Study smartwith
Student Consult
Robbins
BASIC
PATHOLOGY
TENTH EDITION
KUMAR
ABBAS
ASTER
FLSEVIER
Robbins
BASIC
PATHOLOGY
TENTH EDITION
Vinay Kumar, MBBS, MD, FRCPath
Biological Sciences Division and The Pritzker Medical School
University of Chicago
Chicago,Illinois
Abul K.Abbas, MBBS
Distinguished Professor and Chair
Department of Pathology
University of California, San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Ion C.Aster, MD, PhD
Professor of Pathology
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Boston, Massachusetts
ARTIST James A. Perkins, MS, MFA
ELSEVIER
DEDICATION
Dedicated to
Our Grandchildren
Kiera, Nikhil, and Kavi
And Our Children
Jonathan and Rehana Abbas
Michael and Meghan Aster
Contributors
Anthony Chang, MD
Alexander J. Lazar, MD, PhD
Professor
Professor
Department of Pathology
 Departments of Pathology, Genomic Medicine, and
The University of Chicago
Translational Molecular Pathology
Chicago, Illinois
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
Lora Hedrick Ellenson, MD
Professor and Chief of Gynecologic Pathology.
Susan C. Lester, MD, PhD
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
 Assistant Professor and Chief of Breast Pathology
Weill Cornell Medicine-New York Presbyterian
Services
Hospital
 Department of Pathology
New York, New York
Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women's Hospital
Jonathan I. Epstein, MD
Boston, Massachusetts
Professor
 Departments of Pathology, Urology, and Oncology
Mark W. Lingen, DDS, PhD, FRCPath
The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
Professor
Baltimore, Maryland
Department of Pathology
The University of Chicago
Karen M. Frank, MD, PhD, D(ABMM)
Chicago, Illinois
Chief of Microbiology Service
Department of Laboratory Medicine
Tamara L. Lotan, MD
Clinical Center
 Associate Professor of Pathology
National Institutes of Health
 The Johns Hopkins Hospital
Bethesda, Maryland
Baltimore, Maryland
Matthew P. Frosch, MD, PhD
Anirban Maitra, MBBS
Lawrence J. Henderson Associate Professor
Professor
 Department of Pathology
 Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
School
Houston, Texas
 Boston, Massachusetts
Alexander J. McAdam, MD, PhD
Andrew Horvai, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Pathology
Clinical Professor
 Department of Pathology
Department of Pathology
Harvard Medical School
University of California, San Francisco
Medical Director
San Francisco, California
Clinical Microbiology Laboratory
Boston Children's Hospital
Aliya N. Husain, MBBS
Boston, Massachusetts
Professor
 Department of Pathology
Richard N. Mitchell, MD, PhD
The University of Chicago
 Lawrence J. Henderson Professor of Pathology
Chicago, Illinois
 Member of the Harvard/MIT Health Sciences and
Technology Faculty
Zoltan G. Laszik, MD, PhD
Department of Pathology
Professor of Pathology
Brigham and Women's Hospital
University of California, San Francisco
Harvard Medical School
San Francisco, California
Boston, Massachusetts
Contributors
vii
Peter Pytel, MD
Jerrold R. Turner, MD, PhD
Professor
Departments of Pathology and Medicine (GI)
Department of Pathology
 Brigham and Women's Hospital
University of Chicago
Harvard Medical School
Chicago, illinois
Boston, Massachusetts
Neil D. Theise, MD
Professor
Department of Pathology
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
New York, New York
Clinical Consultants
Harold J. Burstein, MD
Joyce Liu, MD, MPH
 Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical
School
School
 Boston, Massachusetts
Boston, Massachusetts
Diseases of the Breast
 Diseases of the Female Genital Tract
Vanja Douglas, MD
Graham MeMahon, MD, MMSC
University of California, San Francisco
 Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
San Francisco, California
School
 Diseases of the Central Nervous System
Boston, Massachusetts
Diseases of the Endocrine System
Hilary J. Goldberg, MD
 Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
Meyeon Park, MD
School
University of California, San Francisco
Boston, Massachusetts
San Francisco, California
Diseases of the Lung
Disease of the Kidney
Ira Hanan, MD
Anna E. Rutherford, MD, MPH
University of Chicago
 Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
Chicago, Illinois
School
Diseases of the Gastrointestinal Tract
 Boston, Massachusetts 
Diseases of the Liver
Cadence Kim, MD
Urologic Associates
Matthew J. Sorrentino, MD
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
 University of Chicago
Diseases of the Male Genital System
Chicago, Illinois
Diseases of the Blood Vessels and Diseases of the
Anne LaCase, MD
Heart
Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical
School
Boston, Massachusetts 
 Diseases of Hematopoietic and Lymphoid Systems
vii
Preface
The tenth edition is an important milestone in the life of a text-
as if it was written de novo and in imany cases to reinove
book. This occasion is a propitious time to look back on
parts of the text that had been present in the previous
the origins of Basic Pathology, which are sumned up best
edition. It is our hope that these changes will unburden
by quoting Stanley Robbins froim the preface of the first
the students and that the tenth edition will be seen as
edition (1971):
an up to date yet simple to comprehend book.
"Of books as well as men, it may be observed that fat
 Third, because illustrations facilitate the understanding
ones contain thin ones struggling to get out. In a sense,
of difficult concepts such as control of the cell cycle and
this book bears such a relationship to its more substantial
the actions of cancer genes, the art has been significantly
progenitor, Robbins Pathology. It arose from an appreciation
revised and enhanced by adding depth so that the four-
of the modern medical student's dilemma. As the curricu-
color figures are seen in three dimensions.
lum has becoime restructured to place greater eimphasis
 Finally, we have added a board of clinical consultants
on clinical experience, time for reading is correspondingly
to help us in keeping the clinical content accurate and
curtailed....In writing this book, rare and esoteric lesions
up to date.
are omitted without apology, and infrequent or trivial ones
described only briefly. We felt it important, however, to
As an additional "tool" to help students focus on the
consider rather fully the major disease entities."
fundaimentals, we have continued the use of Suimunary
While the goals of "baby Robbins" remain true to the
boxes designed to provide key "take hoime" messages.
vision of Stanley Robbins, this edition has been revised on
These have been retained at the risk of adding a few addi-
the basis of a few additional principles.
tional pages to the book because students have uniformly
· First, it is obvious that an understanding of disease
told us that they find them useful.
 mechanisims is based more than ever on a strong foun-
 Although we have entered the genoimic era, the time-
dation of basic science. In keeping with this, we have
 honored tools of gross and imicroscopic analysis remain
always woven the relevant basic cell and molecular
useful, and morphologic changes are highlighted for ready
biology into the sections on pathophysiology in various
reference. The strong eimphasis on clinicopathologic cor-
chapters.In this edition we go one step further and intro-
relations is maintained, and, wherever understood, the
duce a new chapter titled “The Cell as a lInit of Health and
inpact of molecular pathology on the practice of medicine
Disease" at the very beginning of the book. In this chapter
is eimphasized. We are pleased that all of this was accom-
we have atteimpted to encapsulate aspects of cell and
o ausiem a u ana, sis e pnom pars
molecular biology that we believe are helpful in prepar-
the text.
ing readers for discussions of specific diseases. It is, in
We continue to firmly believe that clarity of writing and
essence, a refresher course in cell biology.
proper use of language enhance comprehension and facili-
· Second, as teachers, we are acutely aware that medical
tate the learning process. Those faimiliar with the previous
students feel overwhelimed by the rapid growth of infor-
editions will notice significant reorganization of the text
mation about the molecular basis of disease. We have
in many chapters to improve the flow of inforimation and
a u ,srnoara, mau aso papnxa arogaa
make it more logical. We are now in the digital age, so the
laboratory that have not yet reached the bedside. Thus,
text will be available online. In addition, over 100 updated
for exaimple, the drugs developed for targeting cancer
and revised cases developed by one of us (VK) will also be
mutations that are stil in clinical trials have not been
available, linked to the electronic version of the text. We
a m u sis arr aso u axa passs
hope that these interactive cases will enhance and reinforce
evidence of efficacy is close to hand. Similarly, in geneti-
learning of pathology through application to clinical cases.
cally heterogeneous disorders, we have focused on the
It is a privilege for us to edit this book, and we realize
most coimunon imutations without providing a catalog
the considerable trust placed in us by students and teachers
of all the genes and polyimorphisims involved. Thus,
of pathology. We remain acutely conscious of this respon-
we have tried to balance discussions of advanceiment in
sibility and hope that this edition will be worthy of and
sciences with the needs of students in the early stages of
possibly enhance the tradition of its forebears.
their careers. This effort required us to read each chapter
ix
Acknowledgments
Any large endeavor of this type cannot be completed
the past many editions. Upon his well-earned retireiment,
without the help of many individuals. We thank the con-
he handed over the charge to Jim Merrit, who had previ-
tributors of various chapters. Many are veterans of the older
ously worked on the iimmunology texts authored by one
sibling of this text, the so-called “Big Robbins," and they
 of us (AKA). Jim is a consumunate professional and took
are listed in the table of contents. To each of theim, a special
over the “book" effortlessly. We are especially grateful to
thanks. In addition, we are also very grateful to our clinical
the entire production team, in particular Clay Broeker,
consultants for their input. They are listed separately after
Book Production Specialist, for tolerating our soimetimes
the contributor names. We are fortunate to continue our
next to "impossible” demands and for putting up with our 
 collaboration with Jim Perkins, whose illustrations bring
idiosyncrasies during the periods of extreme exhaustion
abstract ideas to life and clarify difficult concepts, and we
that afflict all authors who undertake what seeims like an
welcome members of our clinical advisory board who read
 endless task. We are thankful to the entire Elsevier team
various chapters for accuracy and appropriateness of the
for sharing our passion for excellence, including Karen
clinical content; they are listed on a separate page. Our
Giacomucci, Brian Salisbury, Tim Santner, Kristine McK-
    pe   si
ercher, and Melissa Darling. We also thank numerous stu-
Ana Narvaez from San Francisco, and Muriel Goutas from
 dents and teachers scattered across the globe for raising
 Boston, deserve thanks for coordinating the tasks.
questions about the clarity of content and serving as the
 Many colleagues have enhanced the text by providing
ultimate "copyeditors." Their efforts reassured us that the
helpful critiques in their areas of interest. These include Dr.
book is read seriously by them.
Rick Aster, who provided "late-breaking news" in the area
Ventures such as this exact a heavy toll from the fami-
of climate change science. Many others offered critiques of
lies of the authors. We thank theim for their tolerance of
various chapters; they include Drs. Jerry Turner, Jeremy
our absences, both physical and emotional. We are blessed
Segal, Nicole Cipriani, and Alex Gallan at the University
and strengthened by their unconditional support and love
of Chicago. Alex Gallan single handedly reviewed and
and by their sharing with us the belief that our efforts are
updated over 100 clinical cases available online. Others
worthwhile and useful. We are especially grateful to our
have provided us with photographic gens froim their per-
wives Raminder Kumar, Ann Abbas, and Erin Malone,
sonal collections; they are individually acknowledged in
who continue to provide steadfast support.
the credits for their contribution(s). For any unintended
And finally, we the editors salute each other; our part-
 oimissions, we offer our apologies.
nership thrives because of a shared vision of excellence
 Many at Elsevier deserve recognition for their roles in
in teaching despite differences in opinions and individual
the production of this book. This text was fortunate to be in
styles.
the hands of Rebecca Gruliow (Director, Content Develop-
ment), who has been our partner for several editions. Others
VK
deserving of our thanks are Bill Schimitt, Executive Content
AKA
 Strategist, who has been our friend and cheerleader for
JCA
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Online Resources for Instructors and Students
Resources for Instructors
statins, targeted therapy for breast cancer, vitamin D,
aspirin and NSAIDs, treatiment of Marfan syndrome, and
The following resources for instructors are available for
 more. These exeimplify how the understanding of molecu-
use when teaching via Evolve. Contact your local sales
 lar pathogenesis has led to the development of therapy.
representative for more inforimation, or go directly to the
 Evolve website to request access: https:/ / evolve.elsevier.
Videos
coim. Note: It may take 1-3 days for account access setup and
Students can access 30 videos online at StudentConsult.
verification upon initial account setup.
coin. The videos cover acute appendicitis, adenoimyosis,
arteriosclerosis, Barretl s esophagus, basal cell carcinoma,
Image Collection
breast cancer, chronic obstructive pyelonephritis, CML,
To assist in the classroom, we have made the images avail-
cystic fibrosis with bronchiectatsis, diabetic gloimeruloscle-
 able for instructors for teaching purposes. The inages are
rosis, ectopic pregnancy, eczeimatous derimatitis, familial
provided in JPEG, PowerPoint, and PDF versions with
adenomatous polyposis syndrome, giardiasis, hemochro-
labels on/off and may be downloaded for use in lecture
matosis, Hirschsprung's disease, ischeimic cardiomy-
presentations.
opathy, massive hepatocellular necrosis, mature cystic
teratoma, metastatic squaimous cell carcinoma, mucinous
Test Bank
 colorectal adenocarcinoma, multiple sclerosis, necrotizing
Instructors can access a coimplete test bank of over 250
vasculitis, osteoarthritis, pancreatic cancer, renal cell carci-
 multiple-choice questions for use in teaching.
noma, sarcoidosis, seminoima, tuberculosis, and ulcerative
colitis.
Resources for Students
Clinical Cases
The following resources are available at StudentConsult.
 Students can study over 100 clinical cases available
coim to students with purchase of Robbins Basic Pathology
online on Studentconsult.com. The clinical cases are
(10th edition).
designed to enhance clinical pathologic correlations and
pathophysiology.
Textbook Online
The complete textbook is available online at Student-
Self-Assessment Questions
Consult.coim. The online version is fully searchable and
Students can test and score theimselves with interactive
provides all figures from the print book, with enhanced
 multiple-choice questions linked to chapters online at
functionality for many, including clickable enlargeiments
 StudentConsult.com.
 and slideshow views of multiple-part images.
Targeted Therapy Boxes
Students have access online at StudentConsult.com to 14
 targeted therapy boxes on clinical therapy topics, including
xi
http://ebooksmedicine.net
俄
See Targeted Therapy available online at studentconsult.com
CHAPTER
The Cell as a Unit of Health
and Disease
CHAPTER OUTLINE
The Genome I
Waste Disposal: Lysosomes and
Extracellular Matrix 21
Noncoding DNA ↑
Proteasomes 13
Components of the Extracellular
Histone Organization 3
Cellular Metabolism and Mitochondrial
Matrix 22
Micro-RNA and Long Noncoding RNA 4
Function 13
Maintaining Cell Populations 24
Cellular Housekeeping 6
Cellular Activation |16
Proliferation and the Cell Cycie 24
 Piasmg Membrane: Protection and Nutrient
Cell Signaling 1 6 
Stem Celis 25
Acquisition8
Signai Transduction Pathways 16
Conciuding Remarks 28
Cytoskeieton II
Moduiar Signaling Proteins, Hubs, and
Cel-Cell Interactions ↑ 2
Nodes 18
Biosynthetic Machinery: Endopiasmic Reticulum
Transcnibtion Factors 19
ond Goigi Apporgtus 1 2
Growth Factors and Receptors I9
Pathology literally translates to the study of suffering (Greek
the genome. The potential for these new powerful tools
uapou on pandde se (Apns = soso Suans = soynd
to expand our understanding of pathogenesis and drive
medicine, it is the study of disease. Virchow was certainly
correct in asserting that disease originates at the cellular
the lay public alike.
level, but we now realize that cellular disturbances arise
 froim alterations in molecules (genes, proteins, and others)
Noncoding DNA
that influence the survival and behavior of cells. Thus, the
foundation of imodern pathology is understanding the cel-
The hunan genoime contains about 3.2 billion DNA base
lutar and molecular abnormalities that give rise to diseases.
pairs. Yet, within the genome there are only roughly 20,000
It is helpful to consider these abnorimalities in the context
protein-encoding genes, comprising just 1.5% of the
of rormal cellular structure and function, which is the
genome. The proteins encoded by these genes are the fun-
theme of this introductory chapter.
damental constituents of cells, functioning as enzymes,
 It is unrealistic (and even undesirable) to condense the
structural elements, and signaling molecules. Although
vast and fascinating field of cell biology into a single
20,000 underestimates the actual number of proteins
chapter. Consequently, rather than attempting a compre-
encoded (imany genes produce multiple RNA transcripts
hensive review, the goal here is to survey basic principles
that encode distinct protein isoforms), it is nevertheless
and highlight recent advances that are relevant to the
startling that worims conposed of fewer than 1000 cells
mechanisims of disease that are enphasized throughout the
and with genomes 30-fold simaller - are also assembled
rest of the book.
from roughly 20,000 protein-encoding genes. Perhaps even
more unsettling is that many of these proteins are recogniz-
able homologs of molecules expressed in humans. What
THE GENOME
then separates humans froim worms?
The answer is not completely known, but evidence sup-
The sequencing of the human genome at the beginning of
ports the assertion that the difference lies in the 98.5% of
the 2lst century represented a landmark achieveiment of
the human genoime that does not encode proteins. The
biomedical science. Since then, the rapidly dropping cost
q s ym) n jo saas i qs po uo
of sequencing and the computational capacity to analyze
called the "dark matter" of the genoime) was inysterious for
vast amounts of data promise to revolutionize our under-
many years. However, itisnow clear that more than 85% of
standing of health and disease. At the same time, the
the human genome is ultimately transcribed, with almost
emerging inforimation has also revealed a breathtaking
80% being devoted to the regulation of gene expression. It
level of complexity far beyond the linear sequencing of
follows that whereas proteins provide the building blocks
http://ebooksmedicine.net
CHAPTERI
 The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
Heterochromatin
Nucleolus
Heterochromatin
Euchromatin
Euchromatin
-Nucleus
(dense, inactive)
(disperse, active)
Nucleosome
1
DNA
Transcription
Promoter 
Exon
Exon
Enhancer
Exon
Pre-
Cell
mRNA
二
Intron
Intron
Splicing
 Intron
p arm_
q arm
Telomeres
mRNA
5'UTR
3UTR
Open-reading frame
Centromere
？
Chromosome
Translation
Protein
Fig. I.l The organization of nuclear DNA.At the light microscopic level, the nuclear genetic material is organized into dispersed, transcriptionally active
euchromotin or densely packed, transcriptionally inactive heterochromatin; chromatin can also be mechanically connected with the nuclear membrane, and
nuclear membrane perturbation can thus influence transcription. Chromosomes (as shown) can only be visualized by light microscopy during cell division.
 During mitosis, they are organized into paired chromatids connected at centromeres; the centromeres act as the locus for the formation of a kinetochore
protein complex that regulates chromosome segregation at metaphase.The telormeres are repetitive nucleotide sequences that cap the termini of chromatids
and permit repeated chromosomal replication without loss of DNA at the chromosome ends.The chromatids are organized into short “P" ("petite") and
long "Q" (*'next letter in the aphobet") arms.The characteristic banding pattern of chromatids has been attributed to relative GC content (less GC content
in bands relative to interbands), with genes tending to localize to interband regions. Individual chromatin fibers are composed of a string of nucleosomes-
DNA wound around octameric histone cores—with the nucleosomes connected via DNA linkers. Promoters are noncoding regions of DNA that initiate
gene transcription; they are on the same strand and upstream of their associated gene.Enhancers are regulatory elements that can modulate gene expression
across distances of Io0 kB or more by looping back onto promoters and recruiting additional factors that are needed to drive the expression of pre-mRNA
species.The intronic sequences are subsequently spliced out of the pre-mRNA to produce the definitive message that includes exons that are translated into
protein and 3'- and 5'-untranslated regions (UTR) that may have regulatory functions. In addition to the enhancer, promoter, and UTR sequences, noncoding 
elements are found throughout the genome;these include short repeats,regulatory factor binding regions, noncoding regulatory RNAs, and transposons.
and machinery required for asseimbling cells, tissues, and
regulation may prove to be more important in disease cau-
organisims, it is the noncoding regions of the genoime that
sation than structural changes in specific proteins. Another
provide the critical "architectural planning."
surprise that eimerged from genome sequencing is that any
The major classes of functional non-proteir-coding DNA
a pu) [upi-Na %96< Aidk a suy om
 sequences found in the human genoime include (Fig. 1.1):
 Promoter and enhancer regions that bind protein tran-
 ual variation, including differential susceptibility to dis
scription factors
eases and environimental exposures, is encoded in <0.5% of
 Binding sites for proteins that organize and maintain
our DNA (importantly, this still represents about 15 million
higher order chromatin structures
base pairs).
 Noncoding regulatory RNAs. Of the S0% of the genome
The two most coimunon forims of DNA variation in the
dedicated to regulatory functions, the vast majority is
human genome are single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
 transcribed into RNAs- micro-RNAs and long noncod-
and copy number variations (CNVs).
ing RNAs (described later)- that are never translated
● SNPs are variants at single nucleotide positions and
into protein, but can regulate gene expression
are almost always biallelic (only two choices exist at a
Mobile genetic elements (e.g., transposons). Remarkably,
given site within the population, such as A or T). More
 more than one-third of the human genoime is composed
than 6 million human SNPs have been identified, with
of such "jumping genes." These segments can cruise
-ap u Auanba ui uoa apim Sumos Au
around the genome, and are implicated in gene regula-
ent populations. The following features are worthy
 tion and chroimatin organization.
of note:
 Special structural regions of DNA, including telomeres 
 SNPs occur across the genoime-within exons,
(chromosome ends) and centromeres (chromosome
 introns, intergenic regions, and coding regions.
"tethers")
 Roughly 1% of SNPs occur in coding regions, which
is about what would be expected by chance, because
Importantly, many genetic variations (polymorphisms)
 coding regions coimprise about 1.5% of the genoime.
 associated with diseases are located in non-protein-
 SNPs iocated in noncoding regions can occur in regu-
 coding regions of the genome. Thus, variation in gene
latory eleiments in the genome, thereby altering gene
http://ebooksmedicine.net
The Genome
expression; in such instances the SNP may have a
two individuals. Approxiimately 50% of CNVs involve
direct influence on disease susceptibility.
SNPs can also be "neutral" variants with no effect on
portion of human phenotypic diversity.
gene function or carrier phenotype.
Even "neutral" SNPs may be useful markers if they
It is important to note that alterations in DNA sequence
happen to be coinherited with a disease-associated
cannot by themselves explain the diversity of phenotypes
gene as a result of physical proximity. In other words,
in human populations; moreover, classical genetic inheri-
the SNP and the causative genetic factor are in linkage
tance cannot explain differing phenotypes in monozygotic
disequilibrium.
twins. The answers to these conundrums probably lie in
· The effect of most SNPs on disease susceptibility is
epigenetics -heritable changes in gene expression that are
weak, and it reimains to be seen if the identification
not caused by alterations in DNA sequence (see later).
of such variants, alone or in combination, can be used
to develop effective strategies for disease prediction
Histone Organization
or prevention.
 CNVs are a form of genetic variation consisting of dif-
Even though virtually all cells in the body have the same
ferent numbers of large contiguous stretches of DNA;
genetic coinposition, differentiated cells have distinct
these can range from l000 base pairs to millions of base
structures and functions arising through lineage-specific
pairs. In soime instances these loci are, like SNPs, bial-
ap syoads-adi as yons uoissaidxa aua jo sueroid
lelic and siimply duplicated or deleted in a subset of the
ences in DNA transcription and translation are regulated
 population. In other instances there are coimplex rear-
by epigenetic modifications that consist of several changes
rangeiments of genomic material, with multiple alleles in
that profoundly influence gene expression, including:
 the human population. CNVs are responsible for several
Chromatin organization (Fig. 1.2). Genomic DNA is
Aue uaamiaq aouarap aruanbas jo shed aseq uou
packed into nucleosomes, which are composed of 147
Core DNA
DNA、
(1.8 turns,
about 150
base pairs)
H2A
Histone
protein
H2E
NN
core
H3
Linker
DNA
Linker
Linker DNA
histone H1
Heterochromatin
Euchromatin
(inactive)
(active)
O-Methylation
←-Acetylation
Fig. I.2 Chromatin organization. (A) Nucleosomes are comprised of octamers of histone proteins (two each of histone subunits H2A, H2B, H3, and H4)
encircled by I.8 loops of I47 base pairs of DNA; histone HI sits on the 20 to 80 nucleotide linker DNA between nucleosomes and helps stabilize the overall
chromatin architecture. The histone subunits are positively charged, thus allowing the compaction of the negatively charged DNA. (B) The relative state of
 DNA unwinding (and thus access for transcription factors) is regulated by histone modification, for example, by acetylation, rmethylation, and/or phosphoryla-
tion (so-called “marks"); marks are dynamicaly written and erased. Certain marks such as histone acetylation “open up" the chromatin structure, whereas
others, such as methylation of particular histone residues,tend to condense the DNA and lead to gene silencing. DNA itself can also be also be methylated,
 a modification that is associated with transcriptional inactivation.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
base pair DNA segments wrapped around a central core
Micro-RNA and Long Noncoding RNA
of proteins called histones. Nucleosomes reseimble beads
joined by short DNA linkers; the entire structure is
Another mechanism of gene regulation depends on the
generically called chromatin. Importantly, the winding
functions of noncoding RNAs. As the name implies, these
and compaction of chromatin in any given cell varies in
-suen pou inq paqisuen are jeu saua Aq paposua ane
different genomic regions. Thus, nuclear chroimatin
lated. Although many distinct families of noncoding RNAs
exists in two basic forins (visualizable by standard his-
exist, only two examples are discussed here: simall RNA
A   Asr () (o
molecules called microRNAs and long roncoding RNAs >200
inactive heterochromatin and (2) histocheimically dis-
nucleotides in length.
persed and transcriptionally active euchromatin. Because
Micro-RNAs (miRNAs) are relatively short RNAs (22
only euchromatin permits gene expression and thereby
nucleotides on average) that function primarily to
dictates cellular identity and activity, there are a host of
modulate the translation of target mRNAs into their
mechanisims that tightly regulate the state of chroimatin
corresponding proteins. Posttranscriptional silencing
(described below).
of gene expression by miRNA is a fundamental and
 DNA methylation. High levels of DNA methylation in
evolutionarily conserved mechanism of gene regula-
- un rsan  sa ronan a
tion present in all eukaryotes (plants and animals).
fin condensation and transcriptional silencing. Like
Even bacteria have a primitive version of the saime
histone modifications (see later), DNA methylation is
tightly regulated by methyltransferases, demethylating
against foreign DNA (e.g., froim phages and viruses).
enzyimes, and methylated-DNA-binding proteins.
 The human genoime contains almost 6000 miRNA genes,
Histone modifying factors. Nucleosomes are highly
only 3.5-fold less than the number of protein-coding
genes. Moreover, individual miRNAs appear to regu-
proteins and post-translational modifications:
late multiple protein-coding genes, allowing each
?
miRNA to coregulate entire prograims of gene expres-
 soimes on DNA, exposing (or obscuring) gene regula-
sion. Transcription of miRNA genes produces a primary
 tory elements such as promoters.
transcript (pri-miRNA) that is processed into progres-
"Chromatin writer" complexes carry out more than
sively simaller segiments, including trimuning by the
70 different covalent histone imodifications generi-
enzyme Dicer. This generates mature single-stranded
cally denoted as marks. These include methylation,
miRNAs of 21 to 30 nucleotides that associate with a
acetylation, and phosphorylation of specific histone
multiprotein aggregate called RNA-induced silencing
anino acid residues: Histone methylation of lysines
coimplex (RISC; Fig. 1.3). Subsequent base pairing
and arginines is accoimplished by specific writer
between the miRNA strand and its target imRNA directs
enzyimes; methylation of histone lysine residues
the RISC to either induce mRNA cleavage or to repress
can lead to transcriptional activation or repression,
its translation. In this way, the target mRNA is posttran-
depending on which histone residue is “imarked."
scriptionally silenced.
Histone acetylation of lysine residues (occurring
through histone acetyl transferases) tends to open
Taking advantage of the same pathway, small interfering
     
RNAs (siRNAs) are short RNA sequences that can be intro-
deacetylases (HDAC) reverse this process, leading
duced into cells. These serve as substrates for Dicer and
to chromatin condensation. Histone phosphorylatior
interact with the RISC complex in a manner analogous to
of serine residues can variably open or condense
endogenous miRNAs. Synthetic siRNAs that can target
chromatin, to increase or decrease transcription,
specific mRNA species are therefore powerful laboratory
respectively.
 tools to study gene function (so-called knockdown technoi-
· Histone marks are reversible through the activity of
 ogy); they also are proimising as therapeutic agents to
silence pathogenic genes, e.g., oncogenes involved in neo-
mtin readers,” binding histones that bear particular
plastic transformation.
 marks and thereby regulating gene expression.
● Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA). The human genome also
contains a very large number of lncRNAs-at least
 The mechanisims involved in the cell-specific epigenetic
30,000, with the total number potentially exceeding
regulation of genomic organization and gene expression
coding mRNAs by 10- to 20-fold. lncRNAs modulate
are undeniably complex. Despite the intricacies, learning
gene expression in imany ways (Fig. 1.4); for exaimple,
to manipulate these processes will likely bear significant
they can bind to regions of chroimatin, restricting RNA
therapeutic benefits because many diseases are associated
polyimerase access to coding genes within the region.
with inherited or acquired epigenetic alterations, and
The best-known exainple of a repressive function
dysregulation of the "epigenoime" has a central role in the
involves XIST, which is transcribed from the X chromo-
genesis of benign and malignant neoplasims (Chapter 6).
some and plays an essential role in physiologic X chro-
Moreover - unlike genetic changes— epigenetic alterations
 mosome inactivation. XIST itself escapes X inactivation,
(e.g., histone acetylation and DNA methylation) are readily
but forims a repressive “cloak" on the X chroimosome
reversible and are therefore amenable to intervention;
from which it is transcribed, resulting in gene silencing.
indeed, HDAC inhibitors and DNA methylation inhibitors
are already being used in the treatnent of various forms
ers are sites of lncRNA synthesis, with the lncRNAs
of cancer.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
The Genome
A. Gene activation
Ribonucleoprotein
miRNA gene
transcription complex
IncRNA
Gene activation
pri-miRNA
Target gene
B. Gene suppression
Decoy IncRNA
MNMN
pre-miRNA
Gene suppression
Export
MINNNNNNIN
00000
protein
0 0 00
pre-miRNA
C. Promote chromatin modification
Dicer
Methylation,
acetylation
TINMNMIN
Target mRNA
 miRNA
D. Assembly of protein complexes
Act on chromatin
 Unwinding of 
structure
miRNA duplex
RISC
Multi-subunit complex
complex
Fig. I.4 Roles of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). (A) Long noncoding
RNAs (lncRNAs) can facilitate transcription factor binding and thus promote
Imperfect
 Perfect
match
match
factors and thus prevent gene transcription.(C) Histone and DNA modifica-
EE
wwwww Target
tion by acetylases or methylases (or deacetylases and demethylases) may be
mRNA
directed by the binding of IncRNAs. (D) In other instances IncRNAs may act
Translational
mRNA
as scaffolding to stabilize secondary or tertiary structures and/or multisub-
repression
cleavage
unit complexes that influence general chromatin architecture or gene activity.
(Adapted from Wang KC, Chang HY: Molecular mechanisms of long noncoding 
RNAs, Mol Cell 43:904, 201 1.)
a variety of mechanisins (Fig. 1.4). Ongoing studies are
exploring the role of lncRNAs in diseases like athero-
Ribosome
sclerosis and cancer.
GENE SILENCING 
Gene Editing
 Exciting new developments that perimit exquisitely specific
Fig. I.3 Generation of microRNAs (miRNA) and their mode of action in
 genoime editing stand to usher in an era of inolecular revo-
lution. These advances come from a wholly unexpected
source: the discovery of clustered regularly interspaced
do uy es ym pens  aus e jo ps 
short palindromic repeats (CRISPRs) and Cas (or CRISPR-
structures that form stretches of double-stranded RNA.After this pre-
associated genes). These are linked genetic elements that
miRNA is exported out of the nucleus via specific transporter proteins, the 
 cytoplasmic enzyme Dicer trims the pre-miRNA to generate mature double-
endow prokaryotes with a form of acquired immunity to
stranded miRNAs of 2I to 30 nucleotides.The miRNA subsequently unwinds,
 phages and plasimids. Bacteria use this system to sample
 and the resulting single strands are incorporated into the multiprotein RISC.
the DNA of infecting agents, incorporating it into the host 
Base pairing between the single-stranded miRNA and its target mRNA
 genome as CRISPRs. CRISPRs are transcribed and pro-
directs RISC to either deave the mRNA target or to repress its translation.
cessed into an RNA sequence that binds and directs the
 In either case,the target mRNA gene is silenced posttranscriptionally.
nuclease Cas9 to a sequences (e.g., a phage), leading to its
cleavage and the destruction of the phage. Gene editing
repurposes this process by using artificial guide RNAs
(gRNAs) that bind Cas9 and are compleimentary to a DNA
http://ebooksmedicine.net
CHAPTERI 
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
sequence of interest. Once directed to the target sequence 
of the systeim (and the exciteiment about its genetic engi
 by the gRNA, Cas9 induces double-strand DNA breaks.
neering potential) coimes from its impressive flexibility and
Repair of the resulting highly specific cleavage sites
specificity, which is substantially better than other previ-
can lead to somewhat random disruptive mutations in the
Buuo! pua snosogououuou ynonn) saouanbas paare
mutations into the genomes of cells to model cancers and
[NHEJ]), or the precise introduction of new sequences of
other diseases, and rapidly generating transgenic animals
interest (by homologous recombination). Both the gRNAs
from edited embryonic stem cells. On the flip side, it now is
and the Cas9 enzyime can be delivered to cells with a single
feasible to selectively "correct" mutations that cause hered-
easy-to-build plasimid (Fig. 1.5). However, the real beauty
itable disease, or - perhaps more worrisoime- to just elimi-
nate less "desirable" traits. Predictably, the technology has
inspired a vigorous debate regarding its application.
Homologous gRNA sequence
CELLULAR HOUSEKEEPING
The viability and norimal activity of cells depend on a
Cas9
variety of fundamental housekeeping functions that all dif-
protein 
gRNA
ferentiated cells must perforim.
Many normal housekeeping functions are compart-
mentalized within mem brane-bound intracellular organ-
elles (Fig. 1.6). By isolating certain cellular functions within
distinct compartiments, potentially injurious degradative
enzyimes or reactive imetabolites can be concentrated
Cleavage
or stored at high concentrations in specific organelles
without risking damage to other cellular constituents.
Double-stranded
DNA
Moreover, compartmentalization allows for the creation
 of unique intracellular environiments (e.g., low pH or high
Target genomic
sequence
calcium) that are optimal for certain enzymes or metabolic
pathways.
 New proteins destined for the plasima meinbrane or
Double-stranded DNA break
secretion are synthesized in the mugh endoplasmic reticulum
(RER) and physically asseinbled in the Goigi apparatus; pro-
MN MN
MNMN MN
teins intended for the cytosol are synthesized on free ribo-
somes. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) may beabundant
in certain cell types such as gonads and liver where it
MNMNMMN
serves as the site of steroid horimone and lipoprotein syn-
NHEJ
thesis, as well as the modification of hydrophobic com-
 pounds such as drugs into water-soluble molecules for
HDR
export.
Cells catabolize the wide variety of molecules that they
MN
endocytose, as well as their own repertoire of proteins and
organelles-all of which are constantly being degraded
Insertion/
Donor DNA
and renewed. Breakdown of these constituents takes
deletion
place at three different sites, ultimately serving different
DNA with random mutation
DNA with specific mutation
functions.
Proteasomes are "disposal" complexes that degrade
Fig. I.5 Gene editing with clustered regularly interspersed short palin-
dromic repeats (CRISPRs)/Cas9. In bacteria, DNA sequences consisting of
CRISPRs are transcribed into guide RNAs (gRNAs) with a constant region
release short peptides. In soime cases the peptides so
and a variable sequence of about 20 bases.The constant regions of gRNAs
generated are presented in the context of class I major
bind to Cas9, permitting the variable regions to form heteroduplexes with
histocompatibility molecules to help drive the adaptive
homologous host cell DNA sequences. The Cas9 nuclease then deaves the
immune response (Chapter 5). In other cases, protea-
bound DNA, producing a double-stranded DNA break. To perform gene
somal degradation of regulatory proteins or transcrip-
editing, gRNAs are designed with variable regions that are homologous to
tion factors can trigger or shut down cellular signaling
a target DNA sequence of interest. Coexpression of the gRNA and Cas9 in
cells leads to efficient deavage of the target sequence. In the absence of
pathways.
homologous DNA, the broken DNA is repaired by nonhomologous end
Lysosomes are intracellular organelles that contain
joining (NHEJ), an error-prone method that often introduces disruptive
enzymes that digest a wide range of macromolecules,
insertions or deletions (indels).By contrast,in the presence ofa homologous
including proteins, polysaccharides, lipids, and nucleic
"donor" DNA spanning the region targeted by CRISPR/Cas9, cells instead
acids. They are the organelle in which phagocytosed
may use homologous DNA recombination (HDR) to repair the DNA break.
 microbes and damaged or unwanted cellular organelles
HDR is less effcient than NHEJ, but has the capacity to introduce precise
changes in DNA sequence. Potential applications of CRISPR/Cas9 coupled
are degraded and eliminated.
with HDR include the repair of inherited genetic defects and the creation
 Peroxisomes are specialized cell organelles that contain
of pathogenic mutations.
 catalase, peroxidase and other oxidative enzymes. They
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Housekeeping
 Relative volumes of intracellular organelles (hepatocyte)
Compartment
% total volume
number/cell
role in the cell
Cytosol
54%
 metabolism, transport, protein translation
Mitochondria
22%
1700
energy generation, apoptosis
Rough ER
9%
1*
 synthesis of membrane and secreted proteins
Smooth ER, Golgi
6%
1
 protein modification, sorting, catabolism 
Nucleus
6%
1
cell regulation, proliferation, DNA transcription 
Endosomes
1%
200
intracellular transport and export, ingestion of extracellular substances
Lysosomes
1%
300
 cellular catabolism 
Peroxisomes
1%
400
 very long-chain fatty acid metabolism
Rough 
Free
endoplasmic
reticulum
Nucleolus
ribosomes
Golgi
Nucleus
sneiedde
Lysosome
Mitochondrion
8688968890
Endosome
Smooth
Cytoskeleton
endoplasmic
Plasma
 reticulum
membrane
Peroxisome
Centrioles
Microtubules
Fig. I.6 Basic subcellular constituents of cells. The table presents the number of various organelles within a typical hepatocyte, as well as their volume within
the cel.The figure shows geographic relationships but is not intended to be accurate to scale. *Rough and srmooth ER form a single compartment; the Golgi
apparatus is organized as a set of discrete stacked disternae interconnected by transport vesicles. Adapted from Weibel ER, Stoubli W, Gnagi HR, et at: Correloted
morphometric and biochemical studies on the liver celf. Morphometric model, stereologic methods, and normal morphometric data for rat liver, J Cell Biol 42:68, 1 969.)
play a specialized role in the breakdown of very long
Most of the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) that powers
chain fatty acids, generating hydrogen peroxide in the
cells is made through oxidative phosphorylation in the
process.
mitochondria. However, mitochondria also serve as an
important source of  metabolic  interimediates  that  are
The contents and position of cellular organelles also
needed for anabolic metabolisin. They also are sites of syn-
are subject to regulation. Endosomal vesicles shuttle inter-
thesis of certain macromolecules (e.g., heme), and contain 
nalized material to the appropriate intracellular sites or
important sensors of cell damage that can initiate and regu-
direct newly synthesized materials to the cell surface or
 late the process of apoptotic cell death.
targeted organelle. Moveiment of both organelles and pro-
 Cell growth and inaintenance require a constant supply
teins within the cell and of the cell in its environiment is
 of both energy and the building blocks that are needed
orchestrated by the cytoskeleton. These structural proteins
for synthesis of macroimolecules. In growing and dividing
 also regulate cellular shape and intracellular organiza-
cells, all of these organelles have to be replicated (organei-
tion, requisites for maintaining cll polarity. This is par-
ticularly critical in epithelia, in which the top of the cell
following mitosis. Moreover, because the macroimolecules 
(apical) and the bottom and side of the cell (basolateral) are
 and organelles have finite life spans (imitochondria, e.g-
 often exposed to different environiments and have distinct
last only
y about 10 days), mechanisims also must exist
functions.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
CHAPTERI
 The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
out" cellular components. The final catabolism occurs in
1 '(yeap Ias pauueroid) sisoidode Suosrapun stao
lysosoimes.
a ul 'sasoseud rog [euis yaun jea, ue saurosag
With this as a primer, we now move on to discuss cel-
special case of platelets, it serves as a cofactor in the
'eap rajeana u uogoung au pue sjuauoduos re
clotting of blood.
Glycolipidsand sphingomyelinare preferentially expressed
Plasma Membrane: Protection and
on the extracellular face; glycolipids (and particularly
Nutrient Acquisition
 gangliosides, with complex sugar linkages and teriminal
sialic acids that confer negative charges) are iimportant
 Plasima meimbranes (and all other organellar imeimbranes)
in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, including inflam-
are more than just static lipid sheaths. Rather, they are
fluid bilayers of aimphipathic phospholipids with hydro-
philic head groups that face the aqueous environment and
Certain membrane components associate laterally with
hydrophobic lipid tails that interact with each other to
each other in the bilayer, leading to distinct domains called
forim a barrier to passive diffusion of large or charged
lipid rafts. Because inserted membrane proteins have differ-
molecules (Fig. 1.7A). The bilayer is composed of a hetero-
ent intrinsic solubilities in various lipid domains, they tend
geneous collection of different phospholipids, which are
distributed asymnetrically-for example, certain mem-
rafts) and to becoime depleted from others. Such nonran-
brane lipids preferentially associate with extracellular or
 doim distributions of lipids and meimbrane proteins impact
cytosolic faces. Asymmetric partitioning of phospholipids
cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, as well as intracel-
is important in several cellular processes:
lular signaling and the generation of specialized membrane
 Phosphatitylirositol on the inner meinbrane leaflet can be
regions involved in secretory or endocytic pathways.
phosphorylated, serving as an electrostatic scaffold for
The plasma membrane is liberally studded with a
intracellular proteins; alternatively, polyphosphoinosit-
variety of proteins and glycoproteins involved in (1) ion
ides can be hydrolyzed by phospholipase C to generate
and metabolite transport, (2) fluid-phase and receptor-
mediated uptake of macromolecules, and (3) cell-ligand,
inositol trisphosphate.
cell-matrix, and cell-cell interactions. Proteins interact
Phosphatidylserine is norimally restricted to the inner
sauasuenre ra rog jo ao q raeg pid a ym
face where it confers a negative charge and is involved
(Fig. 1.7B):
in electrostatic interactions with proteins; however,
Most proteins are transimeimbrane (integral) proteins,
when it flips to the extracellular face, which happens in
having one or more relatively hydrophobic α-helical
Extracellular
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol
Outside
protein
(GPI) linked protein 
Glycolipids
Phosphatidyl-
Sphingo-
Lipid
choline
myelin
raft
(outer mostly)
(outer mostly)
Phosphatidyl-
Phosphatidyl-
 Phosphatidyl-  Cholesterol 
ethanolamine
serine
inositol
(both faces)
(inner mostly)
(inner mostly)
(both faces)
Cytoplasm
Cytosolic
 Lipid-linked protein
protein
A
B
Fig. I.7 Plasma membrane organization and asymmetry. (A) The plasma membrane is a bilayer of phospholipids, cholesterol, and associated proteins. The
phospholipid distribution within the membrane is asymmetric; phosphotidylcholine and sphingormyelin are overrepresented in the outer leaflet, and phosphatidyl-
serine (negative charge) and phosphotidylethonolomine are predominantly found on the inner leaflet; gycolipids occur only on the outer face where they
contribute to the extracellular glycocalyx. Non-random partitioning of certain mermbrane components such as cholesterol creates membrane domains known
as lipid rafts. (B) Membrane-associated proteins may traverse the membrane (singy or multiply) via α-helical hydrophobic amino acid sequences; depending
on the sequence and hydrophobicity of these domain, such proteins may be enriched or excluded from lipid rafts and other membrane domain. Proteins on
the cytosolic face may associate with membranes through postranslational modifications, for example, farnesylation or addition of palmitic acid. Proteins on
the extracytoplasmic face may associate with the membrane via glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol linkages. Besides protein-protein interactions within the mem-
brane, membrane proteins can also associate with extracellular and/or intracytoplasmic proteins to generate large, relatively stable complexes (e.g., the focol
adhesion complex).Transmembrane proteins can translate mechanical forces (e.g., from the cytoskeleton or ECM) as well as chemical signals across the mem-
brane. It is worth remermbering that a similar organization of lipids and associated proteins also occurs within the various organellar membranes.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Housekeeping
segiments that traverse the lipid bilayer. Integral men-
low-molecular-weight species (ions and sinall molecules
brane proteins typically contain positively charged
up to approximately 1000 daltons), channel proteins and
amino acids in their cytoplasimic domains that anchor
qrrier proteirs may be used (although this discussion
the proteins to the negatively charged head groups of
focuses on plasima membranes, it should be noted that
 membrane phospholipids.
similar pores and channels are needed for transport across
● Proteins imay be synthesized in the cytosol and post-
organellar membranes). Each transported molecule (e.g-
translationally attached to prenyl groups (e.g., farnesyl,
ion, sugar, nucleotide) requires a transporter that is typi-
related to cholesterol) or fatty acids (e.g, palmitic or
 no q ao a) s  
myristic acid) that insert into the cytosolic side of the
·Channel proteins create hydrophilic pores that, when
plasima membrane.
open, permit rapid moveinent of solutes (usually
Attachiment to meimbranes can occur through glyco-
restricted by size and charge; Fig. 1.8).
sylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors on the extracel-
 Carrier proteins bind their specific solute and undergo a
lular face of the meimbrane.
series of conforimational changes to transfer the ligand
 Extracellular proteins can noncovalently associate with
across the meimbrane; their transport is relatively slow.
transimeimbrane proteins, which serve to anchor them to
the cell.
 In many cases, a concentration and/or electrical gradi-
ent between the inside and outside of the cell drives solute
Many plasma membrane proteins function together as
larger complexes; these may assemble under the control
branes have an electrical potential difference across theim,
of chaperone molecules in the RER or by lateral diffusion
with the inside negative relative to the outside). In other
in the plasma membrane. The latter mechanism is charac-
cases, active transport of certain solutes against a concentra-
teristic of many protein receptors (e.g., cytokine receptors)
tion gradient is accoimplished by carrier molecules (not
that dimerize or trimerize in the presence of ligand to form
channels) using energy released by ATP hydrolysis or a
functional signaling units. Although lipid bilayers are fluid
coupled ion gradient. Transporter ATPases include the
in the two-dimensional plane of the membrane, membrane
notorious multidrug resistance (MDR) protein, which pumps
components can nevertheless be constrained to discrete
polar compounds (e.g, chemotherapeutic drugs) out of
domains. This can occur by localization to lipid rafts (dis-
cells and may render cancer cells resistant to treatiment.
cussed earlier), or through intercellular protein-protein
Because meimbranes are freely perimeable to water, it
interactions (e.g., at tight junctions) that establish discrete
 moves into and out of cells by osimosis, depending on rela-
boundaries; indeed, this strategy is used to maintain cell
tive solute concentrations. Thus, extracellular salt in excess
polarity (e.g, top/apical versus bottom/basolateral) in epi-
 of that in the cytosol (hypertonicity) causes a net movement
thelial layers. Alternatively, unique domains can be formed
of water out of cells, whereas hypotonicity causes a net
moveiment of water into cells. The cytosol is rich in charged
skeletal molecules or an extracellular matrix (ECM).
metabolites and protein species, which attract a large
The extracellular face of the plasima meimbrane is dif-
number of counterions that tend to increase the intracel-
fusely studded with carbohydrates, not only as complex
 lular osimolarity. As a consequence, to prevent overhydra-
oligosaccharides on glycoproteins and glycolipids, but also
tion cells must constantly pump out simall inorganic ions
as polysaccharide chains attached to integral meimbrane
(e.g., Na')-typically through the activity of membrane
proteoglycans. This glycocalyx functions as a chemical and
ion-exchanging ATPases. Loss of the ability to generate
mechanical barrier, and is also involved in cxll-cell and
energy (e.g., in a cell injured by toxins or ischemia) there-
cell-matrix interactions.
fore results in osimotic swelling and eventual rupture of
cells. Siimilar transport mechanisims also regulate intracel-
Passive Membrane Diffusion
lular and intraorganellar pH; most cytosolic enzyimes
Simall, nonpolar molecules such as O and CO, readily dis-
prefer to work at pH 7.4, whereas lysosomal enzymes func-
solve in lipid bilayers and therefore rapidly diffuse across
tion best at pH 5 or less.
them, as do hydrophobic molecules (e.g, steroid-based
Receptor-Mediated and
molecules such as estradiol or vitamin D). Similarly, simall
polar molecules (<75 daltons in mass, such as water,
Fluid-Phase Uptoke
 ethanol, and urea) readily cross membranes. In contrast,
Uptake of fluids or macromolecules by the cell, called ercdlo-
the lipid bilayer is an effective barrier to the passage of
cytosis, occurs by two fundamental mechanisms (Fig. 1.8).
larger polar imolecules, even those only slightly greater
Certain sinall inolecules — including some vitaimins— are
ae oste siaea pidrl asoon se yns suo s u
taken up by invaginations of the plasima membrane called
imperimeant to ions, no matter how sinall, because of their
 caveolae. For larger molecules, uptake occurs after binding
charge and high degree of hydration. We will next discuss
to specific cell-surface receptors; internalization occurs
 specialized mechanisims that regulate traffic across plasma
ue Aq uaanp ssaond uogeunseaui aunquau e ynon
meinbranes.
intracellular matrix of clathrin proteins. Clathrin is a
hexamer of proteins that spontaneously asseimbles into a
Carriers and Channels
basketlike lattice to drive the invagination process. We
For each of the larger polar molecules that imust cross
shall coime back to these later.
membranes to support normal cellular functions (e.g, for
The process by which large molecules are exported from
cells is called exocytosis. In this process, proteins synthe-
brane protein complexes are typically required. For
sized and packaged within the RER and Golgi apparatus 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
0
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
Carrier
Channel
Endocytosis
Exocytosis
Phagocytosis
Transcytosis
Energy
Caveolae-
ReceptorsReceptor-
Microbe
mediated
mediated
Coated
pit
Receptor 
Caveolin
recycling
Coated
Lysosome
vesicle
/Phagosome
Early
endosome
(low pH)
Reconstitution
Phagolysosome
Late
endosome
Undigested
Lysosome-late
residual material
endosome 
fusion vesicle
Fig. I.8 Movement of small molecules and larger structures across membranes.The lipid bilayer is relatively impermeable to all but the smallest and/or most
hydrophobic molecules. Thus, the import or export of charged species requires specific transmembrane transporter proteins; the internalization or exter-
nalization of large proteins, complex particles, or even cells requires encircling them with segments of the membrane. Small charged solutes can move across 
the membrane using either channels or carriers; in general, each molecule requires a unique transporter. Chonnes are used when concentration gradients
can drive the solute moverment. Carriers are required when solute is moved ogoinst a concentration gradient. Receptor-mediated and fluid-phase uptake of
material involves membrane-bound vacuoles. Coveole endocytose extracellular fluid, membrane proteins, and some receptor-bound molecules (e.g., folate)
in a process driven by caveolin proteins concentrated within lipid rafts. Pinocytosis of extracellular fluid and most surface receptor-ligand pairs involves dothrin-
cooted pits ond vesicles.After internalization, the dathrin dissociates and can be reused, whereas the resulting vesicle progressively matures and acidifies. In
the early and/or late endosome, ligand can be released from its receptor (e.g., iron released from transferrin bound to the transferrin receptor) with receptor
phagosomes eventually fuse with lysosomes to facilitate the degradation of the internalized material. Transcytosis involves the transcellular endocytotic transport
of solute and/or bound ligand from one face of a cell to another. Exocytosis is the process by which membrane-bound vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane
and discharge their contents to the extracellular space.
are concentrated in secretory vesicles, which then fuse with
sipping." Although caveolae likely participate in the
the plasima membrane and expel their contents.
transimeimbrane delivery of soime molecules (e.g., folate),
Trarnscytosis is the moveiment of endocytosed vesicles
 they also appear to contribute to the regulation of trans-
between the apical and basolateral compartiments of cells;
meimbrane signaling and/or cellular adhesion via the
this is a nechanism for transferring large amounts of intact
internalization of receptors and integrins. Mutations in
 proteins across epithelial barriers (e.g., ingested antibodies
caveolin are associated with muscular dystrophy and
in maternal milk across intestinal epithelia) or for the rapid
electrical abnormalities in the heart.
movement of large volumes of solute. In fact, increased
Pinocytosis and receptor-mediated endocytosis (Fig. 1.8).
transcytosis probably plays a role in the increased vascular
Pinocytosis ("celular drinking") is a fluid-phase process.
 permeability seen in tumors.
 The plasima meimbrane invaginates and is pinched off
We now return to the two forms of endocytosis men-
 to form a cytoplasimic vesicle; after delivering their
tioned earlier.
cargo, endocytosed vesicles recycle back to the plasima
Caveolae-mediated endocytosis. Caveolae ("little caves")
 meimbrane (exocytosis) for another round of ingestion.
are rorcoated plasima meimbrane invaginations associ-
 Endocytosis and exocytosis are tightly balanced and
ated with GPI-linked molecules, cyclic adenosine
highly active, as a cell typically pinocytoses 10% to 20%
 Imonophosphate (cAMP)-binding proteins, SRC-family
 of its own cell volume each hour, or about 1% to 2% of
kinases, and the folate receptor. Caveolin is the major
its plasima meimbrane each minute. Pinocytosis and
structural protein of caveolae. Internalization of caveo-
receptor-imediated endocytosis begin with the forimation
lae with any bound molecules and associated extracel-
of a clathrin-coated pit containing the ligand to be inter-
lular fluid is denoted potocytosis-literally “cellular
 nalized (by itself or bound to the receptor), which rapidly
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Housekeeping
invaginates and pinches off to form a clathrir-coated
vesicie. Thus, trapped within the vesicle is a gulp of the
helices. In muscle cells, the filanentous protein myosir
extracellular milieu, as well as receptor-bound macro-
binds to actin and moves along it, driven by ATP hydro-
 molecules as described below. The vesicles then rapidly
lysis (the basis of muscle contraction). In non-muscle
uncoat and fuse with an acidic intracellular structure
cells, F-actin asseimbles via an assortiment of actin-
called the carly endosome, which progressively matures to
 -jau pue sapunq pazruesio-lam ojut suajond supu
late endosomes and ultimately fuses with lysosomes.
works that control cell shape and moveiment.
Receptor-mediated endocytosis is the major uptake
Intermediate filaments are fibrils 10-nim in diaimeter that
mechanisin for certain macromolecules, as exemplified
comprise a large and heterogeneous family. Members
by transferrin and low-density lipoprotein (LDL). These
include lamins A, B, and C, which contribute to the struc-
macromolecules bind to receptors that localize to
ture of nuclear lamina. Individual types of intermediate
clathrin-coated pits. After binding to their specific recep-
filaments have characteristic tissue-specific patterns of
tors, LDL and transferrin are endocytosed in vesicles
expression that are useful for identifying the cellular
that mature into early and late endosomes. In the acidic
origin of poorly differentiated tumors.
environment of the endosome, LDL and transferrin
Vimentir: Mesenchymal cells (fibroblasts, endothe-
release their bound ligands (cholesterol and iron, respec-
lium) anchoring intracellular organelles
tively), which then exit into the cytosol, and the LDL
 Desmin: Muscle cells, foriming the scaffold on which
receptor and transferrin receptor subsequently recycle
actin and myosin contract
to the plasma meimbrane. Defects in receptor-imediated
Neurofilaments: Axons of neurons, imparting strength
 transport of LDL are responsible for faimilial hypercho-
and rigidity
lesteroleimia, as described in Chapter 7.
?
Gliat fibrillary acidic protein: Glial cells that support
neurons
Cytoskeleton
 Cytoke ra tirs: Epithelial cells express more than 30 dis-
tinct varieties with distinct patterns of expression in
The ability of cells to adopt a particular shape, maintain
different lineages (e.g., lung versus gastrointestinal
polarity, organize the intracellular organelles, and move
epithelia). These can serve as histocheimical markers
about depends on the intracellular scaffolding of pro-
for various epithelia
teins called the cytoskeleton (Fig. l.9). In eukaryotic cells,
Intermediate filaments are found predominantly in
there are three major classes of cytoskeletal proteins:
a ropelike polyimerized form and primarily serve to
Actin microfilaments are fibrils 5- to 9-nm in diameter
impart tensile strength and allow cells to bear mechani-
formed from the globular protein actin (G-actin), the
cal stress. The nuclear meimbrane lamins are important
most abundant cytosolic protein in cells. G-actin mono-
ose 1q Xonoqdiou reaonu Suuu rog Auo jou
mers noncovalently polymerize into long filaiments (F-
for regulating nuclear gene transcription. The critical
Suuse inq ar Aq pazisdua si suu jo sao
disorders caused by lamin mutations, which range
froim certain forms of muscular dystrophy to progeria,
a disease of premature aging. Intermediate filaments
also form the major structural proteins of epiderimis
Microvilli-
 and hair.
 Microtubules are 25-nm-thick fibrils composed of nonco-
valently polymerized dimers of α- and β-tubulin arrayed
in constantly elongating or shrinking hollow tubes with
Tight junction
a defined polarity; the ends are designated "+” or "-"
Actin
The "-" end is typically embedded in a microtubule orga-
microfilaments
nizing center (MTOC or centrosome) near the nucleus
Belt
where it is associated with paired centrioles, while the
desmosome
"+" end elongates or recedes in response to various
Desmosome
stimuli by the addition or subtraction of tubulin dimers.
 Microtubules are involved in several important cellular
Gap junctions
functions:
° Support cables for "molecular motor" proteins that
allow the imoveiment of vesicles and organelles
Intermediate
around cells. Kinesins are the motors for anterograde
filaments
 u o oi  sqm s (+ o -)
retrograde direction (+ to -).
Hemi-
The mechanical support for sister chroimatid separa-
desmosome
tion during mitosis
Basement membrane 
Integrins
The core of primary cilia, single nonmotile projections
 on nucleated cells that help regulate proliferation and
Fig. I.9 Cytoskeletal elements and cell-cell interactions. Interepithelial
adhesion involves several diferent surface protein interactions, including tight
differentiation
junctions and desmosomes; adhesion to the ECM involves cellular integrins
The core of motile cilia (e.g., in bronchial epithelium)
(and associated proteins) within hemidesmosomes. See text for details.
or flagella (in spern)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
2
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
Cell-Cell Interactions
calcium fluxes through gap junctions allowing the
Imyocardiun to behave
eas a functional syncytium
Cells interact and communicate with one another by
capable of coordinated  waves of contraction- the
forming junctions that provide mechanical links and
 beating of the heart.
enable surface receptors to recognize ligands on other
sad iseq aar ou pazuro ae suu  sn
Biosynthetic Machinery: Endoplasmic Reticulum
(Fig. 1.9):
and Golgi Apparatus
Occluding junctions (tight junctions) seal adjacent cells
together to create a continuous barrier that restricts the
The structural proteins and enzymes of the cell are con-
 paracellular (between cells) movement of ions and other
 stantly renewed by a balance between ongoing synthesis
imolecules. Viewed en face, occluding junctions form a
and intracellular degradation. The endoplasmic reticulum
tight meshlike network of macromolecular contacts
(ER) is the site of synthesis of all transimembrane proteins
between neighboring cells. The complexes that mediate
and lipids needed for the asseimbly of plasima meimbrane
these cell-cell interactions are composed of multiple
and cellular organelles, including the ER itself. It is also
proteins, including occtudin and claudin. In addition to
 the initial site of synthesis of all molecules destined for
being a high-resistance barrier to solute movement,
 export out of the cell. The ER is organized into a mesh-
occluding junctions also maintain cellular polarity by
like interconnected maze of branching tubes and flattened
forming the boundary between apical and basolateral
lamellae forming a continuous sheet around a single lumen
domains of cells. Significantly, these junctions (as well
that is topologically contiguous with the extracellular envi-
as the desimosomes described later) are dynaimic struc-
roniment. The ER is coimposed of distinct domains that
tures that can dissociate and reform as required to facili-
saosoqi jo aouasqe ro aouasaid a Aq paysinbugsip an
tate epithelial proliferation   or  inflaimnatory  cell
(Fig. 1.6).
Imigration.
Rough ER (RER): Membrane-bound ribosomes on the
· Anchoring junctiors (desmosomes) mechanically attach
cytosolic face of the RER translate mRNA into proteins
cells—and their intracellular cytoskeletons- to other
that are extruded into the ER lumen or becoime inte-
cells or to the ECM. When the adhesion focus is
grated into the ER imembrane. This process is directed
between cells, and is small and rivetlike, it is designated
by specific signal sequerces on the N-terimini of nascent
a spot desmosome. When such a focus attaches the cell to
proteins. Proteins insert into the ER fold and must fold
the ECM, it is called a hemidesmosome. Similar adhesion
 properly in order to assume a functional conforimation
domains can also occur as broad bands between cells,
 and asseimble into higher order complexes. Proper folding
where they are denoted as belt desmosomes. Cell-cell des-
 of the extracellular domains of many proteins involves
mosomal junctions are formed by the hoimotypic asso-
the formation of disulfide bonds. A number of inherited
ciation of transimeimbrane glycoproteins called cacherins.
disorders, including many cases of faimilial hypercholes-
 In spot desimosomes, the cadherins are linked to
teroleimia (Chapter 6), are cause by mutations that disrupt
intracellular intermediate filaments and allow extra-
disulfide bond formation. In addition, N-linked oligosac-
    g 
charides (sugar moieties attached to asparagine residues)
(and dissipated) over multiple cells.
are added in the ER. Chaperone molecules retain proteins
 In belt desimosomes, the transimeimbrane adhesion
in the ER until these modifications are complete and the
molecules are associated with intracellular actin
 proper conforimation is achieved. If a protein fails to fold
microfilaiments, by which they can influence cell
 and asseimble into complexes appropriately, it is retained
shape and/ or motility.
and degraded within the ER. Moreover, excess accu-
· In hemidesmosomes, the transimeimbrane connector
proteins are called integrirs; like cadherins, these
ity of the ER to edit and degrade them-leads to the ER
attach to intracellular intermediate filaments, and
stress response (also called the unfolded protein response
thus they functionally link the cytoskeleton to the
or the LIPR), which triggers cell death through apoptosis
ECM. Focal adhesion complexes are large macroimolecu-
(Chapter 2).
lar complexes that localize at hemidesmosomes, and
As an exaimple of the importance of the ER editing func-
include proteins that can generate intracellular
tion, the disease cystic fibrosis most commonly results from
signals when cells are subjected to increased shear
Imisfolding of the CFTR membrane transporter protein. In
stress, for exainple, endothelium in the bloodstream,
cystic fibrosis, the most cominon mutation in the CFTR
or cardiac myocytes in a failing heart.
gene results in the loss of a single aimino acid residue (phe-
·Communicating junctions (gap junctions)
）mediatethe
nylalanine 508), leading in turn to misfolding, ER retention,
 passage of cheimical or electrical signals froim one cell to
and degradation of the CFTR protein. The loss of CFTR
another. The junction consists of a dense planar array
function leads to abnorimal epithelial chloride transport,
of 1.5- to 2-nim pores (called conrexors) forimed by hex-
hyperviscous bronchial secretions and recurrent airway
ainers of transineimbrane protein cornexins. These pores
infections (Chapter 7).
 perimit the passage of ions, nucleotides, sugars, amino
Golgi apparatus: From the RER, proteins and lipids des-
acids, vitaimins, and other simall molecules; the perime-
tined for other organelles or for extracellular export are
paiamol Aq paonpai Aipidei si uogsun! au jo Aqe
shuttled into the Golgi apparatus. This organelle consists
intracellular pH or increased  intracellular calcium.
of stacked cisternae that progressively modify proteins in
Gap junctions play a critical role in cell-cell coimnuni-
an orderly fashion from cis (near the ER) to trars (near the
cation; in cardiac myocytes, for exaimple, cell-to-cell
plasima meimbrane); macromolecules are shuttled between
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Metabolism and Mitochondrial Function
13
the various cisternae within meimbrane-bound vesicles. As
 is   sa 
 molecules move froim cis to trars, the N-linked oligosac-
in the late endosome; late endosoines mature into
charides originally added to proteins in the ER are pruned
lysosomes.
 and further imodified in a stepwise fashion; O-linked oli-
Senescent organelles and large protein coimplexes
gosaccharides (sugar moieties linked to serine or threo-
p ssaond e Aq saososi onu panus aq u
nine) are also appended. Some of this glycosylation is
au tophagy. Through poorly understood mechanisms,
inportant in directing molecules to lysosoimes (via the
obsolete organelles are corralled by a double men-
mannose-6-phosphate  receptor);  other  glycosylation
brane derived froim the ER; the membrane progres-
adducts may be important for cell-cell or cell-matrix inter-
sively expands to encircle a collection of structures
actions, or for clearing senescent cells (e.g- platelets and
 sa  m   s e
red cells). In addition to the stepwise glycosylation of lipids
lysosomes where the contents are catabolized. In
and proteins, the cis Golgi retwork is where proteins are
addition to facilitating the turnover of aged and
recycled back to the ER, and the trans Golgi network is
defunct cellular constituents, autophagy also is used
-o rao o pars e sidi pe sud aam
to preserve cell viability during nutrient depletion.
elles (including the plasima meimbrane), or to secretory
The significance of autophagy in cell biology was
vesicles destined for extracellular release. The Golgi
recognized by the award of the 2016 Nobel Prize to
complex is especially proiminent in cells specialized for
Yoshinori Ohsumi for his discoveries relating to the
secretion, including goblet cells of the intestine, bronchial
 mechanism of autophagy. This topic is discussed in
epithelium (secreting large aimounts of polysaccharide-rich.
more detail in Chapter 2.
 Jo sannunb are Sanas) shas eusend pue "(snn
 Phagocytosis of microorganisims or large fragiments of
+
antibodies).
matrix or debris occur primarily in professional
Smooth ER (SER): The SER in most cells is relatively
phagocytes  (imacrophages and neutrophils).  The
sparse, foriming the transition zone from RER to transport
Imaterial is engulfed to form a phagosome that subse-
vesicles moving to the Golgi. However, in cells that syn-
quently fuses with a lysosoime.
Proteasomes play an important role in degrading cytosolic
or that catabolize lipid-soluble molecules (e.g., in the liver),
proteins (Fig. 1.10); these include denatured or imisfolded
the SER may be particularly conspicuous. Indeed, repeated
proteins (akin to what occurs within the ER), as well as
exposure to compounds that are metabolized by the SER
other proteins whose levels and half-life need to be
(e.g, phenobarbital, which is catabolized by the cyto-
tightly regulated (e.g., transcription factors). Many (but
chrome P-450 systein) leads to a reactive hyperplasia of the
not all) proteins destined for proteasome destruction are
 SER. The SER also is responsible for sequestering intracel-
targeted after covalent addition of a protein called ubiq-
lular calcium; subsequent release from the SER into the
uitin. Polyubiquitinated molecules are progressively
cytosol can mediate a number of responses to extracellular
unfolded and funneled into the polyimeric proteasoime
signals. In addition, in muscle cells, a specialized SER
complex, a cylinder containing multiple different prote-
called the sarcoplasmic reticulum is responsible for the cycli-
ase activities, each with its active site pointed at the
cal release and sequestration of calcium ions that regulate
hollow core. Proteasoimes digest proteins into simall
 muscle contraction and relaxation, respectively.
(6-12 amino acids) fragiments that can subsequently be
further degraded to their constituent aimino acids and
Waste Disposal: Lysosomes
recycled, or presented to immune cells in the context of
and Proteasomes
major histocompatibility complex class I molecules, an
important component of host imnune surveillance.
As already mentioned briefly, cellular waste disposal
depends on the activities of lysosomes and proteasomes
(Fig. 1.10).
CELLULAR METABOLISM AND
· Lysosomes are membrane-bound organelles containing
roughly 40 different acid hydrolases (i.e., enzymes that
MITOCHONDRIAL FUNCTION
'saseanoid Surpnpu (es Hd sipioe u isaq uonsuny
nucleases, lipases, glycosidases, phosphatases, and sul-
Mitochondria evolved from ancestral prokaryotes that
fatases. Lysosoimal enzyimes are initially synthesized in
were engulfed by primitive eukaryotes about 1.5 billion
the ER luimen and then tagged with a 1mannose-6-phos-
years ago. Their origin explains why mitochondria contain
phate (M6P) residue within the Golgi apparatus. Such
their own DNA genome (circularized, about 1% of the total
M6P-modified proteins are subsequently delivered to
cellular DNA), which encodes roughly 1% of the total cel-
lysosoimes through trans-Golgi vesicles that express
lular proteins and approximately 20% of the proteins
M6P receptors. The other macroimolecules destined for
involved in oxidative phosphorylation.  Although their
catabolisim in the lysosomes arrive by one of three other
genomes are simall, mitochondria can nevertheless perform
pathways (Fig. 1.10):
all the steps of DNA replication, transcription, and transla-
 Material internalized by fluid-phase pinocytosis or
tion. Interestingly, the mitochondrial machinery is similar
receptor-mediated endocytosis passes from plasima
to present-day bacteria; for example, mitochondria initiate
meimbrane to early endosoime to late endosoime, and
 protein synthesis with N-formylimethionine and are sensi-
ultimately into the lysosome, becoiming progres-
tive to anti-bacterial antibiotics.
sively more acidic in the process. The early endosome
Mitochondria are dynamic,
, constantly undergoing
is the first acidic compartnent encountered, whereas
fission and fusion with other mitochondria; in this way,
http://ebooksmedicine.net
4
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
ALYSOSOMAL DEGRADATION
Endoplasmic
Nucleus
reticulum
Endocytosis
Endosome
Senescent
organs 
Phagocytosis
 Denatured proteins
Lysosomes
LC3
Phagosome
AUTOPHAGY
HETEROPHAGY
Autophagosome
Phagolysosome
Exocytosis
B PROTEASOMAL DEGRADATION
Age, Uv, heat,
CYTOSOL
reactive oxygen
species
Multiple
Chaperones
Folded
 Senescent or
ubiquitins
Nascent
protein 
 denatured 
peptide
protein
chains
E1, E2, E3
Ligases
Peptide
Proteasome 
 fragments
 Free ubiquitin
Metabolic alterations (e.g., pH)
"ER stress"
 Genetic mutations
→ (unfolded protein 
APOPTOSIS
Viral infections
response)
Excess
↓ Protein synthesis
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
misfolded 
protein 
↑ Protein synthesis
Fig. I.l0 Intracellular catabolism. (A) Lysosomal degradation. In heterophogy (right side), lysosomes fuse with endosomes or phagosomes to facilitate the
degradation of their internalized contents (see Fig. I.8).The end products may be released into the cytosol for nutrition or discharged into the extracellular
space (exocytosis). In outophogy (eft side), senescent organelles or denatured proteins are targeted for ysosome-driven degradation by encircling them with a
double membrane derived from the ER and marked by LC3 proteins (microtubule-associated protein IA/I B-light chain 3). Cell stressors such as nutrient
depletion or certain intracellular infections can also activate the autophagocytic pathway. (B) Proteasome degradation.Cytosolic proteins destined for turnover
(e.g., transcription factors or regulatory proteins), senescent proteins, or proteins that have become denatured because of extrinsic mechanical or chemical
stresses can be tagged by multiple ubiquitin molecules (through the activity of E, E2, and E, ubiquitin ligases). This marks the proteins for degradation by
proteasomes, cytosolic multisubunit complexes that degrade proteins to small peptide fragments. High levels of misfolded proteins within the ER trigger a
protective unfolded protein response engendering a broad reduction in protein synthesis, but specific increases in chaperone proteins that can facilitate
protein refolding. If this is inadequate to cope with the levels of misfolded proteins, apoptosis is induced.
mitochondria can undergo regular renewal to stave off
contributes the vast majority of cytoplasmic organelles to
degenerative changes that might occur because of genetic
the fertilized zygote, mitochondrial DNA is virtually
entirely maternally inherited. However, because the protein
turn over rapidly, with estimated half-lives ranging from 1
constituents of mitochondria derive from both nuclear and
to 10 days, depending on the tissue, nutritional status, meta-
mitochondrial genetic transcription, mitochondrial disor-
 bolic deinands, and intercurrent injury. Because the ovun 
ders may be X-linked, autosomal, or maternally inherited.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Metabolism and Mitochondrial Function
15
 Lipid, protein building blocks 
METABOLITES
TCA cycle
(glucose, glutamine,
intermediates
fatty acids)
 Intermembrane space 
ATP GENERATION
(ATP generation)
Inner membrane ~
(respiratory chain
APOPTOSIS SIGNALS
proteins)
Outer membrane.
BAX/BAK complexes
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrial outer membrane
Core matrix ~
permeabilization (MOMP)
(citric acid cycle
H+
enzymes)
0 Cytochrome C
Injury
Membrane
permeability
Stabilized
transition pores
apoptosome
ISCHEMIA,
ATP
TOXIN
CELL DEATH
CELL DEATH
(necrosis)
(apoptosis)
Fig. I.ll Roles of the mitochondria. Besides the efficient generation of ATP from carbohydrate and fatty acid substrates, mitochondria play an important
role in intermediary metabolism, serving as the source of molecules used to synthesize lipids and proteins, and they also are centrally involved in cellife-
and-death decisions.
Mitochondria provide the enzymatic machinery for oxi-
transporter that can dissipate the proton gradient (uncou-
dative phosphorylation (and thus the relatively efficient
ple it from oxidative phosphorylation) in the form of heat
generation of energy froim glucose and fatty acid sub-
(nonshivering thermogenesis). As a natural (albeit usually
strates). They also have central roles in anabolic metabo-
 low-level) byproduct of substrate oxidation and electron
lisim and the regulation prograimmed cell death, so-called
transport, mitochondria also are an important source of
'apoptosis" (Fig. 1.11).
 Energy Generation. Each mitochondrion has two sepa-
gen peroxide); inportantly, hypoxia, toxic injury, or even
rate and specialized meimbranes. The inner meimbrane con-
imitochondrial aging can lead to significantly increased
tains the enzymes of the respiratory chain folded into
levels of intracellular oxidative stress.
cristae. This encloses a core matrix space that harbors the
 Intermediate Metabolism. Pure oxidative phosphoryla-
bulk of certain metabolic enzymes, such as the enzymes of
tion produces abundant ATP, but also "burns" glucose to
the citric acid cycle. Outside the inner meimbrane is the
 CO, and HO, leaving no carbon moieties for use as build-
interimembrane space, site of ATP synthesis, which is,
ing blocks for lipids or proteins. For this reason, rapidly
in turn, enclosed by the outer meinbrane; the latter is
 growing cells (both benign and malignant) increase glucose
sr snoanne u n suand uo ym papns
and glutamine uptake and decrease their production of
perimeable to simall (<5000 daltons) molecules. Larger mol-
ATP per glucose molecule- forming lactic acid in the pres-
ecules (and even soine simaller polar species) require spe-
ence of adequate oxygen-a phenoimenon called the
cific transporters.
Warburg effect (or aerobic glycolysis). Both glucose and
isea e ui on papaau Aiaua a jo ainos noleui au
glutamine provide carbon moieties that prime the mito-
cellular functions derives from oxidative metabolisim.
chondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, but instead of
Mitochondria oxidize substrates to CO, and in the process
being used to make ATP, interimediates are “"spun off" to
transfer high-energy electrons from the original molecule
make lipids, nucleic acids, and proteins. Thus, depending
 on the growth state of the cell, imitochondrial imetabolisim
 of various metabolites drives hydrogen ion (proton) pumps
can be modulated to support either cellular maintenance
that transfer H+ ions from the core matrix into the inter-
 or cellular growth. Ultimately, growth factors, nutrient
 membrane space. As these H+ ions flow back down their
supplies, and oxygen availability, as well as cellular signal-
 electrocheimical gradient, the energy released is used to
 ing pathways and sensors that respond to these exogenous
synthesize ATP.
factors, govern these metabolic decisions.
It should be noted that the electron transport chain need
 Cell Death. Mitochondria are like the proverbial Dr.
not necessarily be coupled to ATP generation. Thus, an
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. On the one hand, they are factories
inner membrane protein enriched in brown fat called ther-
 of energy production in the form of ATP that allow the cells
 mogenin (or UCP-1 = uncoupling protein 1) is a proton
to survive; on the other hand, they participate in driving
http://ebooksmedicine.net
6
CH A PT E R IThe Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
cell death when the cells are exposed to noxious stimuli
· Paracrine signaling. Cells in just the imnediate vicinity
that the cells cannot adapt to. The role of mitochondria in
are affected. Paracrine signaling may involve trans-
the two principle forms of cell death, necrosis and apopto-
membrane "sending" molecules that activate receptors
sis, are discussed in Chapter 2. In addition to providing
on adjacent cells or secreted factors that diffuse for only
ATP and metabolites that enable the bulk of cellular activ-
short distances. In some instances, the latter is achieved
ity, mitochondria also regulate the balance of cell survival
by having secreted factors bind tightly to ECM.
and death.
Autocrine signaling occurs when molecules secreted by a
cell affect that saine cell. This can serve as a means to
 entrain groups of cells undergoing synchronous differ-
CELLULAR ACTIVATION
entiation during development, or it can be used to
Cell comnunication is critical in multicellular organisims.
back) a response.
At the most basic level, extracellular signals deterimine
whether a cell lives or dies, whether it reinains quiescent,
 mitters at specialized cell junctions (synapses) onto target
or whether it is stimulated to perform a specific function.
cells.
Intercellular signaling is important in the developing
+
 Endocrine signaling. A hormone is released into the
eimbryo, in maintaining tissue organization, and in ensur-
bloodstream and acts on target cells at a distance.
ing that tissues respond in an adaptive and effective fashion
to various threats, such as local tissue trauma or a systeimic
Regardless of the nature of an extracellular stimulus
infection. Loss of cellular communication and the "social
 (paracrine, synaptic, or endocrine), the signal it conveys
controls" that maintain normal relationships of cells can
is transmitted to the cell via a specific receptor protein.
un ue no (raoues) qmoi paeinaiun on peal Aisnoa
Signaling molecules (ligards) bind their respective recep-
fective response to an extrinsic stress (as in shock).
tors and initiate a cascade of intracellular events culminat-
ing in the desired cellular response. Ligands usually have
Cell Signaling
high affinities for receptors and at physiologic concentra-
tions bind receptors with exquisite specificity. Receptors
An individual cell is constantly exposed to a reimarkable
Imay be present on the cell surface or located within the cell
cacophony of signals, which must be "interpeted" and inte-
(Fig. 1.12):
grated into responses that benefit the organism as a whole.
· Intracellular receptors include transcription factors that
Some signals may induce a given cell type to differentiate,
are activated by lipid-soluble ligands that easily transit
others may stimulate proliferation, and yet others may
plasima meimbranes. Examples include vitamin D and
direct the cell to perform a specialized function. Multiple
steroid hormones, which activate nuclear horimone
aoue ja rasn aur uogquoo u paran seus
receptors. In other settings, a simall and/or nonpolar
totally unique response. Many cells require certain inputs
signaling ligand can diffuse into adjacent cells. Such is
just to continue living; in the absence of appropriate exog-
the case for nitric oxide (NO), through which endothe-
enous signals, they die by apoptosis.
lial cells regulate intravascular pressure. NO is gener-
The sources of the signals that most cells respond to can
ated by an activated endothelial cell and then diffuses
be classified into several groups:
into adjacent vascular simooth muscle cells; there it
·Pathogens and damage to neighboring cells. Many cells have
activates guanylyl cyclase to generate cyclic GMP, an
an innate capacity to sense and respond to daimaged
intracellular second signal that causes simooth muscle
cells (canger signais), as well as foreign invaders such as
relaxation.
microbes. The receptors that generate these danger
 Cell-surface receptors are generally transimeinbrane pro-
signals are discussed in Chapters 3 and 5.
teins with extracellular domains that bind activating
 Cell-cell contacts, mediated through adhesion molecules
ligands. Depending on the receptor, ligand binding may
and/or gap junctions. As mentioned previously, gap
(1) open ion channels (typically at the synapse between
junction signaling is accomplished between adjacent cells
electrically excitable cells), (2) activate an associated
via hydrophilic connexons that permit the moveiment of
anse () (uod ) uaond Aronai upu
simall ions (e.g, calciun), various metabolites, and
an endogenous or associated enzyme, often a tyrosine
 potential second messenger molecules such as cAMP.
kinase, or (4) trigger a proteolytic event or a change in
Cell-ECM contacts, mediated through integrins, which
protein binding or stability that activates a latent tran-
are discussed in Chapter 3 in the context of leukocyte
scription factor. Activities (2) and (3) are associated with
attachment to other cells during inflammation.
growth factor signaling pathways that drive cell prolif-
 Secreted molecules. The most important secreted mol.
eration, whereas activity (4) is a coimmon feature of mul-
ecules include growth factors, discussed later; cytokines, a
tiple pathways (e.g., Notch, Wnt, and Hedgehog) that
term reserved for mediators of inflammation and
regulate norimal developiment. Understandably, signals
immune responses (also discussed in Chapters 3 and 5);
 transduced by cell surface receptors are often deranged
in developmental disorders and in cancers.
and act on different cell types (Chapter 20).
Signal Transduction Pathways
 Signaling pathways also can be classified into different
types based on the spatial relationships between the
Binding of a ligand to a cell surface receptor mediates sig-
sending and receiving cells:
naling by inducing clustering of the receptor (receptor
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Activation
Nonreceptor
Tyrosine
Notch ligand
tyrosine kinase
kinase
based receptor
receptor
Nuclear
hormone
Ligand
Ligand
GPCR ligand
Lrp5/Lrp6
Wnt
GPCR
Notch
Frizzled
cleavage
Kinase
Multi-subunit
P
domain
ATP
CAMP
Notchi
complex
Hormone receptor
IC notch (
β-catenin
Nonreceptor
tyrosine kinase
MNMNNNNNNNNNNNNNMNNN
Transcription of nuclear
Transcription of
Transcription
Nucleus
hormone target gene 
notch target gene
Growth factor
Growth factor receptor
Farnesyl
membrane anchor
Inactive
Active
RAS
Activation
RAS
Phosphorylation
GDP
GTP
Bridging  Activates
protein 
Inactivation by .
hydrolysis of GTP
Active RAS
PI3K
RAF
Akt
mTOR
MAPK
Activation 
 of transcription
NNN
MYC protein
 Cell cycle progression
B
Fig. I.12 Receptor-mediated signaling. (A) Categories of signaling receptors, including receptors that use a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase; a receptor tyrosine
 kinase; a nuclear receptor that binds its ligand and can then influence transcription; a seven-transmembrane receptor linked to heterotrimeric G proteins;
Notch, which recognizes a ligand on a distinct cell and is cleaved yielding an intracellular fragment that can enter the nucleus and influence transcription of 
specific target genes; and the Wnt/Frizzled pathway where activation releases intracellular β-catenin from a protein complex that normally drives its constitu-
tive degradation.The released β-catenin can then migrate to the nucleus and act as a transcription factor. Lrp5/Lrp6, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-
related proteins 5 and 6, are highly homologous and act as coreceptors in Wnt/Frizzled signaling. (B) Signaling from a tyrosine kinase-based receptor. Binding 
of the growth factor (ligand) causes receptor dirmerization and autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues.Attachment of adapter (or bridging) proteins couples
the receptor to inactive, GDP-bound RAS, allowing the GDP to be displaced in favor of GTP and yielding activated RAS.Activated RAS interacts with and
activates RAF (also known as MAP kinose kinase kinose). This kinase then phosphorylates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and activated MAP kinase
phosphorylates other cytoplasmic proteins and nuclear transcription factors, generating cellular responses.Activated RAS can also interact with other com-
 ponents, such as phosphatidyl 3-kinase (PI3 kinase), which activates other signaling systerms. The cascade is turned off when the activated RAS eventually
hydroyzes GTP to GDP converting RAS to its inactive form. Mutations in RAS that lead to delayed GTP hydrolysis can thus lead to augmented proliferative
http://ebooksmedicine.net
8
CH A PT E R IThe Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
crosslinking) or other conforimational changes (Fig. l.12).
· Nuctear receptors. Lipid-soluble ligands can diffuse into
The coimnon theme is that all of these perturbations cause
cells where they interact with intracellular proteins to
a change in the physical state of the intracellular domain
form a receptor-ligand complex that directly binds to
 of the receptor, which then trigers additional biochemical
nuclear DNA; the results can be either activation or
events that lead to signal transduction.
repression of gene transcription.
Cellular receptors are grouped into several types based
?
Other classes of receptors. Other receptors- originally rec-
on the signaling mechanisms they use and the intracel-
ognized as important for embryonic development and
hlar biochemical pathways they activate (Fig. 1.12).
cell fate deterimination- have since been shown to par-
Receptor signaling mnost coimunonly leads to the formation
ticipate in the functions of mature cells, particularly
or modification of biochemical intermediates and/or acti-
within the immune system. These pathways rely on
vation of enzymes, and ultimately to the generation of
protein:protein interactions, rather than enzyimatic
active transcription factors that enter the nucleus and alter
activities, to transduce signals, which may serve to
gene expression:
allow for very precise control.
·Receptors associated with kinase activity. Downstream
 Receptor proteins of the Notch faimily: ligand binding
phosphorylation is a coimmon pathway of signal trans-
to Notch receptors leads to proteolytic cleavage of the
 duction. Changes in receptor geoimetry can stimulate
receptor and subsequent nuclear translocation of the
intrinsic receptor protein kinase activity (
or promote
cytoplasimic domain (intracellular Notch) to forim a
the
enzyimatic  activity (
ofrecruitedi
intracellular
transcription complex.
kinases. These kinases add charged phosphate residues
Wnt protein ligands act through a pathway involving
to target molecules. Tyrosine kinases phosphorylate spe-
transmembrane Frizzled family receptors, which reg-
cific tyrosine residues, whereas serine/threonine kinases
ulate the intracellular levels of B-catenin. In the
add phosphates to distinct serine or threonine residues,
absence of Wnt, B-catenin is targeted for ubiquitin-
and lipid kirases phosphorylate lipid substrates. For
 directed proteasome degradation. Wnt binding to
every phosphorylation event, there is also a potential
Frizzled (and other coreceptors) recruits other pro-
counter-regulatory phosphatase, an enzyme that can
teins that disrupt the degradation-targeting complex.
renove the phosphate residue and thus modulate sig-
This stabilizes β-catenin, allowing it to translocate to
naling; usually, phosphatases play an inhibitory role in
the nucleus and form a transcription complex.
signal transduction.
Modular Signaling Proteins, Hubs,
proteins (e.g, receptors for insulin, epiderimal growth
and Nodes
factor, and platelet-derived growth factor [PDGF]);
ligand-induced crosslinking activates intrinsic tyrosine
The traditional linear view of signaling - that receptor acti-
kinase domains located in their cytoplasimic tails.
 o o s ao e sa 
 Several kinds of receptors have no intrinsic catalytic
 mediates that ultimately leads tochanges in gene expression
activity (e.g, immune receptors, some cytokine recep-
and the desired biological response-is oversimplified.
tors, and integrins). For these, a separate intracellular
Instead, it is increasingly clear that any initial signal results
一
interacts with receptors after ligand binding and phos-
contributes in varying degrees to the final outcome. This
phorylates_specific motifs on the receptor or other
is particularly true of signaling pathways that rely on
proteins. The cellular homolog of the transforming
enzymatic activities, which typically modulate a web of
 protein of the Rous sarcoma virus, called SRC, is the
polypeptides with complex interactions. For exaimple,
 rs p A n  r 
phosphorylation of any given protein can allow it to associ-
tyrosine kinases (Src-family kinases).
 SRC contains
 ate with a host of other molecules, resulting in imultiple
unique functional regions called Src-homology (SH)
effects such as:
doimains; SH2 domains typically bind to receptors
●Enzyime activation (or inactivation)
 phosphorylated by another kinase, allowing the aggre-
 Nuclear (or cytoplasimic) localization of transcription
gation of multiple enzymes, whereas SH3 domains
factors (see later)
imediate protein-protein interactions, often involving
 Transcription factor activation (or inactivation)
proline-rich domains.
Actin polynerization (or depolymerization)
G-protein coupied receptors are polypeptides that charac-
·
 Protein degradation (or stabilization)
teristically traverse the plasima meimbrane seven times
●Activation of feedback inhibitory (or stimulatory) loops
(hence their designation as seven-transimeimbrane or
serpentine receptors); more than 1500 such receptors
Ataptor proteins play a key role in organizing intracel.
have been identified. After ligand binding, the receptor
lular signaling pathways. These proteins function as
associates with an intracellular guanosine triphosphate
molecular connectors that physically link different enzymes
(GTP)-binding protein (G protein). At baseline, these G
and promote the asseimbly of complexes; adaptors can be
 proteins contain guanosine diphosphate (GDP); interac-
 integral membrane proteins or cytosolic proteins. A typical
tion with a receptor-ligand complex results in G protein
adaptor may contain a few specific domains (e.g., SH2 or
activation through the exchange of GDP for GTP. Down-
stream signaling typically involves the generation of
encing the proteins that are recruited to signaling com-
cAMP, and inositol-1,4,5,-triphosphate (IPs), the latter
 plexes, adaptors can determine downstream signaling
releasing calciun from the ER.
events.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Growth Factors and Receptors
19
By analogy with computer networks, the protein-
away. These insights highlight the importance of chro-
protein complexes can be considered rodes and the bio-
cheimical events feeding into or emanating from these
normal and pathologic.
nodes can be thought of as hubs. Signal transduction can
 For a transcription factor to induce transcription, it
therefore be visualized as a kind of networking phenom-
must also possess protein:protein interaction domains
enon; understanding this higher-order complexity is the
that directly or indirectly recruit histone-imodifying
province of systems biology, involving a "marriage" (
of
enzymes, chromatin-remodeling coimplexes, and (imost 
biology and computation.
importantly) RNA polymerase- the large multipro-
tein enzyimatic complex that is responsible for RNA
Transcription Factors
synthesis.
Most signal transduction pathways ultimately influence
GROWTH FACTORS AND
cellular function by modulating gene transcription
through the activation and nuclear localization of tran-
RECEPTORS
scription factors. Conforimational changes of transcription
factors (e.g., following phosphorylation) can allow their
A major role of growth factors is to stimulate the activity
of proteins that are required for cell survival, growth and
or protein-binding motifs. Transcription factors may drive
division. Growth factor activity is mediated through
the expression of a relatively limited set of genes or may
binding to specific receptors, ultimately influencing the 
have imuch more widespread effects on gene expression.
expression of genes that can:
Anong the transcription factors that regulate the expres.
 Promote entry of cells into the cell cycle
sion of genes that are needed for growth are MYC and JUN,
Relieve blocks on cell-cycle progression (thus proimot-
whereas a transcription factor that triggers the expression
 ing replication)
 of genes that lead to growth arrest is p53. Transcription
Prevent apoptosis
factors have a inodular design, often containing doimains
 Enhance biosynthesis of cellular components (nucleic
that bind DNA and others that interact with other proteins,
acids, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates) required for a
such as components of the RNA polymerase complex
 mother cell to give rise to two daughter cells
required for transcription.
jus o bupuq sads pad sup Suu-na ·
Although soime growth factors are proteins that "just"
DNA sequences. Whereas some transcription factor
stimulate cell proliferation and/or survival, it is important
binding sites are found in promoters, close to the site
to reineimber that they also can drive a host of other activi-
ties, including migration, differentiation, and synthetic
most transcription factors bind widely throughout
capacity. Some of the important growth factors relevant to
genomes, including to long-range regulatory elements
tissue regeneration and repair are listed in Table 1.l and
such as enhancers. Enhancers function by looping back
described further in Chapter 3.
to gene proimoters, and therefore are spatially located
Growth factors can be involved in the proliferation of
close to the genes that they regulate, even though it
 cells at steady state as well as after injury, when irrevers-
 ty aq on readde Aeu Aaq aouanbas souas jo sua
ibly damaged cells must be replaced. Uncontrolled
Table I.I Growth Factors Involved in Regeneration and Repair
Growth Factor
Sources
Functions
 Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
 Activated macrophages, salivary glands,
 Mitogenic for keratinocytes and fibroblasts; stimulates keratinocyte
keratinocytes, and many other cells 
 migration; stimulates formation of granulation tissue 
 Transforming growth factor-α 
Activated macrophages, keratinocytes,
Stirmulates proliferation of hepatocytes and many other epithelial
{TGF-0)
 many other cell types
cells
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
Fibroblasts, stromal cells in the liver,
 Enhances proliferation of hepatocytes and other epithelial cells;
(scatter factor)
endothelial cells
increases cell motility
 Vascular endothelial growth factor
 Mesenchymal cells 
Stimulates proliferation of endothelial cells; increases vascular 
(VEGF)
 permeability
Platelet-derived growth factor
 Platelets, macrophages, endothelial cells,
 Chemotactic for neutrophils, macrophages, fibroblasts, and smooth 
(PDGF)
 smooth muscle cells, keratinocytes 
 muscle cells; activates and stimulates proliferation of fibroblasts, 
endothelial, and other cells; stirmulates ECM protein synthesis
 Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs),
 Macrophages, mast cells, endothelial 
 Chemotactic and mitogenic for fibroblasts; stirmulates angiogenesis
including acidic (FGF-l) and basic 
 cells, many other cell types 
 and ECM protein synthesis 
(FGF-2)
 Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-
Platelets, T ymphocytes, macrophages,
 Chermotactic for leukocytes and fibroblasts; stirmulates ECM protein 
 endothelial cells, keratinocytes,
 synthesis; suppresses acute inflammation
 smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts 
Keratinocyte growth factor (KGF)
Fibroblasts
Stimulates keratinocyte migration, proliferation, and differentiation
(i.e., FGF-7)
ECM, Extracellular membrane.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
20
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
proliferation can result when the growth factor activity is
recruitiment of the cells into areas of inflaimmation and
dysregulated, or when growth factor signaling pathways
tissue injury.
are altered to becoime constitutively active. Thus, many
Vascular endothelial growth factor. Vascular endothelial
growth factor pathway genes are proto-oncogenes, and gain-
growth factors (VEGFs)-VEGF-A, -B, -C, and -D, and
of-function mnutations in these genes can convert them into
PIGF (placental growth factor) -- are a family of homodi-
 oncogenes capable of driving unfettered cell proliferation
meric proteins. VEGF-A is generally referred to simply
and tumor formation. The following discussion summa-
as VEGF; it is the major factor responsible for angiogen-
rizes selected growth factors that are involved in the
esis, inducing blood vessel development, after injury
important proliferative processes of tissue repair and
and in tumors. In coimparison, VEGF-B and PIGF are
regeneration; by virtue of their proliferative effects they
 involved in eimbryonic vessel development, and VEGF-C
can also drive tuimorigenesis. Although the growth factors
and -D stimulate both angiogenesis and lyinphatic
described here all involve receptors with intrinsic kinase
development
(lymphangiogenesis). VEGFs also are
activity, other growth factors may signal through each of
 involved in the maintenance of endothelial cells lining
the various pathways shown in Fig. 1.12.
mature vessels. Its expression is highest in epithelial
Epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-a.
cells adjacent to fenestrated endothelium (e.g, podo-
Both of these factors belong to the EGF family and bind
cytes in the kidney, pigiment epithelium in the retina,
to the same receptors, explaining their shared biologic
and choroid plexus in the brain). VEGF induces angio-
activities. EGF and TGF-αare produced by imacrophages
and a variety of epithelial cells, and are mitogenic for
proliferation (capillary sprouting), and the forimation of
hepatocytes, fibroblasts, and a host of epithelial cells.
the vascular lumina. VEGFs also induce vascular dila-
The “EGF receptor family” includes four menbrane
tion and increase vascular perimeability. As might be
receptors with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity; the best-
anticipated, hypoxia is the most important inducer of
characterized is EGFRl, also known as ERB-B1, or simply
VEGF production through pathways that involve acti-
EGFR. EGFRl imutations and/or aimplification fre-
vation of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible
quently occur in a number of cancers including those of
factor (HIF-1). Other VEGF inducers- produced at sites
the lung, head and neck, breast, and brain. The ERBB2
of inflammation or wound healing - include PDGF and
receptor (also known as HER2) is overexpressed in a
TGF-C.
subset of breast cancers. To treat malignancies, many of
VEGFs bind to a faimily of receptor tyrosine kinases
these receptors have been succesfully targeted by anti-
(VEGFR-1, -2, and -3). VEGFR-2 is highly expressed in
bodies and simall molecule antagonists.
endothelium and is the most important for angiogene-
Hepatocyte growth factor. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF;
sis. Antibodies against VEGF are approved for the treat-
also known as scatter factor) has mitogenic effects on
ment of several tumors such as renal and colon cancers
hepatocytes and most epithelial cells. HGF acts as a
because cancers require angiogenesis for their spread
morphogen during embryonic development (i.e., it
and growth. Anti-VEGF antibodies also are used in the
influences the pattern of tissue differentiation), pro-
treatiment of a number of ophthalmic diseases, includ-
motes cell migration (hence its designation as scatter
 ) oaap r pa-ae am, 
factor), and enhances hepatocyte survival. HGF is pro-
disorder of inappropriate angiogenesis and vascular
duced by fibroblasts and most mesenchyimal cells, as
perimeability that causes adult-onset blindness); the reti-
well as endothelium and nonhepatocyte liver cells. It is
 nopathy of preimaturity; and the leaky vessels that lead
synthesized as an inactive precursor (pro-HGF) that is
to diabetic macular edema. Finally, increased levels of
soluble versions of VEGFR-1 (s-FLT-1) in pregnant
sites of injury. The receptor for HGF is MET, which has
women may contribute to preeclampsia (hypertension
intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. It is frequently overex-
and proteinuria) by “sopping up"
the free VEGF
pressed or mutated in tumors, particularly renal and
required for maintaining normal endothelium.
thyroid papillary carcinomas. Consequently, MET
Fibroblast growth factor. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) is
inhibitors are being evaluated as cancer therapies.
a fainily of growth factors with more than 20 meinbers.
Platelet-derived growth factor. PDGF is a family of several
Acidic FGF (aFGF, or FGF-1) and basic FGF (bFGF, or
closely related proteins, each consisting of two chains
FGF-2) are the best characterized; FGF-7 is also referred
(designated by pairs of letters). Three isoforims of PDGF
 to as keratinocyte growth factor (KGF). Released FGFs
(AA,AB, and BB) are constitutively active, while
associate with heparan sulfate in the ECM, which serves
PDGF-CC and PDGF-DD must be activated by proteo-
as a reservoir for inactive factors thatcan be subsequently
lytic cleavage. PDGF is stored in platelet granules and
released by proteolysis (e.g., at sites of wound healing)
is released on platelet activation. Although originally
FGFs transduce signals through four tyrosine kinase
isolated froin platelets (hence the name), it also is pro-
receptors (FGFR 1-4). FGFs contribute to wound healing
 duced by many other cells, including activated macro-
responses, hematopoiesis, and development; bFGF has
phages, endothelium, simooth muscle cells, and a variety
all the activities necessary for angiogenesis as well.
of tumors. All PDGF isoforims exert their effects by
Transforming growth factor-β. TGF-β has three isoforms
binding to two cell surface receptors (PDGFR α and β),
(TGF-B1, TGF-β2, and TGF-B3) that belong to a faimily
both having intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. PDGF
with about 30 members, including bone morphogenetic
induces fibroblast, endothelial, and smooth muscle cell
proteins (BMPs), activins, inhibins, and Millerian inhib-
 proliferation and matrix synthesis, and is cheinotactic
iting substance. TGF-β1 has the most widespread distri-
for these cells (and inflaimnatory cells), thus proimoting
bution, and it is more commonly referred to simply as
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Extracellular Matrix
21
TGF-B. It is a hoimodimeric protein produced by mul-
to the inflammation that accompanies wound healing
tiple cell types, including platelets, endothelium, and
by inhibiting lymphocyte proliferation and the activity
mononuclear inflammatory cells. TGF-β is secreted as a
of other leukocytes.
 precursor that requires proteolysis to yield the biologi-
cally active protein. There are two TGF-β receptors, both
with serine/threonine kinase activity that induces the
EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX
phosphorylation of several downstream cytoplasimic
transcription factors called Smads. Phosphorylated
The ECM is a network of interstitial proteins that consti-
Simads forim heterodiners with Simad4, allowing nuclear
tutes a significant proportion of any tissue. Cell interac-
translocation and association with other DNA-binding
 tions with ECM are critical for development and healing.
 proteins to activate or inhibit gene transcription. TGF-β
 as well as for maintaining normal tissue architecture (Fig.
produces multiple and often opposing effects depend-
1.13). Much more than a simple "space filler" around cells,
ing on the tissue type and concurrent signals. Agents
ECM serves several key functions:
with such multiplicity of effects are called pleiotropic,
 Mechanical support for cell anchorage and cell migration,
and maintenance of cell polarity.
-us xinun Sunennus Aq uonuoy ress saaip d
 Control of cell proliferation, by binding and displaying
thesis  through  decreased  imatrix  metalloproteinase
(MMP) activity and increased activity of tissue inhibi-
tors of the integrin family. The ECM provides a depot
Laminin
Laminin 
fibers
EXTRACELLULAR
fibers
MATRIX
Collagen
Collagen
Fibronectin
Fibronectin
C
Growth factor
Integrin
Integrin
Growth factol
Growth factor
Growth factor
receptor
receptor
Focal adhesion complexes 
Actin cytoskeleton
CYTOSKELETON-MEDIATED
 SIGNALS
CYTOPLASMIC
CYTOPLASMIC
 SIGNAL 
SIGNAL 
TRANSDUCTION
TRANSDUCTION 
PATHWAYS
PATHWAYS
Nucleus
 PROLIFERATION, DIFFERENTIATION,
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS, ATTACHMENT,
MIGRATION, SHAPE CHANGE
Fig. I.I3 Interactions of ECM and growth factor-mediated cell signaling. Cell surface integrins interact with the cytoskeleton at focal adhesion complexes
(protein aggregates that include vinculin, α-actinin, and talin; see Fig. I.l6C). This can initiate the production of intracellular messengers or can directly trans-
duce signals to the nucleus. Cell surface receptors for growth factors can activate signal transduction pathways that overlap with those mediated through
 locomotion, and/or differentiation.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
27
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
for a variety of latent growth factors that can be acti-
organized around epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and
vated within a focus of injury or inflammation.
simooth muscle cells, foriming the specialized basement
Scaffolding for tissue renewal. Because maintenance of
membrare. This is synthesized conjointly by the overly-
normal tissue structure requires a basement membrane 
ing epitheliun and the underlying mesenchyinal cells,
or stroimal scaffold, the integrity of the baseiment mem-
o rs am , ra r e 
brane or the stroma of parenchyimal cells is critical for the
labeled as a membrane, it is quite porous). The major
 organized regeneration of tissues. Thus, ECM disruption
constituents are amorphous nonfibrillar type IV colla-
results in defective tissue regeneration and repair, for
 gen and laminin.)
example, cirrhosis of the liver resulting from thecollapse
of the hepatic stroma in various forms of hepatitis.
Establishment of tissue microenvironments.The baseiment
Components of the Extracellular Matrix
membrane acts as a boundary between the epithelium
and underlying connective tissue; it does not just
The components of the ECM fall into three groups of pro-
 provide support to the epithelium but is also functional,
teins (Fig. 1.15):
for example, in the kidney, foriming part of the filtration
Fibrous structural proteins such as collagens and elastins
apparatus.
that confer tensile strength and recoil
-e pe suiod se yns sia p-i o
The ECM is constantly being reimodeled; its synthesis
nan that perimit compressive resistance and lubrication
-ualar anssn sisauaodou Aueduosoe uoneperop pue
 Athesive glycoproteins that connect ECM eleinents to one
eration and repair, chronic fibrosis, and tumor invasion
 another and to cells
and metastasis. ECM occurs in two basic forims: interstitial
matrix and baseiment meinbrane (Fig. 1.14
Collagens. Collagens are composed of three separate
·Interstitial matrix is present in the spaces between cells
polypeptide chains braided into a ropelike triple helix.
in connective tissue, and between the parenchyimal epi-
About 30 collagen types have been identified, some of
thelium and the underlying supportive vascular and
which are unique to specific cells and tissues.
simooth muscle structures. The interstitial matrix is
Some collagen types (e.g. types I,II,II, and V colla-
synthesized by mesenchyimal cells (e.g., fibroblasts),
gens) forim linear fibrils stabilized by interchain hydro-
forming an aimorphous three-dimensional gel. Its major
gen bonding; such fbrillar collagens forin a imajor
 constituents are fibrillar and nonfibrillar collagens, as
proportion of the connective tissue in structures such as
well as fibronectin, elastin, proteoglycans, hyaluronate,
bone, tendon, cartilage, blood vessels, and skin, as well 
and other constituents (see later).
as in healing wounds and scars. The tensile strength of
Basement membrane. The seemingly random array of
the fibrillar collagens derives from lateral crosslinking
interstitial matrix in connective tissues becomes highly
of the triple helices by covalent bonds, an unusual
Epithelium
ntegrins
Fibroblast
BASEMENT MEMBRANE
·Type IV collagen
Integrins 
·Laminin
-Endothelial cells
Adhiesive
·Proteoglycan
Capillary
glycoproteins
Integrins
Fibroblast
- Proteoglycan
INTERSTITIAL MATRIX
- Type IV collagen
● Fibrillar collagens 
•Elastin
Laminin
· Proteoglycan and 
Cross-linked
hyaluronan
collagen triple helices
Proteoglycan
Fig. I.I4 Main components of the ECM, including collagens, proteoglycans, and adhesive gycoproteins. Both epithelial and mesenchymal cells (e.g.,fibroblasts)
interact with ECM via integrins. Basement membranes and the interstitial ECM have different architecture and general composition, although certain com-
ponents are present in both. For the sake of clarity, many ECM components (e.g., elastin, fibrillin, hyaluronan, and syndecan) are not included.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
 Extracellular Matrix
23
Short section of a collagen fibril
50
 Heparan sulfate
nm .
Chondroitin
proteoglycan
sulfate
in matrix
Collagenmolecule
300x1.5nm
Keratan
sulfate
Hyaluronic acid
backbone
Heparan
Link protein
sulfate
1.5
Free
nm
s
bFGF
bFGF complexed
with heparan sulfate 
Elastic fiber
Link protein
Hyaluronic acid
Core protein
Na
Na+
STRETCH
RELAX
Sulfated
FGF receptor
Syndecan
FGF receptor
Elastin molecule
Cross-link
sugars
Nat
Actin
Cytosol
cytoskeleton
A Fibrillar collagen and elastin
B Proteoglycan
 C bFGF regulation by association with
the extracellular matrix
Fig. I.15 ECM components. (A) Fbrillar collagen, and elastic tissue structures. Because of rodlike fibril stacking and extensive lateral crosslinking, collagen
fibers have marked tensile strength but little elasticity. Elastin also is crosslinked but differs in having large hydrophobic segments that form a dense globular
configuration at rest. As stretch is exerted, the hydrophobic domains are pulled open, but the crosslinks keep the molecules intact; release of the tension
allows the hydrophobic domains of the proteins to refold. (B) Proteogycan structure. The highly negatively charged sulfated sugars on the proteoglycan
teogycans. Heparan sulfate binds bFGF secreted in the ECM. Syndecan is a cell surface proteoglycan with a transmembrane core protein and extracellular
 glycosaminoglycan side chains that bind bFGF, and a cytoplasmic tail that interacts with the intracellular actin cytoskeleton. Syndecan side chains bind bFGF
released from damaged ECM, thus facilitating bFGF interaction with cell surface receptors.
 post-translational modification that requires hydroxyl-
explains why fibrillin defects lead to skeletal abnorimalities
ation of lysine residues in collagen by the enzyime lysyl
and weakened aortic walls, as in individuals with Marfan
oxidase. Because lysyl oxidase is a vitamin C-dependent
syndrome. Fibrillin also controls the availability of TGF-β
enzyime, children with ascorbate deficiency have skele-
(Chapter 7).
tal deformities, and people of any age with vitamin C
Proteoglycans and hyaluronan (Fig. 1.15). Proteogly-
 Jo asnesaq Aisea paaa pue Aiood leaq Aouaiap
 cans form highly hydrated gels that confer resistance to
"weak" collagen. Genetic defects in collagens cause dis-
compressive forces; in joint cartilage, proteoglycans also
eases such as osteogenesis imperfecta and certain forims of
provide a layer of lubrication between adjacent bony sur-
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Chapter 7).
faces. Proteoglycans consist of long polysaccharides called
Nonfibrillar collagens variously contribute to the struc-
glycosaiminoglycans (examples are keratan sulfate and
tures of planar basement membranes (type IV collagen);
chondroitin sulfate) attached to a core protein; these are
help regulate collagen fibril diameters or collagen-
 then linked to a long hyaluronic acid polymer called hyal-
 collagen interactions via so-called “fibril-associated col-
uronan in a manner reiminiscent of the bristles on a test-tube
lagen with interrupted triple helices" (FACITs, such as
 brush. The highly negatively charged, densely packed sul-
type IX collagen in cartilage); and provide anchoring
fated sugars attract cations (mostly sodium) and abundant
fibrils within baseinent membrane beneath stratified
water molecules, producing a viscous, gelatin-like matrix.
squamous epithelium (type Vll collagen).
Besides providing compressibility to fissues, proteogly-
cans also serve as reservoirs for secreted growth factors
Elastin. The ability of tissues to recoil and recover their
(e.g, FGF and HGF). Soime proteoglycans are integral cell
shape after physical deformation is conferred by elastin
imeinbrane proteins that have roles in cell proliferation,
(Fig. 1.15). Elasticity is especially important in cardiac
 migration, and adhesion, for example, by binding and con-
valves and large blood vessels, which must accomnodate
centrating growth factors and cheimokines (Fig. 1.15).
recurrent pulsatile flow, as well as in the uterus, skin, and
Adhesive glycoproteins and adhesion receptors. These
ligaiments. Morphologically, elastic fibers consist of a
are structurally diverse molecules variously involved in
central core of elastin with an associated meshlike network
cell-cell, cell-ECM, and ECM-ECM interactions (Fig. 1.16).
composed of fibrillin. The latter relationship partially
 Prototypical adhesive glycoproteins include fibronectin (a
http://ebooksmedicine.net
24
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
H2N
Heparan-
NH2
binding
Extracellular
domains
A chain
matrix
 Fibrin-
binding
domains
Collagen-
binding
B1 chain
B2 chain
domains
二
Cell binding
Integrin-
Type IV
domain
binding
collagen
Talin
Paxillin
motif
R
binding sites
Vinculin-
Vinculin
Heparan-
）
Tensin
 binding 
domains
Fibrin-
Actin
 binding -
Neurite
HOOC
domains
surface
α-Actinin
receptor
Actin
S
COOH
 binding site
S
Heparan
S
Kinases
sulfate
S
proteoglycan
A
FIBRONECTIN
B
LAMININ
binding site 
C
Fig. I.l6 Cell and ECM interactions: adhesive glycoproteins and integrin signaling. (A) Fibronectin consists of a disulfide-linked dimer, with several distinct
domains that allow binding to ECM and integrins,the latter through arginine-gycine-aspartic acid (RGD) motifs. (B) The cross-shaped lominin molecule is one
of the major components of basement membranes; its multidomain structure allows interactions between type IV collagen, other ECM components, and
cell-surface receptors. (C) Integrins and integrin-mediated signaling events at focal adhesion complexes. Each α-β heterodimeric integrin receptor is a trans-
membrane dimer that links ECM and the intracellular cytoskeleton. It is also associated with a complex of linking molecules (e.g., vinculin and talin) that can
recruit and activate kinases that ultirmately trigger downstream signaling cascades.
major component of the interstitial ECM) and laiminin (a
(Chapter 3), and they play a critical role in platelet
major constituent of basement membrane). Integrins are
 representative of the adhesion receptors, also known as cell
adhesion molecules (CAMs); the CAMs also include immu-
motif (abbreviated RGD). In addition to providing focal
noglobulins family meimbers, cadherins, and selectins.
attachiment to underlying substrates, binding through
Fibronectin is a large (450 kD) disulfide-linked heterodi-
the integrin receptors can also trigger signaling cascades
mer that exists in tissue and plasima forims; it is synthe-
that influence cell locomotion, proliferation, shape, and
sized by a variety of cells, including fibroblasts,
differentiation (Fig. 1.16).
monocytes, and endothelium. Fibronectin has specific
domains that bind to distinct ECM components (e.g, col-
lagen, fibrin, heparin, and proteoglycans), as well as inte-
MAINTAINING CELL POPULATIONS
grins (Fig. 1.16). In healing wounds, tissue and plasima
fibronectin provide a scaffold for subsequent ECM depo-
Proliferation and the Cell Cycle
sition, angiogenesis, and reepithelialization.
Laminin is the most abundant glycoprotein in the base-
Cell proliferation is fundamental to development, main-
ment meinbrane. It is an 820-kD cross-shaped heterotri-
tenance of steady-state tissue homeostasis, and replace-
mer that connects cells to underlying ECM components
ment of dead or damaged cells. The key elenents of
(91'1 bi aens ueiedaq pue uaseos Ai ad se yons
cellular proliferation are accurate DNA replication accoim-
Besides imediating the attachiment to the baseiment
panied by the coordinated synthesis of all other cellular
membrane, laminin can also modulate cell proliferation,
constituents, followed by equal apportionment of DNA
differentiation, and motility.
and other cellular constituents (e.g., organelles) to daugh-
Integrins are a large faimily of transimeimbrane heterodi-
ter cells through mitosis and cytokinesis.
Imeric glycoproteins composed of α-andβ-subunits that
The sequence of events that results in cell division
allow cells to attach to ECM constituents such as laminin
is called the cell cycle. The cell cycle consists of G, (pre-
and fibronectin, thus functionally and structurally
synthetic growth), S (DNA synthesis), Gz (preimitotic
linking the intracellular cytoskeleton with the outside
ane i sis puasab sasd (o)  pue (mo
world. Integrins also mediate cell-cell adhesive interac-
not actively cycling are in the G, state. (Fig. 1.17). Cells
tions. For instance, integrins on the surface of leukocytes
can enter G, either from the Go quiescent cell pool or
 are essential in mediating firm adhesion to and transimi-
 after completing a round of mitosis. Each stage requires
gration across the endothelium at sites of inflamunation
completion of the previous step, as well as activation of
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Extracellular Matrix
25
Chromosomeduplication
Checkfor
Checkfor
DNA damage
damaged or
unduplicated DNA
(G/S checkpoint)
(G2/Mcheckpoint)
Restriction point-
Mitosis
Centrosome duplication
Growth in mass
Cef!
division
Go
Fig. I.17 Cell-cycle landmarks.The figure shows the cell-cycle phases (Go, Gi, G2, S,and M),the location of the G; restriction point, and the G/S and G2/M
cell-cycle checkpoints. GI restriction point refers to the phase in GI at which the cell gets committed to the cell cycle without further need of the growth 
factor that initiated cell division. Cells from labile tissues such as the epidermis and the gastrointestinal tract may cycle continuously; stable cells such as
hepatocytes are quiescent but can enter the cell cycle; permanent cells such as neurons and cardiac myocytes have lost the capacity to proliferate. (Modified
from Pollard TD, Eamshow WC: Cell biology, Philadelphia, 2002, Sounders.)
necessary factors (see later); nonfidelity of DNA replica-
apoptosis or enter a nonreplicative state called serescence-
 tion or cofactor deficiency results in arrest at the various
primarily through p53-dependent mechanisms (see later).
transition points.
Enforcing the cell-cycle checkpoints is the job of CDK
The cell cycle is regulated by numerous activators and
CDK-cyclin coimplex activity. There are several different
called cyclins -naimed for the cyclic nature of their pro-
CDKIs:
duction and degradation- and cyclin-associated enzymes
· One fainily of CDKIs- composed of three proteins called
called cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) (Fig. 1.18). CDKs
p21 (CDKN1A), p27 (CDKN1B), and p57 (CDKN1C)-
acquire the ability to phosphorylate protein substrates (i.e.,
broadly inhibits multiple CDKs
kinase activity) by foriming complexes with the relevant
 Another faimily of CDKIs has selective effects on cyclin
cyclins. Transienty increased synthesis of a particular
CDK4 and cyclin CDK6; these proteins are called p15
cyclin leads to increased kinase activity of the appropriate
(CDKN2B), p16 (CDKN2A), p18 (CDKN2C), and p19
CDK binding partner; as the CDK coimpletes its round of
(CDKN2D)
phosphorylation, the associated cyclin is degraded and the
 Defective CDKI checkpoint proteins allow cells with
CDK activity abates. Thus, as cyclin levels rise and fall, the
 damaged DNA to divide, resulting in mutated daughter 
activity of associated CDKs likewise waxes and wanes.
cells at risk for malignant transformation
More than 15 cyclins have been identified; cyclins D, E
A, and B appear sequentially during the cell cycle and bind
An equally important aspect of cell growth and division
to one or more CDKs. The cell cycle thus reseimbles a relay
is the biosynthesis of other cellular coimponents needed to
race in which each leg is regulated by a distinct set of
 make two daughter cells, such as meimbranes and organ-
cyclins: as one collection of cyclins leaves the track, the next
elles. Thus when growth factor receptor signaling stimu-
set takes over.
lates cell-cycle progression, it also activates events that
Eimbedded in the cell cycle are surveillance mechanisims
promote changes in cellular metabolisim that support
primed to sense DNA or chromosomal damage. These
growth. Chief among these is the Warburg effect, imen-
quality-control checkpoints ensure that cells with genetic
tioned earlier, marked by increased cellular uptake of
inperfections do not complete replication. Thus, the G-S
glucose and glutaimine, increased glycolysis, and (counter-
checkpoint monitors the integrity of DNA before irrevers-
intuitively) decreased oxidative phosphorylation. These
ibly coimnitting cellular resources to DNA replication.
changes are major elements of cancer-cell growth and are
Later in the cell cycle, the Gz-M check point ensures that
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
there has been accurate DNA replication before the cell
actually divides. When cells do detect DNA irregularities,
Stem Cells
checkpoint activation delays cell-cycle progression and
 triggers DNA repair mechanisms. If the genetic derange-
 Not all stem cells are created equal. During develop-
 ment is too severe to be repaired, the cells either undergo
ment, totipotent stem cells can give rise to all types of
http://ebooksmedicine.net
26
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
CDK inhibitors
p21
p27p57
Cyclin
L
上
p19
L
CDK inhibitors
E
p21
p18
p27
p15
CDK2
p57
p16
Cyclin
Cyclin
D
CDK4
CDK6
Cyclin
A
CDK2
RB
RB-P
Cyclin
A
CDK1
G.
G2
Cyclin
B 
CDK1
p21
p27
p57
Fig. I.18 Role of cyclins, CDKs, and CDK inhibitors in regulating the cell cycle. Shaded arrows represent the phases of the cell cycle during which specific
Rb protein (pRb). Cyclin A-CDK2 and cyclin A-CDKI are active in the S phase. Cyclin B-CDKI is essential for the G2-to-M transition. Two families of CDK
inhibitors can block activity of CDKs and progression through the cell cycle.The so-called “INK4 inhibitors, composed of pl6, pl5, pl8, and pl9, act on
cyclin D-CDK4 and cyclin D-CDK6. The other family of three inhibitors, p2l, p27, and p57, can inhibit all CDKs.
differentiated tissues; in the mature organism, adult stem
Under conditions of homeostasis, stem cells are char-
cells in various tissues only have the capacity to replace
acterized by two important properties:
 damaged cells and maintain cell populations within the
Self-renewal, which perimits stem cells to maintain their
tissues where they reside. There also are populations of
numbers. Self-renewal may follow asymmetric or sym-
steim cells between these extremes with varying capacities
 metric division.
to differentiate into multiple cell lineages. Thus, depend-
 Asymmetric division refers to cell replication in which
ing on the source and stage of developiment, there may
one daughter cell enters a differentiation pathway and
 be limits on the cell types that a stein cell population can
gives rise to mature cells, whereas the other reinains
generate.
undifferentiated and retains its self-renewal capacity.
 In normal tissues (without neoplasia, degeneration,
By contrast, in syimunetric division, both daughter cells
or healing), there is a homeostatic equilibrium between
retain self renewal capacity. Such divisions are seen
the replication, self-renewal,
 and differentiation 
of
early in embryogenesis (when stem cell populations are
stem cells and the death of the mature, fully differenti-
 expanding) and under conditions of stress, such as in
ated cells (Fig. 1.19). The dynaimic relationship between
the bone marrow following chemotherapy.
steim cells and teriminally differentiated parenchyima is
nicely exemplified by the continuously dividing epithe-
Although there is a tendency in the scientific literature
lium of the skin. Thus, stem cells at the basal layer of
 to partition stem cells into several different subsets, funda-
the epithelium progressively differentiate as they migrate
mentally there are only two varieties:
 pue sup aroaq unauda au jo siae naddn au oi
· Embryonic stem cells (ES cells) are the most undifferenti-
being shed.
ated. They are present in the inner cell mass of the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
 Extracellular Matrix
27
blastocyst, have virtually limitless cell renewal capacity,
including neurons, cardiac muscle, liver cells, and pan-
and can give rise to every cell in the body; they are thus
creatic islet cells.
said to be totipotent (Fig. l.20). ES cells can be main-
Tissue stem cells (also called adult stem cells) are found in
tained for extended periods without differentiating;
intimate association with the differentiated cells of a
thereafter, appropriate culture conditions allow them
 given tissue. They are norimally protected within spe-
to form specialized cells of all three germ cell layers,
cialized tissue microenvironments called stem cell niches.
 Such niches have been deinonstrated in imany organs,
most notably the bone marrow, where hematopoietic
 steim cells congregate in a perivascular niche. Other
 niches for stem cells include the bulge region of hair
follicles; the limbus of the cornea; the crypts of the gut;
the canals of Hering in the liver; and the subventricular
zone in the brain. Soluble factors and other cells within
the niches keep the steim cells quiescent until there is a
 need for expansion and differentiation of the precursor 
Proliferation
pool (Fig. 1.21).
Adult stem cells have a limited repertoire of differ-
ynoure 'snul aienauas ues Aaq ie shas paenua
adult stem cells can naintain tissues with high (e.g-)
Differentiation
skin and gastrointestinal tract) or low (e.g., endothe-
lium) cell turnover, the adult sten cells in any given
tissue can usually only produce cells that are normal
constituents of that tissue.
Stem cells
Hematopoietic stem cells are the most extensively
Baseline cell population 
studied; they continuously replenish all the cellular ele-
ments of the blood as they are consumed. They can be
isolated directly from bone marrow, as well as from the
Cell death (apoptosis)
peripheral blood after adiministration of certain colony
stimulating factors (CSF) that induce their release from
bone marrow niches. Although rare, heimatopoietic steim
cells can be purified to virtual hoimogeneity based on cell
Fig. I.l9 Mechanisms regulating cell populations. Cell numbers can be 
surface markers. Clinically, these steim cells can be used to
altered by increased or decreased rates of stem cell input, cell death resulting
repopulate marrows depleted after chemotherapy (e.g., for
from apoptosis, or changes in the rates of proliferation or differentiation.
(Modified from McCarthy Ny, et ol: Apoptosis in the development of the immune
leukeimia), or to provide norimal precursors to correct
system: growth foctors, clonat selection and bcl-2, Cancer Metastasis Rev II:157,
various blood cell defects (e.g., sickle cell disease; see
1992.)
Chapter 12).
Totipotent
Pluripotent
Multipotent
 Lineage committed
Differentiated cells 
stem cell
stem cells
stem cells
stem cells
Endoderm derived
Inner
Mesoderm derived
 cell mass
Ectoderm derived
Zygote
Culture
Blastocyst
 Embryonic stem cell
(ES cell)
Pancreatic
islet cells
Hepatocytes
Hematopoietic
Neurons
cells
Cardiomyocytes
Fig. I.20 Embryonal stem cells. The zygote, formed by the union of sperm and egg, divides to form blastocysts, and the inner cell mass of the blastocyst
generates the embryo. The pluripotent cells of the inner cell mass, known as ermbryonic stem (ES) cells, can be induced to differentiate into cells of multiple 
lineages. In the embryo, pluripotent stem cells can asymmetrically divide to yield a residual stable pool of ES cells in addition to generating populations that
have progressively more restricted developmental capacity, eventually generating stem cells that are committed to just specific lineages.ES cells can be cultured
 in vitro and induced to give rise to cells of all three germ layers.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
28
CHAPTERI
The Cell as a Unit of Health and Disease
Hair-
Epidermal stem cells
 Epidermis
Goblet cell
Absorptive
enterocyte
Sebaceous
 Entero-
Dermis
 gland 
endocrine
cell
Hair follicle bulge
Crypt cells
 Bulge stem cells
(stem cells)
Paneth
cells
A Skin
B Intestine
C Liver
Fig. I.2I Stem cell niches in various tissues. (A) Skin stem cells are located in the bulge area of the hair follicle, in sebaceous glands, and in the lower layer
of the epidermis. (B) Small intestine stem cells are located near the base of the crypt, above Paneth cells.(C) Liver stem cells (ovol cells) are located in the
canals of Hering (thick orrow), structures that connect bile ductules (thin orrow) to parenchymal hepatocytes. Bile duct cells and canals of Hering are stained
here with an irmmunohistochemical stain for cytokeratin 7. (C, Courtesy Tonia Roskams, MD, University of Leuven, Belgium.)
Besides hematopoietic steim cells, the bone marrow (and
Patient's cell
Genes for stem-ness
notably, other tissues such as fat) also contains a popula-
MNMN
tion of mesenchymal stem cells. These are multipotent cells
that can differentiate into a variety of stromal cells includ-
ing chondrocytes (cartilage), osteocytes (bone), adipocytes
(fat), and myocytes (1muscle). Because these cells can be
expanded to large numbers, they represent a potential
 means of manufacturing the stromal scaffolding needed
Cells in
for tissue regeneration.
culture
Regenerative Medicine
The ability to identify, isolate, expand, and transplant
 Patient-specific 
stem cells has given birth to the new field of regenerative
 medicine. Theoretically, the differentiated progeny of ES
 induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPS)
or adult stem cells can be used to repopulate damaged
tissues or to construct entire organs for replaceiment. In
Differentiation in vitro
 particular, there is considerable excitement about the ther-
apeutic opportunities for restoring damaged tissues that
i  rs d aaar r m a
dium after a myocardial infarct or neurons after a stroke.
expand stem cell populations, much of the initial enthusi-
asim has been teimpered by difficulties encountered in
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Endoderm
 cells into sites of dainage.
More recently it has been possible to generate pluripo-
Fig. I.22 The production of induced pluripotent stem cells (ipS cells).
tential cells, resembling ES cells, that are derived froim the
Genes that confer stem cell properties are introduced into a patient's dif-
ferentiated cells, giving rise to stem cells that can be induced to differentiate
into various lineages. (Modified from Hochedlinger K, Joenisch R: Nuclear trans-
this, a handful of genes have been identified whose prod-
plontotion, embryonic stem cells, ond the potentiol for cell therapy, N Engl J Med
ucts can — reimarkably— reprogram somatic cells to achieve
349:275-286,2003.)
the "steim-ness" of ES cells. When such genes are intro-
duced into fully differentiated cells (e.g., fibroblasts),
Concluding Remarks
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells) are generated (Fig.
1.22), albeit at low frequency. Because these cells are
This survey of selected topics in cell biology serves as a
derived from the patient, their differentiated progeny (e.g--
basis for our later discussions of pathology, and we will
insulin-secreting B-cells in a patient with diabetes) can be
refer back to it throughout the book. Students should,
however, reimember that this summary is intentionally
rejection reaction that would occur if the differentiated
 brief, and more inforimation about some of the fascinating
cells were derived from ES cells obtained from another
topics reviewed here can be readily found in textbooks
donor.
 devoted to cell and imolecular biology.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Suggested Readings
29
Kaur J, Debnath J: Autophagy at the crossroads of catabolism and
SUGGESTED READINGS
anabolism, Nat Reo Mol Cell Biot 16:461, 2015. [An excellent revie of
Genetics and Epigenetics
the mechanisms and consequences of celutar autophagy.!
Batista PJ, Chang HY: Long noncoding RNAs: cellular address codes
Simons K, Sampaio JL: Membrane organization and lipid rafts, Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3:1, 2013. {A nice review of the general prin-
ing IncRNA biology.!
 Cech TR, Steitz JA: The noncoding RNA revolution trashing old rules
Wong E, Cuervo AM: Integration of clearance mechanisms: the pro-
to forge new ones, Cell 157:77, 2014. fAn excellenf review of the roles
  '     e 
played by noncoding RNAs.!
Hibner MR, Eckersley-Maslin MA, Spector DL: Chromatin organiza
the elimination of aberant or abnormat constituents.!
tion and transcriptional regulation, Curr Opin Genet Deo 23:89, 2013.
CellularMetabolism andMitochondrialFunction
[A nice discussion of genome organization and chromatin structure-
Andersen JL, Kornbluth S: The tangled circuiry of metabolism and
funcfion relationships that regulate cell type-specific nuclear
apoptosis, Mol Cell49:399, 2013. [A solid review of theinterplay betzweer
transcription.!
cell metabolism, cell proliferafion, and cell death.
Dang CV: Links between metabolism and cancer, Genes Dev 26:877,
disease, Nat Med 18:1194, 2012. [A zwell-woriften o0erriew of genomic
2012. IAn excellent review on metabolic functions of mitochondria.
organization and transeriptionatl regulation,witha specificfocus on ne-
Friedman JR, Nunnari J: Mitochondrial form and function, Nature
rologic disease.}
505:335, 2014. IA good overview of mitochondrial replication, and
 Meller VH, Joshi SS, Deshpande N: Modulation of chromatin by non-
response to celtutar injury.!
coding RNA, Annu Reo Genet 49:673, 2015. IAn excellent o0erview of
Tait SW, Green DR: Mitochondria and cell death: outer membrane
the roles played by noncoding RNAs in nuctear organization.]
permeabilization and beyond, Nat Reo Mol Cell Biol 1l:621, 2010.
Minarovits J, Banati F, Szenthe K, et al: Epigenetic regulation, Ado Exp
[A review of the role of mitochondria in celt death pathways.
Med Biot 879:1, 2016.IA brief primer on the pathzuays that regulate
Cellular Activation
chromatin structure and accessibitity.!
Rowley MJ, Corces VG: The three-dimensional genome: principles
Duronio RJ, Xiong Y: Signaling pathways that control cel prolifera-
and roles of long-distance interactions, Curr Opin Cell Biol
408, 2016. fAn interesting discussion regarding the
mechanisms
review of cell signating and proliferation.
4:1, 2012.A revie of mitoge-actiated kinasesignatingpathys.
transcripfion.
Teperino R, Lempradl A, Pospisilik JA: Bridging epigenomics and
Perona R: Cell signalling: growth factors and tyrosine kinase recep-
tors, Clin Transt Oncot 8:77, 2011. [An ooerview of signaling pathways
introductory review of the epigenetic basis for human disease.
with an emphasis on how these become dysregutated in malignancy.!
Cellular Housekeeping
Maintaining Cell Populations
Andersson ER: The role of endocytosis in activating and regulating
Alvarado AS, Yamanaka S: Rethinking differentiation: stem cells,
signal transduction, Cell Mol Life Sci 69:1755, 2011. fOoerriew of
regeneration, and plasticity, Cell 157:110, 2014.
endocytosis zuith specific emphasis on its role in modutating intracellular
 Fuchs E, Chen T: A matter of life and death: self-renewal in stem cells,
signaling.!
EMBO Rep 14:39, 2013. [A scholarly review on the conceptual framezoork
Choi AM, Ryter SW, Levine B: Autophagy in human health and
and experimentat underpinningsofour understanding regarding stem cel!
disease, N Engl I Med 368:651, 2013. [A superb review concerning the
renewat, using cutaneous stem cells as a paradigm.!
ydonfo sad ooshiudoundpuooshid
Li M, Liu GH, Izpisua-Belmonte JC: Navigating the epigenetic land-
English AR, Zurek N, Voeltz GK: Peripheral ER structure and func-
scape of pluripotent stem cells, Nat Reo Mot Cell Biot 13:524, 2012.
tion, Curr Opin Cell Biol 21:596, 2009. [An 00erview of the structural
[A good discussion of theepigenetic regulation of stem cell proliferation
and functionat organization of the endoplasmic reticutum and its relation-
and subsequent differentiation.!
ship to other celtutar organelles.!
Martello G, Smith A: The nature of embryonic stem cells, Arnu Rev
Guillot C, Lecuit T: Mechanics of epithelial tissue homeostasis and 
Cell Deo Biol 30:647, 2014. [A good, comprehensive ooeriew of cell
morphogenesis, Srience 340:1185, 2013. [A topical discussion abouf
plasticity and stemness.
celtular interactions and the mechanicat basis of fissue maintenance.
Hetz C, Chevet E, Oakes SA: Proteostasis control by the unfolded
protein response, Nat Cell Biol 17:829, 2015. JMechanisms underlying
endoplasmic reficulum editing and celtutar homeostasis.$
http://ebooksmedicine.net
See Targeted Therapy available online at studentconsult.com
CHAPTER
2
Cell Injury,
Cell
I Death
and
Adaptations
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Introduction to Pathology 31
Other Pathways of Cell Death 40
Common Events in Cell injury From Diverse
Overview of Cellular Responses
Autophagy 40
Couses 47
to Stress and Noxious
Mechanisms of Cell Injury and Cell
Cellular Adaptations to Stress 48
Stimuli 31
Death 41
Hybertrophy 48
Causes of Cell Injury 32
Hyboxic and ischemig 42
Hyperpiasig 49
 Sequence of Events in Cell Injury
Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury 43
Atrophy 50
and Cell Death 33
Oxidative Stress 43
Metoplasig 50
Reversible Cel njury 33
Cell Injury Caused by Toxins 45
Intracellular Accumulations 5 1
Cell Death  34
Endopiasmic Reticulum Stress 45
Pathologic Calcification 53
Necrosis 35
DNA Damoge 47
Cellular Aging 54
Apoptosis 37
Inflammation 47
scopic appearance (1morphology) of cells and tissues, and
INTRODUCTIONTO PATHOLOGY
biocheimical alterations in body fluids (such as blood and
urine). Pathologists also use a variety of imorphologic,
The field of pathology is devoted to understanding the
molecular, and other techniques to define the biochemical,
causes of disease and the changes in cells, tissues, and
structural, and functional changes that occur in cells,
 organs that are associated with disease and give rise to the
tissues, and organs in response to injury. We begin, in this
 presenting signs and symptoms in patients. There are two
chapter, with a discussion of cellular abnormalities induced
important terms that students will encounter throughout
by a variety of internal (e.g genetic) and external (e.g-
their study of pathology and medicine:
environmental) abnorimalities and stresses.
 Etiology refers to the underlying causes and modifying
factors that are responsible for the initiation and pro-
gression of disease. It is now clear that many cominon
OVERVIEW OF CELLULAR
diseases, such as hypertension, diabetes, and cancer, are
RESPONSESTO STRESS AND
caused by a combination of inherited genetic suscepti-
bility and various environmental triggers. Elucidating
NOXIOUS STIMULI
the genetic and environimental factors underlying dis-
eases is a major theime of modern medicine.
Cells actively interact with their environment, constantly
 Pathogeresis refers to the mechanisims of development
adjusting their structure and function to accommodate
and progression of disease, which account for the cel-
changing deinands and extracellular stresses. The intracel-
lular and molecular changes that give rise to the specific
lular milieu of cells is norimally tightly regulated such that
functional and structural abnormalities that characterize
it reimains fairly constant, a state referred to as homeosta-
any particular disease. Thus, etiology refers to why a
sis. As cells encounter physiologic stresses (such as
disease arises and pathogenesis describes how a disease
increased workload in the heart) or potentially injurious
develops (Fig. 2.1).
conditions (such as nutrient deprivation), they can undergo
acdaptation, achieving a new steady state and preserving
 Defining the etiology and pathogenesis of disease not 
viability and function. If the adaptive capability is exceeded
only is essential for understanding disease but also is the
 or if the external stress is inherently harimful or excessive,
basis for developing rational treatiments and effective pre-
cell injury develops (Fig. 2.2). Within certain limits, injury
ventive measures. Thus, pathology provides the scientific
is reversible, and cells return to their stable baseline;
foundation for the practice of medicine.
however, if the stress is severe, persistent, or rapid in onset,
To render diagnoses and guide therapy in clinical prac-
it results in irreversible injury and death of the affected cells.
tice, pathologists identify changes in the gross or micro-
Cell tdeath is one of the most crucial events in the evolution
31
http://ebooksmedicine.net
32
CHAPTER２
 Cell Injury, Cell Death, and Adaptations
Immunologic
Genetic abnormalities
Nutritional
abnormalities
(inherited and acquired)
imbalances
CAUSES OF CELL INIURY
Infections
The causes of cell injury span a range from gross physical
ETIOLOGY:
Trauma
trauma, such as after a motor vehicle accident, to a single
CAUSES OF DISEASE
Toxins
gene defect that results in a nonfunctional enzyme in a
specific metabolic disease. Most injurious stimuli can be
 grouped into the following categories.
 PATHOGENESIS:
Hypoxia and ischemia. Hypoxia, which refers to oxygen
Biochemical-
MECHANISMS OF DISEASE
Structural
 deficiency, and ischemia, which means reduced blood
changes
changes
supply, are among the most comunon causes of cell injury.
Both deprive tissues of oxygen, and ischemia, in addition,
d pq e pe suanu ussa jo uaap e u snsa
MOLECULAR, FUNCTIONAL,
 of toxic metabolites. The most coimmon cause of hypoxia
AND MORPHOLOGIC
is ischemia resulting from an arterial obstruction, but
 ABNORMALITIES IN 
CELLS AND TISSUES
ation of the blood, as in a variety of diseases affecting the
Jo Ades sui-uaxo a u uonpai wor ro dum
the blood, as with aneinia of any cause, and carbon mon-
 CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS:
oxide (CO) poisoning.
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
Toxins. Potentially toxic agents are encountered daily
OF DISEASE
 in the environment; these include air pollutants, insecti-
cides, CO, asbestos, cigarette simoke, ethanol, and drugs.
Fig. 2.I Steps in the evolution of disease. Only selected major causes (eti-
Many drugs in therapeutic doses can cause cell or tissue
ologies) are shown.
injury in a susceptible patient or in many individuals if
of disease in any tissue or organ. It results from diverse
innocuous substances, such as glucose, salt, water and
causes, including ischeimia (lack of blood flow), infections,
 oxygen, can be toxic.
toxins, and immune reactions. Cell death also is a norimal
and essential process in eimbryogenesis, the development 
 gens, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoans,
of organs, and the maintenance of tissue homeostasis.
injure cells. The imechanisims of cell injury caused by these
 Because damage to cells is the basis of all disease, in this
 iander u passs ae sae asraa
chapter we discuss first the causes, mechanisims, and con-
Immunologic reactions. Although the immune system
sequences of the various forms of acute cell injury, includ-
 defends the body against pathogenic imicrobes, immune
 ing reversible injury and cell death. We then consider
reactions also can result in cell and tissue injury. Examples
cellular adaptations to stress and conclude with two other
 are autoimnune reactions against one's own tissues, aller-
processes that affect cells and tissues: the deposition of
gic reactions against environimental substances, and exces-
abnormal substances and cell aging.
sive or chronic imimune responses to microbes (Chapter 5).
-un na sasuodsan aun sos aa jo e u
matory reactions, which are often the cause of damage to
cells and tissues.
NORMAL CELL
Genetic abnormalities. Genetic aberrations can result in
(homeostasis)
pathologic changes as conspicuous as the congenital mal-
forimations associated with Down syndrome or as subtle as
Injurious stimulus
the single amino acid substitution in heinoglobin giving
rise to sickle cell aneimia (Chapter 7). Genetic defects may
REVERSIBLE
cause cell injury as a consequence of deficiency of func-
INJURY
tional proteins, such as enzymes in inborn errors of metab-
olism, or accumulation of damaged DNA or misfolded
 Severe, progressive
proteins, both of which trigger cell death when they are
beyond repair.
'Nutritional imbalances. Protein-calorie insufficiency
IRREVERSIBLE
among impoverished populations remains a major cause
INJURY
of cell injury, and specific vitaimin deficiencies are not 
uncommon even in developed countries with high stan-
dards of living (Chapter 8). Ironically, excessive dietary
intake may result in obesity and also is an important
CELL
NECROSIS
DEATH
APOPTOSIS
underlying factor in many diseases, such as type 2 diabetes
mellitus and atherosclerosis.
Fig. 2.2 Sequence of reversible cell injury and cell death. Necrosis and
Physical agents. Trauma, extreimes of temperature, radi-
apoptosis are the two major pathways of cell death and are discussed in
 ation, electric shock, and sudden changes in atmospheric
detail later.
 pressure all have wide-ranging effects on cells (Chapter 8).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Sequence of Events in Cell Injury and Cell Death
33
Aging. Cellular senescence results in a diminished
ability of cells to respond to stress and, eventually, the
death of cells and of the organisim. The mechanisims under-
lying cellular aging are discussed at the end of this chapter.
With this introduction, we proceed to a discussion of the
NORMAL
CELL
 and then to the biocheimical mechanisims in injury caused
by different noxious stimuli.
SEQUENCE OF EVENTS IN CELL
Reversible
injury
Recovery
INJURY AND CELL DEATH
Swelling of
Although various injurious stimuli damage cells through
endoplasmic
diverse biocheimical mechanisims, all tend to induce a ste-
reticulum and
reotypic sequence of morphologic and structural altera-
mitochondria
tions in most types of cells.
Reversible Cell Injury
Myelin figure
Membrane
blebs
Reversible injury is the stage of cell injury at which the
deranged function and morphology of the injured cells
can return to normal if the damaging stimulus is removed
(Fig. 2.3). In reversible injury, cells and intracellular organ-
Progressive injury
elles typically becoime swollen because they take in water
Breakdown of
 as a result of the failure of energy-dependent ion pumps
 plasma membrane,
in the plasima meimbrane, leading to an inability to main-
 organelles, and 
nucleus; leakage
tain ionic and fluid homeostasis. In some forms of injury,
 degenerated organelles and lipids may accumulate inside
of contents
the injured cells.
Inflammation
MORPHOLOGY
The two main morphologic correlates of reversible cell injury
are cellular swelling and fatty change.
· Cellular swelling (Fig. 2.4B) is commonly seen in cell injury
?
NECROSIS
associated with increased permeability of the plasma mem-
Amorphous densities in mitochondria
brane. It may be difficult to appreciate with the light micro-
scope, but it is often apparent at the level of the whole organ.
Fig. 2.3 Reversible cell injury and necrosis.The principal cellular alterations
When it affects many cells in an organ, it causes pallor (as a
that characterize reversible cell injury and necrosis are ilustrated.By conven-
tion, reversible injury is considered to aulminate in necrosis if the injurious
result of compression of capillaries), increased turgor, and an
stimulus is not removed.
increase in organ weight. Microscopic examination may show
 small, clear vacuoles within the cytoplasm; these represent
 distended and pinched-off segments of the endoplasmic reticu-
with detachment of ribosomes and dissociation of polysomes;
and (4) nuclear alterations, such as clumping of chromatin. The 
lum (ER). This pattern of nonlethal injury is sometimes called
hydropic change or vacuolar degeneration.
+ Fatty change is manifested by the appearance of triglyceride
lections of phospholipids resembling myelin sheaths that are
 derived from damaged cellular membranes.
 containing lipid vacuoles in the cytoplasm. It is principally
'sogeiaw pid u paaoaui aue eue sueao u! pauaunosua
 In some situations, potentially injurious insults induce
such as the liver, and hence it is discussed in Chapter I6.
specific alterations in cellular organelles, such as the ER.
The cytoplasm of injured cells also may become redder
The simooth ER is involved in the metabolism of various
chemicals, and cells exposed to these cheimicals show
(eosinophilic), a change that becomes much more pronounced
hypertrophy of the ER as an adaptive response that may
with progression to necrosis (described later). Other intracel-
lular changes associated with cell injury (Fig. 2.3) include (l)
have important functional consequences. For instance,
 plasma membrane alterations such as blebbing, blunting, or dis-
many drugs, including barbiturates, which were com-
 monly used as sedatives in the past and are still used as a
tortion of microvill, and loosening of intercellular attachments;
(2) mitochondrial changes such as sweling and the appearance
 treatiment for some forms of epilepsy, are metabolized in
the liver by the cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxidase
of phospholipid-rich amorphous densities; (3) dilation of the ER
systein found in the simooth ER. Protracted use of
http://ebooksmedicine.net
34
CHAPTER2 
Cell Injury Cell Death, and Adaptations
Fig. 2.4 Morphologic changes in reversible and irreversible cell injury (necrosis). (A) Normal kidney tubules with viable epithelial cells. (B) Early (reversible)
ischemic injury showing surface blebs, increased eosinophilia of cytoplasm, and swelling of occasional cells. (C) Necrotic (irreversible) injury of epithelial cells,
with loss of nuclei and fragmentation of cells and leakage of contents. (Courtesy of Drs. Neal Pinckard ond MA. Venkotochalom, University of Texos Health Sciences
Center, Son Antonio,Texas.)
barbiturates leads to a state of tolerance, imarked by the
uncontrollable forim of death that has been called "acci-
need to use increasing doses of the drug to achieve the
dental" cell death. The morphological manifestation of
saime effect. This adaptation steims froim hypertrophy (an
accidental cell death is necrosis (Greek, recros = death)
increase in volume) of the sinooth ER of hepatocytes and
(Table 2.1). Necrosis is the imajor pathway of cell death
a consequent increase in P-450 enzymatic activity. P-450-
in many commonly encountered injuries, such as those
mediated modification of compounds sometimes leads to
resulting from ischeimia, exposure to toxins, various
their detoxification, but in other instances converts them
infections, and trauma. Necrosis is traditionally consid-
 into a dangerous toxin; one such exaimple involves carbon
ered the inevitable end result of severe damage that is
tetrachloride (CCl4), discussed later. Cells adapted to one
beyond salvage and is not thought to be regulated by
drug demonstrate an increased capacity to imetabolize
specific signals or biochemical imechanisims; in other
other compounds handled by the same systen. Thus, if
words, necrosis happens accidentally because the injury
patients taking phenobarbital for epilepsy increase their
is too severe to be repaired and many cellular constitu-
- poona ui dorp e auaadxa Arul Aa u noroe
ents simply fail or fall apart.
centration of the anti-seizure medication to subtherapeutic
 In contrast, when the injury is less severe, or cells need
D asuosan u Audonaday  yoours jo asna sia
to be eliminated during norimal processes, they activate
the alcohol.
a precise set of molecular pathways that culiminate in
With persistent or excessive noxious exposures, injured
death. Because this kind of cell death can be manipulated
s oapun pue uan ou jo juod, snongau e ssed sa
death. The clinical relevance of defining this transition
point is obvious - if the biochemical and molecular changes
that predict cell death can be identified, it 1may be possible
Table 2.l Features of Necrosis and Apoptosis
to devise strategies for preventing the transition from
Feature
Necrosis
Apoptosis
reversible to irreversible cell injury. Although there are no
Cell size 
Enlarged (swelling)
Reduced (shrinkage)
definitive morphologic or biocheimical correlates of irre-
versibility, it is consistently characterized by three phe-
Nucleus
Pyknosis 
 Fragmentation into 
nomena: the inability to restore mitochondrial function
karyorrhexis →→
nucleosome-sized 
karyolysis
(oxidative phosphorylation and adenosine triphosphate
fragments
[ATP] generation) even after resolution of the original
Plasrma
Disrupted
Intact; altered structure,
injury; the loss of structure and functions of the plasma mem-
membrane
especially orientation 
of lipids
brane and intracellular membranes; and the loss of DNA and
chromatin structural integrity. As discussed in more detail
Cellular contents
 Enzymatic digestion; 
Intact; may be released
later, injury to lysosoimal membranes results in the enzy-
may leak out of cell
 in apoptotic bodies
matic dissolution of the injured cell, which is the culmina-
Adjacent
Frequent
No
inflammation
tion of necrosis.
Physiologic or
 Invariably pathologic
Often physiologic
pathologic
(culmination of
means of eliminating
Cell Death
role
irreversible cell 
unwanted cells, may
(Xuniu!
 be pathologic after 
When cells are injured they die by different mechanisms,
 some forms of cell 
depending on the nature and severity of the insult.
injury, especially
 Severe disturbances, such as loss of oxygen and nutrient
DNA and protein
damage
supply and the actions of toxins, cause a rapid and
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Sequence of Events in Cell Injury and Cell Death
35
Necrosis
Reversible i
Irreversible
 cell injury
 cell injury
Ultrastructural _ Light 
 changes microscopic
Necrosis is a form of cell death in which cellular mem-
changes
branes fall apart, and cellular enzymes leak out and ulti-
Cell
Cell death
function
mately digest the cell (Fig. 2.3). Necrosis elicits a local host
reaction, called inflammation, that is induced by substances
Gross
released from dead cells and which serves to eliminate the
EFFECT
debris and start the subsequent repair process (Chapter 3).
morphologic
 changes
The enzyimes responsible for digestion of the cell are
derived froim lysosomes and may come froim the dying
cells theimselves or from leukocytes recruited as part of the
inflaimmatory reaction. Necrosis often is the culmination of
 reversible cell injury that cannot be corrected.
The biochemical mechanisims of necrosis vary with dif-
ferent injurious stimuli. These mechanisims include: failure
DURATION OF INJURY
 of energy generation in the form of ATP because of reduced
Fig. 2.5 The relationship among cellular function, cell death, and the mor-
 oxygen supply or mitochondrial daimage; dainage to cel-
phologic changes of cell injury. Note that cells may rapidly become nonfunc-
lular meimbranes, including the plasima membrane and
tional after the onset of injury,although they are still viable, with potentially
lysosoimal meimbranes, which results in leakage of cellular
reversible damage; with a longer duration of injury, irreversible injury and
contents including enzymes; irreversible damage to cellu-
cell death may result. Note also that cell death typically precedes ultrastruc-
lar lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, which may be caused
chemical mechanisims are discussed later when we con-
sider the individual causes of cell necrosis.
 by therapeutic agents or genetic mutations, it is said to
be “regulated" cell death. The morphologic appearance
of most types of regulated cell death is apoptosis (see
MORPHOLOGY
Table 2.1). In some instances, regulated cell death shows
features of both necrosis and apoptosis, and has been
Necrosis is characterized by changes in the cytoplasm and nuclei
of the injured cells (Figs. 2.3 and 2.4C).
called recroptosis. The discovery of these previously
+ Cytoplasmic changes. Necrotic cells show increased eosin-
 unrecognized forims of cell death that were regulated by
ophilia (i.e., they are stained red by the dye eosin-the E in
identifiable genes and signaling pathways showed that
the hematoxylin and eosin [H&E] stain), attributable partly to
cell death can be a controlled process. The idea of regu-
intreased binding of eosin to denatured cytoplasmic proteins
lated cell death also raises the possibility that specific
and partly to loss of basophilic ribonucleic acid (RNA) in the
cytoplasm (basophilia stems from binding of the blue dye
 prevent the loss of cells in pathologic conditions. Apop-
hematoxylin—the H in "H&E"). Compared with viable cells,the
tosis is a process that eliminates cells with a variety of
cell may have a glassy, homogeneous appearance, mostly
intrinsic abnorimalities and promotes clearance of the
because of the loss of ighter staining glycogen particles.Myelin
 fragiments of the dead cells without eliciting an inflam-
figures are more prominent in necrotic cells than in cells with 
matory reaction. This "clean" form of cell suicide occurs
in pathologic situations when a cell's DNA or proteins
reversible injury. When enzymes have digested cytoplasmic
organelles, the cytoplasm becomes vacuolated and appears
are damaged beyond repair or the cell is deprived of
necessary survival signals. But unlike necrosis, which
 acterized by discontinuities in plasma and organelle mem-
 is always an indication of a pathologic process, apop-
branes, marked dilation of mitochondria associated with the
tosis also occurs in healthy tissues. It serves to elimi-
appearance of large amorphous intramitrochondrial densities,
nate unwanted cells during normal development and to
disruption of lysosomes, and intracytoplasmic myelin figures.
maintain constant cell numbers, so it is not necessarily
+ Nuclear changes. Nuclear changes assume one of three pat-
associated with pathologic cell injury. These types of
terns, all resulting from a breakdown of DNA and chromatin.
physiologic cell death are also called programmed cell
Pyknosis is characterized by nuclear shrinkage and increased
death.
basophilia; the DNA condenses into a dark shrunken mass. The
 It is important to point out that cellular function may
pyknotic nucleus can undergo fragmentation; this change is
called karyorrhexis. Ultimately, the nucleus may undergo
be lost long before cell death occurs, and that the mor-
karyolysis, in which the basophilia fades because of digestion
phologic changes of cell injury (or death) lag far behind
of DNA by deoxyribonuclease (DNase) activity. In I to 2 days,
loss of function and viability (Fig. 2.5). For example, myo-
the nucleus in a dead cell may completely disappear.
cardial cells become noncontractile after 1 to 2 minutes
+ Fates of necrotic cells. Necrotic cells may persist for some
of ischemia, but may not die until 20 to 30 minutes of
 time or may be digested by enzymes and disappear. Dead cells 
ischeimia have elapsed. Morphologic features indica-
 may be replaced by myelin figures, which are either phagocy-
-a Aq readde saarou sat jo yeap a jo a
tosed by other cells or further degraded into fatty acids. These
tron microscopy within 2 to 3 hours after the death of the
fatty acids bind calcium salts, which may result in the dead cells
cells, but are not evident by light microscopy until 6 to 12
hours later.
ultimately becoming calcified.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
36
CHAPTER 2
 Cell Injury. Cell Death, and Adaptations
Fig. 2.6 Coagulative necrosis. (A) A wedge-shaped kidney infarct (yelow) with preservation of the outlines. (B) Microscopic view of the edge of the infarct,
with normal kidney (N) and necrotic cells in the infarct ().The necrotic cels show preserved outlines with loss of nuclei, and an inflammatory infiltrate is
present (difficult to discern at this magnification).
Morphologic Patterns of Tissue Necrosis
infection,the material is frequently creamy yellow and is called
 In severe pathologic conditions, large areas of a tissue or
pus (Chapter 3).
even entire orgrans may undergo necrosis. This may
· Although gangrenous necrosis is not a distinctive pattern
happen in association with marked ischeimia, infections,
 Of cell death, the term is still commonly used in clinical practice.
and certain inflammatory reactions. There are several mor-
It usually refers to the condition of a limb (generally the lower
phologically distinct patterns of tissue necrosis that may
leg) that has lost its blood supply and has undergone coagula-
provide etiologic clues. Although the terms that describe
tive necrosis involving multiple tissue layers. When bacterial
these patterns do not reflect underlying mechanisims, such
infection is superimposed, the morphologic appearance 
 terms are comnonly used and their implications are under-
changes to liquefactive necrosis because of the destructive
stood by pathologists and clinicians.
contents of the bacteria and the attracted leukocytes (resulting
in so-called "wet gangrene").
Caseous necrosis is most often encountered in foci of tuber-
MORPHOLOGY
culous infection. Caseous means "cheeselike," referring to the 
Most of the types of necrosis described here have distinctive
friable yellow-white appearance of the area of necrosis on
gross appearances; the exception is fibrinoid necrosis, which is
gross examination (Fig. 2.8). On microscopic examination, the
detected only by histologic examination.
necrotic focus appears as a collection of fragmented or lysed
 Coagulative necrosis is a form of necrosis in which the
cells with an amorphous granular pink appearance in H&E-
underlying tissue architecture is preserved for at least several
stained tissue sections. Unlike coagulative necrosis, the tissue 
days after death of cells in the tissue (Fig. 2.6). The affected 
tissues take on a firm texture. Presumably the injury denatures
not only structural proteins but also enzymes, thereby blocking
the proteolysis of the dead cells; as a result, eosinophilic,
anucleate cells may persist for days or weeks. Leukocytes are
recruited to the site of necrosis, and the dead cells are ulti-
mately digested by the action of lysosomal enzymes of the
leukocytes. The cellular debris is then removed by phagocytosis
mediated primarily by infiltrating neutrophils and macrophages.
Coagulative necrosis is characteristic of infarcts (areas of
necrosis caused by ischemia) in all solid organs except the
brain.
+ Liquefactive necrosis is seen in focal bacterial and, occasion-
ally, fungal infections because microbes stimulate rapid accu-
mulation of inflammatory cells, and the enzymes of leukocytes
digest (liquefy") the tissue. For obscure reasons, hypoxic
death of cells within the central nervous system often evokes
liquefactive necrosis (Fig. 2.7). Whatever the pathogenesis, the
 dead cells are completely digested, transforming the tissue into 
a viscous liquid that is eventually removed by phagocytes. If the
process is initiated by acute inflammation, as in a bacterial 
Fig. 2.7 Liquefactive necrosis. An infarct in the brain shows dissolution of
the tissue.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Sequence of Events in Cell Injury and Cell Death
37
Fig. 2.10 Fibrinoid necrosis in an artery in a patient with polyarteritis
nodosa.The wall of the artery shows a circumferential bright pink area of
 necrosis with protein deposition and inflammation.
Fig. 2.8 Caseous necrosis. Tuberculosis of the lung, with a large area of
· Fibrinoid necrosis is a special form of necrosis. It usually
caseous necrosis containing yellow-white (cheesy) debris.
 occurs in immune reactions in which complexes of antigens
and antibodies are deposited in the walls of blood vessels, but
architecture is completely obliterated and cellular outlines
 it also may occur in severe hypertension. Deposited immune
cannot be discerned. Caseous necrosis is often surrounded by
complexes and plasma proteins that leak into the wall of
a collection of macrophages and other inflammatory cells; this
 damaged vessels produce a bright pink, amorphous appearance
appearance is characteristic of a nodular inflammatory lesion
on H&E preparations called fibrinoid (fibrinlike) by pathologists
called a granuloma (Chapter 3).
(Fig. 2.10). The immunologically mediated diseases (e.g., poly-
· Fat necrosis refers to focal areas of fat destruction, typically
arteritis nodosa) in which this type of necrosis is seen are
resulting from the release of activated pancreatic lipases into
described in Chapter 5.
the substance of the pancreas and the peritoneal cavity. This
occurs in the calamitous abdominal emergency known as acute
Leakage of intracellular proteins through the damaged
pancreatitis (Chapter I7). In this disorder, pancreatic enzymes
 cell membrane and ultimately into the circulation pro-
that have leaked out of acinar cells and ducts liquefy the mem-
vides a means of detecting tissue-specific necrosis using
branes of fat cells in the peritoneum, and lipases split the tri-
blood or serum samples. Cardiac muscle, for example,
glyceride esters contained within fat cells. The released fatty
 contains a unique isoforim of the enzyime creatine kinase
acids combine with calcium to produce grossly visible chalky
and of the contractile protein troponin, whereas hepatic
white areas (fat saponification), which enable the surgeon and
bile duct epitheliun contains the enzyime alkaline phos-
the pathologist to identify the lesions (Fig. 2.9). On histologic
phatase, and hepatocytes contain transaiminases. Irrevers-
examination, the foci of necrosis contain shadowy outlines of
ible injury and cell death in these tissues elevate the serum
necrotic fat cells surrounded by basophilic calcium deposits
 levels of these proteins, which makes theim clinically useful
and an inflammatory reaction.
 markers of tissue damage.
Apoptosis
Apoptosis is a pathway of cell death in which cells acti-
vate enzymes that degrade the cells' own nuclear DNA
 and nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins (Fig. 2.1l). Frag-
ments of the apoptotic cells then break off, giving the
(sisdod auu a rog aissan s ie aurdde
"falling off"). The plasima imembrane of the apoptotic cell
remains intact, but the menbrane is altered in such a way
that the fragiments, called apoptotic bodies, become highly
-od Aq uondusuos piden nan oi supean aaia,
cytes. The dead cell and its fragiments are cleared with little
leakage of cellular contents, so apoptotic cell death does
 not elicit an inflammatory reaction. Thus, apoptosis differs
 in many respects froim necrosis (Table 2.1).
Causes of Apoptosis
Fig. 2.9 Fat necrosis in acute pancreatitis.The areas of white chalky deposits
represent foci of fat necrosis with calcium soap formation (saponification)
 Apoptosis occurs in many norimal situations and serves to
at sites of lipid breakdown in the mesentery.
eliminate potentially harimful cells and cells that have
http://ebooksmedicine.net
38
CHAPTER2
Cell Injury Cell Death, and Adaptations
Table 2.2 Physiologic and Pathologic Conditions Associated
With Apoptosis
 Condition
Mechanism of Apoptosis
Physiologic
NORMAL
 During embryogenesis
 Loss of growth factor signaling
CELL
(presumed mechanism)
Turnover of proliferative tissues
Loss of growth factor signaling
(e.g, intestinal epithelium,
(presumed mechanism)
ymphocytes in bone marrow,
and thymus)
 Involution of hormone-
Decreased hormone levels lead
dependent tssues (e.g.
to reduced survival signals
Condensation
endometrium)
of chromatin
 Decline of leukocyte numbers
Loss of survival signals as
at the end of immune and 
 stimulus for leukocyte
inflammatory responses 
activation is eliminated
>Membrane blebs
 Elimination of potentially
 Strong recognition of self 
harmful self-reactive 
 antigens induces apoptosis by
ymphocytes
both the mitochondrial and
 death receptor pathways
 Pathologic
DNA damage
Activation of proapoptotic
 proteins by BH3-only sensors
 Accumulation of misfolded
 Activation of proapoptotic
Cellular
proteins
proteins by BH3-only sensors,
fragmentation
possibly direct activation of
caspases
Infections, especially certain 
 Activation of the mitochondrial
viral infections
pathway by viral proteins
 Killing of infected cells by
APOPTOSIS
cytotoxic T lymphocytes, which
Apoptotic-
activate caspases
body
Apoptosis in pathologic concditions. Apoptosis eliminates
Phagocytosis
cells that are damaged beyond repair. This is seen when
Phagocyte-
of apoptotic cells 
there is severe DNA damage, for example, after expo-
and fragments 
sure to radiation and cytotoxic drugs. The accumulation
of misfolded proteins also triggers apoptotic death; the
underlying inechanisims of this cause of cell death and
its significance in disease are discussed later, in the
 context of ER stress. Certain infectious agents, particu-
Fig. 2.ll Apoptosis. The cellular alterations in apoptosis are illustrated.
 larly soine viruses, induce apoptotic death of infected
Contrast these with the changes that characterize necrotic cell death, shown
in Fig. 2.3.
cells.
Mechanisms of Apoptosis
outlived their usefulness (Table 2.2). It also occurs as a
Apoptosis is regulated by biochemical pathways that
pathologic event when cells are damaged, especially when
control the balance of death- and survival-inducing
the daimage affects the cell's DNA or proteins; thus, the
signals and ultimately the activation of enzymes called
irreparably damaged cell is eliminated.
caspases. Caspases were so named because they are cyste-
 Physiologic apoptosis. During norimal developiment of an
ine proteases that cleave proteins after aspartic acid resi-
 organisim, soime cells die and are replaced by new ones.
dues. Two distinct pathways converge on caspase
 In mature organisims, highly proliferative and hormone-
activation: the mitochondrial pathway and the death recep-
responsive tissues undergo cycles of proliferation and
tor pathway (Fig. 2.12). Although these pathways can
cell loss that are often deterimined by the levels of
intersect, they are generally induced under different condi-
growth factors. In these situations, the cell death is
tions, involve different molecules, and serve distinct roles
always by apoptosis, ensuring that unwanted cells are
 in physiology and disease. The end result of apoptotic cell
 eliminated without eliciting potentially harmful inflam-
death is the clearance of apoptotic bodies by phagocytes.
mation. In the imimune system, apoptosis eliminates
 The mitochondrial (intrinsic) pathway seems to be
excess leukocytes left at the end of imumune responses
responsible for apoptosis in most physiologic and
as well as lyimphocytes that recognize self-antigens and
pathologic situations. Mitochondria contain several
could cause autoimmune diseases if they were not
 proteins that are capable of inducing apoptosis, includ-
purged.
ing cytochrome c.  When mitochondrial membranes
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Sequence of Events in Cell Injury and Cell Death
39
MITOCHONDRIAL (INTRINSIC)
DEATH RECEPTOR (EXTRINSIC)
PATHWAY
PATHWAY
 Receptor-ligand interactions
·Fas
·TNF receptor
Cell injury
Mitochondria
Growthfactor
withdrawal
Adaptor proteins
·DNA damage
(by radiation,
Bcl-2 family
Cytochrome c
toxins, free
effectors (Bax, Bak)
 and other 
 Caspase
radicals)
pro-apoptotic
activation
▪ Protein
misfolding
proteins
Regulators
(ER stress)
BH3
(Bcl-2, Bcl-x)
sensors
O
Endonuclease
Breakdown of
activation
cytoskeleton
 Nuclear
fragmentation
Ligands for
 phagocytic
cell receptors
Apoptotic body
Fig. 2.12 Mechanisms of apoptosis.The two pathways of apoptosis differ in their induction and regulation, and both culminate in the activation of caspases.
In the mitochondrial pathway, BH3-only proteins, which are related to mermbers of the Bcl-2 family, sense a lack of survival signals or DNA or protein damage.
These BH3-only proteins activate effector molecules that increase mitochondrial permeability. In concert with a deficiency of Bcl-2 and other proteins that
maintain mitochondrial permeability, the mitochondria become leaky and various substances, such as cytochrome c, enter the cytosol and activate caspases.
Activated caspases induce the changes that culminate in cell death and fragmentation. In the death receptor pathway, signals from plasma mermbrane receptors
lead to the assembly of adaptor proteins into a “death-inducing signaling complex," which activates caspases, and the end result is the same.
become perimeable, cytochroine c leaks out into the
receptors, that trigger apoptosis. Most of these are
members of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor
death. A family of imore than 20 proteins, the proto-
family, which contain in their cytoplasinic regions a
type of which is Bcl-2, controls the perimeability
of
-ipaul ll asnesaq paueu os 'ureuop qeap, paarasuos
mitochondria. In healthy cells, Bcl-2 and the related
ates interaction with other proteins involved in cell
protein Bcl-xL, which are produced in response to
 death. The prototypic death receptors are the type I TNF
growth factors and other stimuli, maintain the integrity
receptor and Fas (CD95). Fas ligand (FasL) is a mem-
brane protein expressed mainly on activated T lympho-
two proapoptotic meinbers of the faimily, Bax and Bak,
cytes. When these T cells recognize Fas-expressing
in check. When cells are deprived of growth factors 
 targets, Fas molecules are crosslinked by FasL and bind
and survival signals, or are exposed to agents that
adaptor proteins via the death domain. These then
damage DNA, or accumulate unacceptable aimounts of
recruit and activate caspase-8, which, in turn, activates
misfolded proteins, a number of sensors are activated.
downstream caspases. The death receptor pathway is
These sensors are called BH3 proteins because they
involved in the elimination of self-reactive lyimphocytes
contan the third domain seen in Bcl-family proteins.
and in the killing of target cells by some cytotoxic T
They in turn shift this delicate, life-sustaining balance in
lymphocytes (CTLs) that express FasL.
favor of pro-apoptotic Bak and Bax. As a result, Bak and
 In either pathway, after caspase-9 or caspase-8 is acti-
Bax dimerize, insert into the mitochondrial membrane,
vated, it cleaves and thereby activates additional cas-
and forim channels through which cytochrome c and
pases that cleave numerous targets and ultimately
other mitochondrial proteins escape into the cytosol.
activate enzymes that degrade the cells' proteins and
After cytochroime c enters the cytosol, it, together with
nucleus. The end result is the characteristic cellular frag-
certain cofactors, activates caspase-9. The net result is
mentation of apoptosis.
the activation of a caspase cascade, ultimately leading
 Clearance of apoptotic cells. Apoptotic cells and their
to nuclear fraginentation and forimation of apoptotic
fragiments entice phagocytes by producing a number of
bodies.
"eat-me” signals.For instance, in norimal cells, phospha
 The death receptor (extrinsic) pathway of apoptosis.
tidylserine is present on the inner leaflet of the plasma
Many cells express surface Imolecules, called death
menbrane, but in apoptotic cells this phospholipid
http://ebooksmedicine.net
40
CHAPTER2
 Cell Injury, Cell Death, and Adaptations
"flips" to the outer leaflet, where it is recognized by
tissue macrophages, leading to phagocytosis of the
apoptotic cells. Cells that are dying by apoptosis also
secrete soluble factors that recruit phagocytes. The
plasima meimbrane alterations and secreted proteins
facilitate prompt clearance of the dead cells before the
cells undergo membrane damage and release their con-
tents (which can induce inflammation). Numerous mac-
rophage receptors have been shown to be involved in
the binding and engulfiment of apoptotic cells. The
phagocytosis of apoptotic cells is so efficient that dead
cells disappear without leaving a trace, and inflaimna-
tion is virtually absent.
MORPHOLOGY
In H&E-stained tissue sections, the nuclei of apoptotic cells show
various stages of chromatin condensation and aggregation and,
ultimately, karyorrhexis (Fig. 2.13); at the molecular level, this is
reflected in the fragmentation of DNA into nucleosome-sized
pieces. The cells rapidly shrink, form cytoplasmic buds, and frag
ment into apoptotic bodies that are composed of membrane-
bound pieces of cytosol and organelles (Fig. 2.ll). Because these
fragments are quickly extruded and phagocytosed without elicit-
ing an inflammatory response, even substantial apoptosis may be
Fig. 2.13 Morphologic appearance of apoptotic cells.Apoptotic cels (some
histologically undetectable.
indicated by orrows) in colonic epithelium are shown. (Some preparative
regimens for colonoscopy may induce apoptosis in epithelial cells, which
explains the presence of dead cells in this biopsy.) Note the fragmented
Other Pathways of Cell Death
nuclei with condensed chromatin and the shrunken cell bodies, some with
pieces falling off.(Courtesy of Dr. Sonjoy Kakar, Department of Pothology, Univer-
In addition to necrosis and apoptosis, two other patterns
sity of Calformia Son Francisco, Son Franisco, Calfomia.)
of cell death have been described that have unusual fea-
tures. Although the importance of these pathways in
microbes cause the death of infected cells. Its role in
disease reimains to be established, they are the subjects of
other pathologic situations is unknown.
considerable current research, and it is useful to be aware
of the basic concepts.
Autophagy
·Necroptosis. This forim of cell death is initiated by engage-
Iment of TNF receptors as well as other, poorly defined
Autophagy ("self-eating") refers to lysosomal digestion
triggers. Unlike the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis, which
of the cell's own components. It is a survival mechanism
also is downstreaim of TNF receptors, in necroptosis,
 in times of nutrient deprivation, so that the starved cell can
live by eating its own contents and recycling these contents
are activated, initiating a series of events that result in the
to provide nutrients and energy. In this process, intracel-
dissolution of the cell, much like necrosis. The name
lular organelles and portions of cytosol are first seques
necroptosis iimplies that there are features of both necro-
tered within an ER-derived autophagic vacuole, whose
sis and apoptosis. Some infections are believed to kill
formation is initiated by cytosolic proteins that sense
cells by this pathway, and it has been hypothesized to
nutrient deprivation (Fig. 2.14). The vacuole fuses with
play a role in ischemic injury and other pathologic situa-
lysosomes to form an autophagolysosome, in which lyso-
tions, especially those associated with inflammatory reac-
somal enzymes digest the cellular components. In some
tions in which the cytokine TNF is produced. However,
circumstances, autophagy may be associated with atrophy
when and why it occurs and how significant it is in
-gidepe ue juasaidai Aeur pue (iaiel passnosip) sanssn jo
human diseases is not well understood.
tion that helps cells survive lean fimes. If, however, the
 Pyroptosis. This forim of cell death is associated with
starved cell can no longer cope by devouring its contents,
activation of a cytosolic danger-sensing protein complex
called the inflammasome (Chapter 5). The net result of
inflamumasome activation is the activation of caspases,
some types of myopathies. Polymorphisims in a gene
some of which induce the production of cytokines that
 involved in autophagy have been associated with inflam-
induce inflaimmation, often manifested by fever, and
 matory bowel disease, but the mechanistic link between
-uueu pue sisondode 'snu sisoidode rasin sao
autophagy and intestinal inflaimnation is not known. The
tion coexist. The naime pyroptosis stems from the asso-
 role of autophagy in cancer is discussed in Chapter 6. Thus,
ciation of apoptosis with fever (Greek, pyro = fire). It is
a once litfle-appreciated survival pathway in cells may
thought to be one mechanisin by which some infectious
 prove to have wide-ranging roles in human disease.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mechanisms of Cell Injury and Cell Death
41
Nutrient depletion 
Autophagy
 signal
Lysosome
Cytoplasmic
organelles
Enzymatic
 Formation of autophagic vacuole 
Fusion of vacuole
digestion of
with lysosomes
contents 
Used as sources
 of nutrients
Fig. 2.14 Autophagy. Cellular stresses, such as nutrient deprivation, activate autophagy genes, which initiate the formation of membrane-bound vesicles in
which cellular organelles are sequestered. These vesicles fuse with lysosomes, in which the organelles are digested, and the products are used to provide
nutrients for the cell. The same process can trigger apoptosis by mechanisms that are not well defined.
 SUMMARY
MECHANISMS OF CELL INIURY AND
PATTERNS OF CELL INJURY AND CELL DEATH
CELL DEATH
+ Reversible cell injury: cell swelling, fatty change, plasma mem-
 brane blebbing and loss of microvill, mitochondrial swelling.
 Before discussing individual mechanisms of cell injury and
death, some general principles should be emphasized.
dilation of the ER, eosinophilia (resulting from decreased cyto-
· The cellular response to injurious stimuli depends on
plasmic RNA)
the type of injury, its duration, and its severity. Thus,
+ Necrosis: Accidental cell death manifested by increased cyto-
low doses of toxins or a brief period of ischeinia imay
plasmic eosinophilia; nuclear shrinkage, fragmentation, and dis-
lead to reversible cell injury, whereas larger toxin doses
solution; breakdown of plasma membrane and organellar
 or longer ischemic times may result in irreversible injury
membranes; abundant myelin figures; leakage and enzymatic
digestion of cellular contents
and cell death.
 The consequences of an injurious stimulus also
· Morphologic types of tissue necrosis: under different condi-
 depend on the type, status, adaptability, and genetic
tions, necrosis in tissues may assume specific patterns: coagula-
makeup of the injured cell. The same injury has vastly
tive, liquefactive, gangrenous, caseous, fat, and fibrinoid.
different outcoimes depending on the cell type. For
· Apoptosis: regulated mechanism of cell death that serves to
instance, striated skeletal muscle in the leg tolerates
eliminate unwanted and irreparably damaged cells, with the
least possible host reaction, characterized by enzymatic deg-
complete ischeimia for 2 to 3 hours without irreversible
injury, whereas cardiac muscle dies after only 20 to 30
radation of proteins and DNA, initiated by caspases; and by
 rapid recognition and removal of dead cels by phagocytes
minutes of ischemia. The nutritional (or hormonal)
status also can be important; understandably,
+ Apoptosis is initiated by two major pathways:
a
glycogen-replete hepatocyte will survive ischeimia
· Mitochondrial (intrinsic) pathway is triggered by loss of
better than one that has just burned its last glucose
survival signals, DNA damage, and accumulation of
misfolded proteins (ER stress); associated with leakage of
molecule. Genetically determined diversity in meta-
bolic pathways can contribute to differences in
 proapoptotic proteins from mitochondrial membrane into
the cytoplasm, where they trigger caspase activation;
responses to injurious stimuli. For instance, when
 exposed to the same dose of a toxin, individuals who
inhibited by anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl family.
 inherit variants in genes encoding cytochroime P-450
may catabolize the toxin at different rates, leading to
factors.
different outcoimes. Much effort is now directed toward
+ Death receptor (extrinsic) pathway is responsible for
understanding the role of genetic polymorphisins in
elimination of self-reactive lymphocytes and damage by
responses to drugs and toxins, a field of study called
CTLs; is initiated by engagement of death receptors
(members of the TNF receptor family) by ligands on 
 pharmacogenomics. In fact, genetic variations influ-
ence susceptibility to many coimplex diseases as well as
adjacent cells.
· Two other unusual pathways of cell death are necroptosis
the genetic makeup of the individual patient to guide
(which, as the name implies, includes features of both necrosis
aar usad , jo anduxa auo st der
(skemued gueuais yeinued Ag paeineau s! pue sisoidode pue
 Cell injury usually results from functional and bio-
 and pyroptosis, which can lead to the release of proinflamma-
chemical abnormalities in one or more of a limited
number of essential cellular components (Fig. 2.15).
· Autophagy is an adaptation to nutrient deprivation in which
cells digest their own organelles and recycle them to provide
As we discuss in more detail later, different external
insults and endogenous perturbations typically affect
energy and substrates. If the stress is too severe for the
different cellular organelles and biochemical pathways.
process to cope with it, it results in cell death by apoptosis.
 For instance, deprivation of oxygen and nutrients (as
http://ebooksmedicine.net
42
CHAPTER２
 Cell Injury, Cell Death, and Adaptations
Hypoxia,
Multiple
 Mutations, cell 
Radiation,
Infections,
ischemia
injurious stimuli
stress, infections
other insults
immunologic disorders
★ATP
+ROS
 Accumulation of
DNA damage
Inflammation
misfolded proteins
Energy-
Damage to
Nucleus
dependent
 lipids, proteins,
functions
nucleic acids
Toxic molecules
L
 Cell injury
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Necrosis or
apoptosis
Necrosis
Fig. 2.15 The principal biochemical mechanisms and sites of damage in cellinjury. Note that causes and mechanisms of cell death by necrosis and apoptosis
are shown as being independent but there may be overlap; for instance, both may contribute to cell death caused by ischemia, oxidative stress, or radiation.
ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; RO5, reactive oxygen species.
-Araua siiedur Aeud (euaost pue erxoday u
are induced by transcription factors of the hypoxia-
dependent cellular functions, culminating in necrosis,
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) family. HIF-1 simulates the syn-
whereas damage to proteins and DNA triggers apop-
thesis of several proteins that help the cell to survive in the
tosis. However, it should be einphasized that the very
face of low oxygen. Some of these proteins, such as vascu-
deaao pue aldninu aslin Aeur juae snonul aures
lar endothelial growth factor (VEGF), stimulate the growth
ping biochemical pathways. Not surprisingly, therefore,
of new vessels and thus atteimpt to increase blood flow
it has proved difficult to prevent cell injury by targeting
and the supply of oxygen. Other proteins induced by
 an individual pathway.
HIF-1 cause adaptive changes in cellular metabolism by
stimulating the uptake of glucose and glycolysis and
As we discussed in the beginning of this chapter and
daimpening mitochondrial oxidative  phosphorylation.
have alluded to throughout, there are numerous and diverse
Anaerobic glycolysis can generate ATP in the absence of
causes of cell injury and cell death.Similarly, there are many
oxygen using glucose derived either from the circulation
biochemical pathways that can initiate the sequence of
 or from the hydrolysis of intracellular glycogen. Under-
events that lead to cell injury and culminate in cell death.
 standably, norimal tissues with a greater glycolytic capac-
 Ad o azuor are se asa go a
ity because of the presence of glycogen (e.g., the liver and
roles in human diseases. In the following section, we orga-
striated muscle) are more likely to survive hypoxia and
nize our discussion of the mechanisms of cell injury along
decreased oxidative phosphorylation than tissues with
its major causes and pathways, and discuss the principal
limited glucose stores (e.g., the brain). Although it seems
biocheimical alterations in each. For the sake of clarity and
counterintuitive, rapidly proliferating normal cells and
simplicity, we emphasize the unique mechanisms in each
cancer cells rely on aerobic glycolysis to produce much of
pathway, but it is important to point out that any initiating
their energy, a phenoimenon referred to as the Warburg
 trigger inay activate one or more of these mechanisins, and
effect. The reason for this is that although glycolysis yields
several mechanisims may be active simultaneously.
less ATP per molecule of glucose burned than oxidative
phosphorylation, metabolites generated by glycolysis and
Hypoxia and Ischemia
the TCA cycle serve as precursors for the synthesis of cel-
lular constituents (e.g, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids)
a A go ay n spe uxo go 
that are needed for cell growth and division. Alterations in
dependent metabolic pathways, and ultimately to death
cellular metabolism are frequently seen in cancer cells, so
of cells by necrosis. Most cellular ATP is produced froin
they are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) by oxidative phosphoryla-
 Persistent or severe hypoxia and ischemia ultimately
 lead to failure of ATP generation and depletion of ATP
system of mitochondria. High-energy phosphate in the
 in cells. Loss of this critical energy store has deleterious
form of ATP is required for membrane transport, protein
 effects on many cellular systeins (Fig. 2.16).
synthesis, lipogenesis, and the deacylation-reacylation
·Reduced activityofplasma membrane ATP-dependent sodium
reactions necessary for phospholipid turnover. It is esti-
pumps, resulting in intracellular accumulation of sodium
mated that in total, the cells of a healthy human burn 50 to
and efflux of potassiun. The net gain of solute is accom-
 75 kg of ATP every day! Not surprisingly, therefore, cells
panied by isoosimotic gain of water, causing cell swelling
deprived of oxygen are at risk of suffering catastrophic
and dilation of the ER.
failure of many essential functions. Oxygen deprivation is
one of the most frequent causes of cell injury and necrosis
lactic acid accumulation, decreased intracellular pH,
in clinical medicine.
and decreased activity of many cellular enzymes.
Cells subjected to the stress of hypoxia that do not
 Prolonged or worsening depletion of ATP causes struc-
imunediately die activate compensatory mechanisims that
tural disruption of the protein synthetic apparatus,
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mechanisms of Cell Injury and Cell Death
43
Ischemia
tissue damage, especially after myocardial and cerebral
ischemia.
Several mechanisims may account for the exacerbation
 of cellinjury resulting from reperfusion of ischemic tissues:
Aq uogeuasxon Sunp paenru aq Aeu aeurep man
Mitochondrior
below). Some of the ROS may be generated by injured
cells with damaged mitochondria that cannot carry out
the complete reduction of oxygen, and at the saime time
↓ Oxidative phosphorylation
cellular anti-oxidant defense mechanisims may be com-
 proimised by ischemia, exacerbating the situation. ROS
↓ATP
generated by infiltrating leukocytes also may contribute
to the damage of vulnerable injured cells.
 The inflaimmation that is induced by ischeinic injury
↓Na+ pump
↑ Anaerobic glycolysis
Detachment
may increase with reperfusion because it enhances the
ofribosomes
influx of leukocytes and plasima proteins. The products
t Influx of Ca2+
of activated leukocytes may cause additional tissue
HzO, and Na+
↓Glycogen
↑Lactic
+pH
↓Protein 
↑Efflux of K+
acid
 synthesis
also may contribute to ischeimia-reperfusion injury.
 Coimpleinent proteins may bind to the injured tissues,
ER swelling
Cellular swelling
or to antibodies that are deposited in the tissues, and
subsequent complement activation generates byprod-
Loss of microvilli
Blebs
ucts that exacerbate the cell injury and inflammation.
Fig. 2.l6 The functional and morphologic consequences of hypoxia and
ischemia. ER, Endoplasmic reticulum.
Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress refers to cellular abnormalities that are
manifested as detachinent of ribosoimes from the rough
induced by ROS, which belong to a group of molecules
ER (RER) and dissociation of polysomes into mono-
known as free radicals. Free radical-imediated cell injury
somes, with a consequent reduction in protein
is seen in many circumstances, including chemical and
synthesis.
Anu anssn ue res exoday nun uopei
It also has been suggested that hypoxia per se increases
caused by inflaimmatory cells, and ischemia-reperfusion
the accumulation of ROS. Whether this is true is a matter
injury. In all these cases, cell death may be by necrosis,
of debate; however, there is ample evidence that hypoxia
apoptosis, or the mixed pattern of necroptosis.
predisposes cells to ROS-imediated damage if blood
Free radicals are chemical species with a single unpaired
flow (and oxygen delivery) is reestablished, a phenom-
enon called reperfusion injury (described later).
unstable, and free radicals readily react with inorganic and
· Ultimately, there is irreversible damage to mitochondrial
organic molecules; when generated in cells, they avidly
and lysosomal membranes, and the cell undergoes necro-
attack nucleic acids as well as a variety of cellular proteins
sis. Membrane damage is a late event in cell injury
and lipids. In addition, free radicals initiate reactions in
caused by diverse mechanisims, and is discussed later.
which imolecules that react with the free radicals are theim-
Although necrosis is the principal form of cell death
selves converted into other types of free radicals, thereby
caused by hypoxia, apoptosis by the mitochondrial
 propagating the chain of damage.
pathway is also thought to contribute.
Generation and Rermoval of Reactive Oxygen Species
The functional consequences of hypoxia and ischeimia
The accumulation of ROS is determined by their rates of
depend on the severity and duration of the deficit. For
production and removal (Fig. 2.17). ROS are produced by
instance, the heart muscle ceases to contract within 60
two major pathways.
seconds of coronary occlusion. If hypoxia continues, wors-
 ROS are produced normally in small amounts in all
ening ATP depletion causes further deterioration, under-
cells during the reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions
 going the sequence of changes illustrated in Fig. 2.3 and
that occur during mitochondrial respiration and energy
described earlier.
generation. In this process, molecular oxygen is reduced
in mitochondria to generate water by the sequential
Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury
addition of four electrons. This reaction is imperfect,
however, and simall amounts of highly reactive but
Under certain circumstances, the restoration of blood
short-lived toxic intermediates are generated when
flow to ischemic but viable tissues results, paradoxically.
in increased cell injury. This is the reverse of the expected
include superoxide (O'), which is converted to hydro-
outcome of the restoration of blood flow, which norimally
gen peroxide (HO2) spontaneously and by the action of
results in the recovery of reversibly injured cells. This
the enzyme superoxide dismutase (SOD). HO, is more
so-called "ischemia-reperfusion injury" is a clinically
stable than O and can cross biologic meimbranes. In the
 i    sd 
 presence of imetals, such as Fe²t, HO is converted to the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
44
CHAPTER2
Cell Injury Cell Death, and Adaptations
Pathologic effects
Radiation
Toxins ---
+
Production of ROs:
Lipid peroxidation
→ Membrane damage
Reperfusion
02
H202
·OH
Superoxide
Hydrogen 
Hydroxyl
Protein
Breakdown,
peroxide
radical
modifications
misfolding
n
DNAdamage
Mutations
Conversion
 Decomposition to
to HO2
 H2O by glutathione
by SOD
peroxidase, catalase
 Removal of free radicals
Fig. 2.17 The generation, rermoval, and role of reactive oxygen species (ROs) in cellinjury. The production of ROs is increased by many injurious stirmuli.
These free radicals are rermoved by spontaneous decay and by specialized enzymatic systems. Excessive production or inadequate rermoval leads to accumula-
tion of free radicals in cells, which may darmage lipids (by peroxidation), proteins, and DNA, resulting in cellinjury. SOD, Superoxide dismutase.
highly reactive hydroxyl radical *OH by the Fenton
 The enzymatic metabolism of exogenous cheimicals
reaction. The properties and pathologic effects of the
(e.g, carbon tetrachloride-see later)
major ROS are sumunarized in Table 2.3.
Inflaimmation, in which free radicals are produced by
 ROS are produced in phagocytic leukocytes, mainly
leukocytes (Chapter 3)
neutrophils and macrophages, as a weapon for destroy-
· Reperfusion of ischemic tissues, as already described.
ing ingested microbes and other substances during
inflammation and host defense (Chapter 3). The ROS are
Cells have developed mechanisms to remove free radi-
generated in the phagosoimes and phagolysosoimes
cals and thereby minimize their injurious effects. Free
of leukocytes by a process that is similar to mitochon-
radicals are inherently unstable and decay spontaneously.
 drial respiration and is called the respiratory burst (or
There also are nonenzymatic and enzyimatic systems,
oxidative burst). In this process, a phagosome mem-
soimetimes called free radical scavengers, serving to inacti-
brane enzyme catalyzes the generation of superoxide,
vate free radicals (Fig. 2.17).
which is converted to HO2. HO2 is in turn converted
 The rate of decay of superoxide is significantly increased
to a highly reactive compound, hypochlorite (the major
by the action of superoxide disimutase (SOD).
· Glutathione (GSH) peroxidases are a family of enzyimes
peroxidase, which is present in leukocytes. The role of
whose major function is to protect cells from oxidative
ROS in inflanmation is described in Chapter 3.
damage. The most abundant meimber of this family,
 Nitric oxide (NO) is another reactive free radical pro-
GSH peroxidase l, is found in the cytoplasim of all cells.
duced in macrophages and other leukocytes. It can react
It catalyzes the breakdown of HzO, by the reaction
with O; to form a highly reactive compound, peroxyni-
2GSH + HO2 → GS-SG + 2HO. The intracellular ratio
trite, which also participates in cell injury.
of oxidized GSH to reduced GSH is a reflection of this
 enzyime's activity and thus of the cell's ability to catabo-
The generation of free radicals is increased under several
lize free radicals.
circumstances:
Catalase, present in peroxisoimes, catalyzes the decom-
The absorption of radiant energy (e.g., ultraviolet (UV)
position of hydrogen peroxide (2HO2 → O, + 2H,O). It
light, x-rays). Ionizing radiation can hydrolyze water
is one of the most active enzyimes known, capable of
into hydroxyl (·OH) and hydrogen (H·) free radicals.
degrading millions of molecules of HOz per second.
Table 2.3 Principal Free Radicals Involved in Cell Injury
Free Radical
Mechanisms of Production
Mechanisms of Removal
Pathologic Effects
 Superoxide (O)
Incomplete reduction of O2 during
Conversion to H2O2 and O2 by
 Direct damaging effects on lipids
mitochondrial oxidative 
superoxide dismutase 
(peroxidation), proteins, and 
phosphorylation; by phagocyte
DNA
oxidase in leukocytes 
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
 Mostly from superoxide by action of 
Conversion to H2O and O2 by
Can be converted to .OH and 
 superoxide dismutase
 catalase, gutathione peroxidase 
 OCI, which destroy microbes
and cells 
Hydroxyl radical ('OH)
Produced from HO, HO2, and O2 by
Conversion to HzO by gutathione
 Direct damaging effects on lipids, 
various chemical reactions 
peroxidase
proteins, and DNA
Peroxynitrite (ONOO")
Interaction of O2 and NO mediated 
Conversion to nitrite by enzymes 
 Direct damaging effects on lipids,
by NO synthase
in mitochondria and cytosol
 proteins, and DNA
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mechanisms of Cell Injury and Cell Death
45
● Endogenous or exogenous anti-oxidants (e.g, vitaimins E,
P450 in the simooth ER of the liver and other organs.
A, and C and β-carotene) may either block the forimation
Although the metabolites might cause meinbrane
of free radicals or scavenge theim after they have forimed.
daimage and cell injury by direct covalent binding to
protein and lipids, the most important mechanism of
Cell Injury Caused by Reactive
cell injury involves the formation of free radicals. Carbor
Oxygen Species
tetrachloride (CCl4)- once widely used in the dry clean-
ROS causes cell injury by damaging multiple compo
ing industry but now banned - and the analgesic acet-
nents of cells (Fig. 2.17):
aminophen belong in this category. The effect of CCl4 is
Lipid peroxidation of membranes. Double bonds in men-
stll instructive as an example of chemical injury. CClg is
brane polyunsaturated lipids are vulnerable to attack by
converted to a toxic free radical, principally in the liver,
Oxygen-derived free radicals. The lipid-radical interac-
and this free radical is the cause of cell injury, mainly
tions yield peroxides, which are themselves unstable
by membrane phospholipid peroxidation. In less than
and reactive, and an autocatalytic chain reaction ensues.
30 minutes after exposure to CCl, there is sufficient
 Damage to plasima membranes as well as mitochondrial
 damage to the ER membranes of hepatocytes to cause
and lysosoinal meimbranes can have devastating conse.
a decline in the synthesis of enzyimes and plasima pro-
quences, as discussed earlier in the context of ischemia
teins; within 2 hours, swelling of the simooth ER and
and hypoxia.
dissociation of ribosomes from the RER have occurred.
Crosslinking and other changes in proteins. Free radicals
There also is decreased synthesis of apoproteins that
proimote  sulfhydryl-imediated protein  crosslinking,
forim complexes with triglycerides and thereby facilitate
resulting in enhanced degradation or loss of enzyimatic
triglyceride secretion; this defect results in the accu-
activity. Free radical reactions also may directly cause
mulation of lipids in hepatocytes and other cells and
polypeptide fragimentation. Damaged proteins imay
the "fatty liver" of CCl4 poisoning. Mitochondrial injury
fail to fold properly, triggering the unfolded protein
follows, and subsequently diminished ATP stores result
response, described later.
in defective ion transport and progressive cell swelling;
 DNA damage. Free radical reactions with thymine resi-
the plasma membranes are further damaged by fatty
dues in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA produce single-
aldehydes produced by lipid peroxidation in the ER.
strand breaks. Such DNA damage has been implicated
The end result can be cell death.
in apoptotic cell death, aging, and malignant transfor-
mation of cells.
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
· In addition to the role of ROS in cell injury and the
killing of microbes, low concentrations of ROS are
The accumulation of misfolded proteins in a cell can stress
involved in numerous signaling pathways in cells and
compensatory pathways in the ER and lead to cell death
thus in many physiologic reactions. Therefore, these
by apoptosis. During normal protein synthesis, chaperones
Ja proae on 'nq Aeuou paonpond ane sannsanou
in the ER control the proper folding of newly synthesized
harmful effects, their intracellular concentrations are
proteins, and misfolded polypeptides are ubiquitinated
tightly regulated in healthy cells.
and targeted for proteolysis. If unfolded or misfolded pro-
teins accumulate in the ER, they first induce a protective
Cell Injury Caused by Toxins
cellular response that is called the unfolded protein resporse
(Fig. 2.18). This adaptive response activates signaling
Toxins, including environmental chemicals and sub-
stances produced by infectious pathogens, induce cell
decrease protein translation, thus reducing the levels of
injury that culminates primarily in necrotic cell death.
 misfolded proteins in the cell. When a large amount of mis-
[eaua om Aq Anu as anput surxoi jo sadk juara
folded protein accumulates and cannot be handled by the
mechanism:
adaptive response, the signals that are generated result in
 Direct-acting toxins. Some toxins act directly by coimbin-
activation of proapoptotic sensors of the BH3-only fainily
ing with a critical molecular component or cellular organ-
as well as direct activation of caspases, leading to apoptosis
elle. For exanple, in mercuric chloride poisoning (as imay
 by the mitochondrial (intrinsic) pathway.
occur froim ingestion of contaiminated seafood) (Chapter
 Intracellular accumulation of misfolded proteins may
S), mercury binds to the sulfhydryl groups of various cell
 be caused by abnormalities that increase the production
Imembrane proteins, causing inhibition of ATP-dependent
of misfolded proteins or reduce the ability to eliminate
 transport and increased membrane perimeability. Many
them. This may result from gene mutations that lead to
the production of proteins that cannot fold properly; aging.
damage by direct cytotoxic effects. Also included in this
which is associated with a decreased capacity to correct
dlass are toxins made by microorganisims (described in
misfolding; infections, especially viral infections, when large
Chapter 9). These often cause damage by targeting host 
anounts of microbial proteins are synthesized within cells,
cell molecules that are needed for essential functions,
more than the cell can handle; increased demand for secre-
sun un pue siss uand se yns
p s pssa n   ns sd 
Latert toxirs. Many toxic cheimicals are not intrinsically
changes in intracellular pH and redox state. Protein misfold-
active but must first be converted to reactive metabo-
ing is thought to be the fundamental cellular abnorimality in
lites, which then act on target cells. Understandably,
several neurodegenerative diseases (Chapter 23). Depriva-
such toxins typically affect the cells in which they are
tion of glucose and oxygen, as in ischemia and hypoxia, also
activated. This is usually accomplished by cytochrome
 may increase the burden of misfolded proteins.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
46
CHAPTER2
Cell Injury Cell Death, and Adaptations
Mld ER Stress
Severe ER Stress
Misfolded proteins.
ER lumen
ER membrane
PPPP
Sensor of misfolded 
proteins (e.g., IRE1)
Signaling
Signaling
Cytosol
Increased
 Reduced 
Increased
Activation of
Activation of
synthesis of
protein
protein
chaperones 
synthesis
degradation
BH3 proteins
caspases
Reduced load of misfolded proteins
ADAPTIVE
TERMINAL UNFOLDED PROTEIN
UNFOLDED PROTEIN RESPONSE
 RESPONSE: APOPTOSIS
Fig. 2.18 The unfolded protein response and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.The presence of misfolded proteins in the ER is detected by sensors in the
 ER mermbrane, such as the kinase IRE-l, which form oligomers that are activated by phosphorylation. This triggers an adaptive unfolded protein response,
which can protect the cell from the harmful consequences of the misfolded proteins.When the armount of misfolded proteins is too great to be corrected,
excessive activation of ER sensors activates the mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis and the irreparably darmaged cell dies; this is also called the terminal
unfolded protein response.
 Protein misfolding within cells may cause disease by
· Cell death as a result of protein misfolding is recognized
creating a deficiency of an essential protein or by induc-
as a feature of a number of diseases, including the neu-
ing apoptosis (Table 2.4).
rodegenerative disorders Alzheimer disease, Hunting-
 Misfolded proteins often lose their activity and are rapidly
ton disease, and Parkinson disease, and may underlie
degraded, both of which can contribute to a loss of func-
type 2 diabetes as well (Table 2.4).
tion. If this function is essential, cellular injury ensues.
One important disease in which this occurs is cystic fibro-
As discussed later in the chapter, improperly folded
sis, which is caused by inherited mutations in a men-
proteins can also accuimulate in extracellular tissues, as in
 brane transport protein that prevent its norinal folding.
amyloidosis.
Table 2.4 Diseases Caused by Misfolded Proteinsa
Disease
Affected Protein
Pathogenesis
Cystic fibrosis
CFTR
Loss of CFTR leads to defects in chloride transport and death of affected cells 
 Familial hypercholesterolemia 
LDL receptor
Loss of LDL receptor leads to hypercholesterolemia
Tay-Sachs disease
Hexosaminidase β subunit
 Lack of the lysosomal enzyme leads to storage of GM2 gangliosides in neurons 
 Diseases Caused by Misfolded Proteins
is That Result in ER Stress-Induced Cell Loss
 Retinitis pigmentosa
Rhodopsin
Abnormal folding of rhodopsin causes photoreceptor loss and cell death, resulting in
blindness
Creutzfeldt-jacob disease
 Prions
Abnormal folding of PrPsc causes neuronal cell death 
 Alzheimer disease
A peptide
Abnormal folding of As peptide causes aggregation within neurons and apoptosis
the Protein
 Alpha-l-anti-tr ypsin 
α-l anti-trypsin
Storage of nonfunctional protein in hepatocytes causes apoptosis; absence of enzymatic
deficiency
activity in lungs causes destruction of elastic tissue giving rise to ermphysema 
nui anssp do lia do auaaueap euoun, ya wsuyaw dol aua aq on aunoua si upiysu ulaoid yym ui umous ae saseasi yo saldwexa aeisnll paalase
CFTR, Cystic fibrosis ransmembrane conduccance regulator; LDL, low-densicy lipoprotein.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mechanisms of Cell Injury and Cell Death
47
DNA Damage
+02 supply
↓ Survival signals
Exposure of cells to radiation or chemotherapeutic agents,
Toxins
 DNA, protein
Radiation
damage
intracellular generation of ROS, and acquisition of muta-
tions may all induce DNA damage, which if severe may
tigger apoptotic death. Damage to DNA is sensed by
↑ Pro-apototic proteins
intracellular sentinel proteins, which transimit signals that
↓ Anti-apoptotic proteins
lead to the accumulation of p53 protein. p53 first arrests
the cell cycle (at the Gl phase) to allow the DNA to be
repaired before it is replicated (Chapter 6). However, if the
daimage is too great to be repaired successfully, p53 trig-
 Mitochondrial damage
proteins that ultimately activate Bax and Bak, proapoptotic
 or dysfunction
members of the Bcl-2 family. When p53 is mutated or
absent (as it is in certain cancers), cells with damaged DNA
ATP
← Production
 generation
ofROS
Leakage of
cells, the DNA daimage may result in mutations or DNA
mitochondrial
rearrangeiments (e.g., translocations) that lead to neoplastic
 proteins
transformation (Chapter 6).
率
Multiple cellular abnomalities
Inflammation
NECROSIS
APOPTOSIS
A common cause of injury to cells and tissues is the inflaim-
Fig. 2.19 Role of mitochondria in cell injury and death. Mitochondria are
matory reaction that is elicited by pathogens, necrotic cells,
affected by a variety of injurious stimuli and their abnormalities lead to
and dysregulated immune responses, as in autoimimune
necrosis or apoptosis.This pathway of apoptosis is described in more detail
 diseases and allergies. In all these situations, inflammatory
later. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; ROs, reactive oxygen species.
cells, including neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes,
and other leukocytes, secrete products that evolved to
 destroy microbes but also may damage host tissues. These
injurious imunune reactions are classified under hypersen-
perimeability transition pore. The opening of thischannel
sitivity. Their mechanisims and significance are discussed
leads to the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential
in Chapter 5.
and pH changes, further comproimising oxidative
phosphorylation.
Common Events in Cell Injury From
 Mitochondria also contain proteins such as cytochrome
Diverse Causes
c that, when released into the cytoplasim, tell the cell
 there is internal injury and activate a pathway of apop-
In the previous discussion, we addressed the mechanisims
tosis, as discussed earlier.
of cell injury according to the initiating cause, and high-
lighted the principal pathways of injury that are triggered
Defects in Membrane Permeabiity
in different pathophysiologic situations. Some abnormali-
 Increased meimbrane permeability leading ultimately to
ties characterize cell injury regardless of the cause, and are
 overt membrane damage is a feature of most forims of cell 
thus seen in a variety of pathologic situations. Two of these
injury that culminate in necrosis. The most important sites
 changes are described next.
 of imembrane damage during cell injury are the mitochon-
drial meinbrane, the plasima meimbrane, and meimbranes
Mitochondrial Dysfunction
of lysosoimes. As noted earlier, increased permeability of
 s-,    a 
the plasma meimbrane and lysosomal membranes is not a
feature of apoptosis.
surprisingly, therefore, they also are critical players in cell
·Mitochondrial membrane damage. As discussed earlier,
injury and death. Mitochondria are sensitive to many types
damage to1
 mitochondrial  membranes results  in
 of injurious stimuli including hypoxia, cheinical toxins,
decreased production of ATP, with many deleterious
and radiation (Fig. 2.19). Mitochondrial changes occur in
effects culminating in necrosis.
necrosis and apoptosis. They may result in several bio-
Plasma membrane damage. Plasima membrane damage
chemical abnormalities:
leads to loss of osmotic balance and influx of fluids and
●Failure of oxidative phosphorylation leads to progres-
ions, as well as loss of cellular contents. The cells may
sive depletion of ATP, culminating in necrosis of the
also leak metabolites that are vital for the reconstitution
cell, as described earlier.
 of ATP, thus further depleting energy stores.
 Abnorimal oxidative phosphorylation also leads to the
Injury to lysosomal membranes results in leakage of their
formation of ROS, which have imany deleterious effects,
enzyimes into the cytoplasim and activation of the acid
as already described.
hydrolases in the acidic intracellular pH of the injured
· Daimage to mitochondria is often associated with
(e.g., ischemic) cell. Activation of these enzymes leads
the formation of a high-conductance channel in the
to enzyimatic digestion of cell coimponents, and the cells
mitochondrial membrane,  called  the mitochondrial
die by necrosis.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
48
CHAPTER2
Cell Injury Cell Death, and Adaptations
uterus during pregnancy), or to the demands of mechani-
SUMMARY
cal stress (in the case of bones and muscles). Pathologic
MECHANISMS OF CELL INJURY
adaptatiors are responses to stress that allow cells to modu-
late their structure and function and thus escape injury, but
+ Different initiating events cause cell injury and death by diverse
at the expense of norimal function, such as squamous meta-
mechanisms
 plasia of bronchial epithelium in simokers. Physiologic and
+ Hypoxia and ischemia lead to ATP depletion and failure of
 many energy-dependent functions, resulting first in reversible
pathologic adaptations can take several distinct forms, as
injury and, if not corrected, in necrosis.
described in the following text.
+ In ischemia-reperfusion injury, restoration of blood flow to an 
ischemic tissue exacerbates damage by increasing production
Hypertrophy
of ROS and by inflammation.
+ Oxidative stress refers to accumulation of ROs, which can
Hypertrophy is an increase in the size of cells resulting
 in an increase in the size of the organ. In contrast, hyper-
damage cellular lipids, proteins, and DNA, and is associated
with numerous initiating causes.
plasia (discussed next) is an increase in cell nuumber. Stated
+ Protein misfolding depletes essential proteins and, if the mis-
folded proteins accumulate within cells, results in apoptosis.
+ DNA damage (e.g, by radiation) also can induce apoptosis if
proteins and organelles. Hyperplasia is an adaptive
response in cells capable of replication, whereas hypertro-
it is not repaired.
+ Inflammation is associated with celinjury because ofthe damag-
phy occurs when cells have a limited capacity to divide.
Hypertrophy and hyperplasia also can occur together,
ing actions of the products of inflammatory leukocytes.
and obviously both result in an enlarged organ.
Hypertrophy can be physiologic or pathologic and is
We have now concluded the discussion of cell injury and
caused either by increased functional demand or by
cell death. As we have seen, these processes are the root
 growth factor or hormonal stimulation.
cause of many coimumon diseases. We end this chapter with
 The massive physiologic enlargeiment of the uterus
brief considerations of three other processes: cellular adapta-
during pregnancy occurs as a consequence of estrogen-
tions to stresses; intracellular accuimulations of various sub-
stimulated simooth muscle hypertrophy and simooth
stances and extracellular deposition of calcium, both of
muscle hyperplasia (Fig. 2.20). In contrast, in response
 pe    s o e 
to increased workload the striated muscle cells in both
the skeletal muscle and the heart undergo only hyper-
 trophy because adult imuscle cells have a limited capac-
CELLULAR ADAPTATIONSTO STRESS
ity to divide. Therefore, the chiseled physique of the
avid weightlifter steims solely from the hypertrophy of
Adaptations are reversible changes in the number, size,
individual skeletal muscles.
phenotype, metabolic activity, or functions of cells in
An example of pathologic hypertrophy is the cardiac
enlargeiment that occurs with hypertension or aortic
tatiors usually represent responses of cells to norimal stim-
valve disease (Fig. 2.2l). The differences between
normal, adapted, and irreversibly injured cells are illus-
(e.g., the hormone-induced enlargement of the breast and
 trated by the responses of the heart to different types of
Fig. 2.20 Physiologic hypertrophy of the uterus during pregnancy. (A) Gross appearance of a normal uterus (right) and a gravid uterus (left) that was removed
for postpartum bleeding. (B) Small spindle-shaped uterine smooth muscle cells from a normal uterus. (C) Large, plump hypertrophied srmooth muscle cells
from a gravid uterus; compare with B.(B and C, Same magnification.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Adaptations to Stress
49
Normal myocyte
Ischemia
leading to
cellinjury
Adaptation:
Reversibly injured
response to
myocyte
increasedfoad
 Adapted 
myocyte
(hypertrophy)
Cell death
Fig. 2.21 The relationship armong normal, adapted, reversibly injured, and dead myocardial cells. The cellular adaptation depicted here is hypertrophy, the
Ieft ventricular wall is thicker than 2 cm (normal, I-1.5 cm). Reversibly injured myocardium shows functional effects without any gross or light microscopic
changes, or reversible changes such as cellular swelling and fatty change (shown here).In the specimen showing necrosis (lower righty the transmural light area
in the posterolateral left ventricle represents an acute myocardial infarction. All three transverse sections of myocardium were stained with triphenyltetra-
zolium chloride, an enzyme substrate that colors viable myocardium magenta. Failure to stain is due to enzyme loss after cell death.
in the myocardial fibers, of which the most important are
workload, as in hypertension or with a narrowed (ste-
fragmentation and loss of imyofibrillar contractile elements.
notic) valve, adapts by undergoing hypertrophy to gen-
Why hypertrophy progresses to these regressive changes
erate the required higher contractile force. If, on the
is incompletely understood. There may be finite limits on
other hand, the myocardium is subjected to reduced
the abilities of the vasculature to adequately supply the
blood flow (ischeimia) due to an occluded coronary
enlarged fibers, the mitochondria to supply ATP, or the
 artery, the muscle cells may undergo injury.
biosynthetic machinery to provide sufficient contractile
 proteins or other cytoskeletal eleinents. The net result of
The mechanisims driving cardiac hypertrophy involve
these degenerative changes is ventricular dilation and ulti-
 at least two types of signals: mechanical triggers, such as
 mately cardiac failure.
stretch, and soluble mediators that stimulate cell growth,
such as growth factors and adrenergic horimones. These
Hyperplasia
stimuli turn on signal transduction pathways that lead to
the induction of a number of genes, which in turn stimulate
Hyperplasia is an increase in the number of cells in an
 organ that stems from increased proliferation, either of
factors and structural proteins. The result is the synthesis
differentiated cells or, in some instances, less differenti-
 of more proteins and myofilaments per cell, which increases
ated progenitor cells. As discussed earlier, hyperplasia
the force generated with each contraction, enabling the cell
takes place if the tissue contains cell populations capable
to meet increased work demands. There may also be a
of replication; it may occur concurrently with hypertrophy
switch of contractile proteins from adult to fetal or neonatal
and often in response to the same stimuli.
forims. For example, during muscle hypertrophy, the
Hyperplasia can be physiologic or pathologic; in both
C-inyosin heavy chain is replaced by the fetal βform of the
situations, cellular proliferation is stimulated by growth
Imyosin heavy chain, which produces slower, more ener-
factors that are produced by a variety of cell types.
getically econoimical contraction.
 The two types of physiologic hyperplasia are (1) hor-
An adaptation to stress such as hypertrophy can pro-
monal hyperplasia, exemplified by the proliferation of
 gress to functionally significant cell injury if the stress is
the glandular epitheliun of the female breast at puberty
not relieved. Whatever the cause of hypertrophy, a limit is
-eldiadAy Aioesuaduos () pue Koueuaid Sunp pue
reached beyond which the enlargement of muscle mass can
sia, in which residual tissue grows after removal or loss
no longer coimpensate for the increased burden. When this
 of part of an organ. For example, when part of a liver is
happens in the heart, several degenerative changes occur
resected, imitotic activity in the reinaining cells begins as
http://ebooksmedicine.net
50
CHAPTER2
 Cell Injury. Cell Death, and Adaptations
A
B
Fig. 2.22 Atrophy as seen in the brain. (A) Normal brain of a young adult. (B) Atrophy of the brain in an 82-year-old man with atherosclerotic disease.
Atrophy of the brain is caused by aging and reduced blood supply. Note that loss of brain substance narrows the gyri and widens the sulci. The meninges
have been stripped from the bottom half of each specirmen to show the surface of the brain.
early as 12 hours later, eventually restoring the liver to
involved, the entire tissue or organ is reduced in size, or
its norimal size. The stinuli for hyperplasia in this setting
atrophic (Fig. 2.22). Although atrophic cells may have
are polypeptide growth factors produced by uninjured
diminished function, they are not dead.
hepatocytes as well as nonparenchyimal cells in the liver
Causes of atrophy include a decreased workload (e.g
(Chapter 3). After restoration of the liver mass, various
imnobilization of a limb to permit healing of a fracture),
growth inhibitors turn off cell proliferation.
loss of innervation, diminished blood supply, inadequate
 Most forins of pathologic hyperplasia are caused by
nutrition, loss of endocrine stimulation, and aging (senile
excessive hormonal or growth factor stimulation. For
atrophy). Although some of these stimuli are physiologic
example, after a norimal menstrual period there is a burst
(e.g, the loss of horimone stimulation in menopause) and
of uterine epithelial proliferation that is normally tightly
others are pathologic (e.g., denervation), the fundamental
regulated by the stimulatory effects of pituitary hor-
cellular changes are similar. They represent a retreat by the
 mones and ovarian estrogen and the inhibitory effects of
cell to a simaller size at which survival is still possible; a
 progesterone. A disturbance in this balance leading to
new equilibrium is achieved between cell size and dimin-
increased estrogenic stimulation causes endometrial
ished blood supply, nutrition, or trophic stimulation.
hyperplasia, which is a common cause of abnormal men-
Cellular atrophy results from a combination of
strual bleeding. Benign prostatic hyperplasia is another
decreased  protein synthesis  and increased  protein
degradation.
responses to horimonal stimulation by androgens. Stimu-
 Protein synthesis decreases because of reduced meta-
-draday a u patoau si ose siooe ymon aq uon
bolic activity.
sia that is associated with certain viral infections; for
The degradation of cellular proteins occurs mainly by
exaimple, papillomaviruses cause skin warts and mucosal
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Nutrient deficiency
lesions that are composed of masses of hyperplastic epi-
and disuse may activate ubiquitin ligases, which attach
thelium. Here the growth factors may be encoded by
multiple copies of the simall peptide ubiquitin to cellular
viral genes or by the genes of the infected host cells.
proteins and target them for degradation in protea-
somes. This pathway is also thought to be responsible
An important point is that in all of these situations, the
for the accelerated proteolysis seen in a variety of cata-
hyperplastic process remains controlled; if the signals
 bolic conditions, including the cachexia associated with
that initiate it abate, the hyperplasia disappears. It is this
cancer.
responsiveness to norimal regulatory control mechanisims
In many situations, atrophy also is associated with
that distinguishes pathologic hyperplasias from cancer, in
autophagy, with resulting increases in the number of
which the growth control mechanisms become perma-
autophagic vacuoles. As discussed previously, autoph-
nently dysregulated or ineffective (Chapter 6). Neverthe-
agy is the process in which the starved cell eats its own
less, in many cases, pathologic hyperplasia constitutes a
 organelles in an attempt to survive.
fertile soil in which cancers may eventually arise. For
exainple, patients with hyperplasia of the endometrium
Metaplasia
are at increased risk of developing endometrial cancer
(Chapter 19).
Metaplasia is a change in which one adult cell type (epi-
 thelial or mesenchymal) is replaced by another adult cell
Atrophy
type. In this type of cellular adaptation, a cell type sensitive
to a particular stress is replaced by another cell type better
Atrophy is shrinkage in the size of cells by the loss of
able to withstand the adverse environment. Metaplasia
cell substance. When a sufficient number of cells are
is thought to arise by the reprograimuming of steim cells
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Intracellular Accumulations
51
SUMMARY
CELLULAR ADAPTATIONS TO STRESS
· Hypertrophy: increased cell and organ size, often in response 
to increased workload;induced by growth factors produced in
response to mechanical stress or other stimuli; occurs in
Squamous
tissues incapable of cell division
Basement
Normal
+ Hyperplasia: increased cell numbers in response to hormones 
membrane columnar
metaplasia
epithelium
and other growth factors; occurs in tissues whose cells are
A
able to divide or contain abundant tissue stem cells
+ Atrophy: decreased cell and organ size,as a result of decreased 
nutrient supply or disuse; associated with decreased synthesis
of cellular building blocks and increased breakdown of cellular
organelles and autophagy
+ Metaplasia: change in phenotype of differentiated cells, often in
response to chronic irritation, that makes cells better able to
withstand the stress; usually induced by altered differentiation
pathway of tissue stem cells; may result in reduced functions
or increased propensity for malignant transformation
B
INTRACELLULAR ACCUMULATIONS
Fig. 2.23 Metaplasia of normal columnar (left) to squamous epithelium
(right) in a bronchus, shown schermatically (A) and histologicaly (B).
Under some circumstances, cells may accumulate abnor-
mal amounts of various substances, which may be harim-
to differentiate along a new pathway rather than a pheno.
less or may cause varying degrees of injury. The substance
typic change (transdifferentiation) of already differentiated
may be located in the cytoplasm, within organelles
cells.
a  h pue a a un no (saosoi An)
 ar a  a si sd 
synthesized by the affected cells or it imay be produced
occurs in the respiratory epithelium of habitual cigarette
elsewhere.
The main pathways of abnormal intracellular accumula-
cells of the trachea and bronchi often are replaced by strati-
tions are inadequate removal and degradation or excessive
fied squamous epithelial cells (Fig. 2.23). The rugged strati-
 production of an endogenous substance, or deposition of
fied squamous epithelium may be able to survive the
an abnormal exogenous material (Fig. 2.24). Selected exam-
noxious chemicals in cigarette simoke that the more fragile
ples of each are described as follows.
specialized epithelium would not tolerate. Although the
 Fatty Change. Fatty change, also called steatosis, refers
 metaplastic squamous epithelium has survival advantages,
to any accumulation of triglycerides within parenchymal
important protective mechanisins are lost, such as mucus
cells. It is imost often seen in the liver, since this is the major
secretion and ciliary clearance of particulate matter. Epi-
 organ involved in fat metabolism, but also may occur in
thelial metaplasia is therefore a double-edged sword.
heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and other organs. Steatosis
Because vitaimin A is essential for norimal epithelial dif-
  d s   a 
ferentiation, its deficiency also may induce squamous
mellitus, obesity, or anoxia. Alcohol abuse and diabetes
 metaplasia in the respiratory epithelium.
associated with obesity are the most comunon causes of
Metaplasia need not always occur in the direction of
fatty change in the liver (fatty liver) in industrialized
nations. This process is discussed in more detail in
reflux, the normal stratified squamous epithelium of the
Chapter 16.
lower esophagus may undergo metaplastic transforimation
Cholesterol and Cholesteryl Esters. Cellular cholesterol
to gastric or intestinal-type columnar epithelium. Metapla-
metabolism is tightly regulated to ensure normal genera-
sia also may occur in mesenchymal cells, but in these situ-
tion of cell meinbranes (in which cholesterol is a key con-
ations itis generally a reaction to some pathologic alteration
ponent) without significant intracellular accumulation.
and not an adaptive response to stress. For exaimple, bone
However, phagocytic cells may become overloaded with
is occasionally forimed in soft tissues, particularly in foci of
lipid (triglycerides, cholesterol, and cholesteryl esters) in
injury.
several different pathologic processes, mostly character-
The influences that induce metaplastic change in an
ized by increased intake or decreased catabolisim of lipids.
epithelium, if persistent, may predispose to malignant
Of these, atherosclerosis is the most important. The role of
transformation. In fact, squamous metaplasia of the respi-
lipid and cholesterol deposition in the pathogenesis of ath-
ratory epithelium often coexists with lung cancers coim-
erosclerosis is discussed in Chapter 10.
posed of malignant squamous cells. It is thought that
Proteins. Morphologically visible protein accumula-
cigarette simoking initially causes squamous metaplasia,
tions are less cominon than lipid accumulations; they may
and cancers arise later in some of these altered foci.
Occur when excesses are presented to the cells or if the cells
http://ebooksmedicine.net
52
CHAPTER2
Cell Injury Cell Death, and Adaptations
synthesize excessive amounts. In the kidney, for exaimple,
trace amounts of albumin filtered through the glomerulus
①
 Abnormal
convoluted tubules. However, in disorders with heavy
metabolism
protein leakage across the glomerular filter (e.g., nephrotic
syndrome), much more of the protein is reabsorbed, and
vesicles containing this protein accumulate, giving the his-
tologic appearance of pink, hyaline cytoplasimic droplets.
The process is reversible: if the proteinuria abates, the
 protein droplets are metabolized and disappear. Another
Normal cell
Fatty liver
exaimple is the marked accumulation of newly synthesized
immunoglobulins that may occur in the RER of some
plasma cells, foriming rounded, eosinophilic Russel bodies.
Other exaimples of protein aggregation are discussed
(2
elsewhere in this book (e.g-)
, "alcoholic hyaline" in the
 Protein mutation
Defect in 
liver in Chapter 16; neurofibrillary tangles in neurons in
protein
Chapter 23).
folding,
Glycogen. Excessive intracellular deposits of glycogen
transport
are associated with abnormalities in the metabolisim of
X
either glucose or glycogen. In poorly controlled diabetes 
mellitus, the prime exainple of abnorimal glucose metabo-
lism, glycogen accumulates in renal tubular epithelium,
GFAH
cardiac imyocytes, and β cells of the islets of Langerhans.
Accumulation of
Glycogen also accumulates within cells in a group of
abnormal proteins
related genetic disorders collectively referred to as glyco-
gen storage diseases, or glycogenoses (Chapter 7).
 Pigments. Pigiments are colored substances that are
either exogenous, coming from outside the body, such as
carbon, or are endogenous, synthesized within the body
③
itself, such as lipofuscin, melanin, and certain derivatives
Lack of 
of hemoglobin.
enzyme
The most comnon exogenous pigiment is carbon, a
ubiquitous air pollutant of urban life. When inhaled, it is
phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages and transported
Complex
Soluble
through lymphatic channels to the regional tracheobron-
substrate
products
Complex
Enzyme
chial lymph nodes. Aggregates of the pigiment blacken the
substrate 7
draining lyimph nodes and pulmonary parenchyina (anthra-
Lysosomal storage disease:
cosis) (Chapter 13).
accumulation of
Lipofuscin, or "wear-and-tear pigiment," is an insoluble
endogenous materials
accumulates in a variety of tissues (particularly the
heart, liver, and brain) with aging or atrophy. Lipofus-
...
cin represents complexes of lipid and protein that are
④
+..
produced by the free radical-catalyzed peroxidation of
Ingestion of
8
 polyunsaturated lipids of subcellular membranes. It is
 indigestible
not injurious to the cell but is a marker of past free
 materials
radical injury. The brown pigiment (Fig. 2.25), when
a oi aoueeadde ue sjredu sunoure alret u juasaid
tissue that is called brown atrophy.
8
is synthesized by melanocytes located in the epiderimis
and acts as a screen against harimful UV radiation.
Accumulation of
exogenous materials
Although melanocytes are the only source of melanin,
adjacent basal keratinocytes in the skin can accumu-
Fig. 2.24 Mechanisms of intracellular accumulation: (1) Abnormal metabo-
late the pigiment (e.g., in freckles), as can derimal
macrophages.
folding and transport, so that defective molecules accumulate intracellularly.
Hemosiderin is a heinoglobin-derived granular pigiment
(3) A deficiency of critical enzymes responsible for breaking down certain
compounds, causing substrates to accumulate in lysosomes, as in lysosomal
that is golden yellow to brown and accumulates in
storage diseases. (4) An inability to degrade phagocytosed particles, as in
tissues when there is a local or systeimic excess of iron.
carbon pigment accumulation.
Iron is normally stored within cells in association with
the protein apoferritin, foriming ferritin micelles. Hemo-
siderin pigiment represents large aggregates of these
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Pathologic Calcification
53
areas of necrosis of any type. It is virtually ubiquitous
in the arterial  lesions of advanced atherosclerosis
(Chapter 10). Although dystrophic calcification may be
an incidental finding indicating insignificant past cell
injury, it also may be a cause of organ dysfunction. For
example, calcification can develop in aging or daimaged
heart valves, resulting in severely compromised valve
motion. Dystrophic calcification of the aortic valves is
an important cause of aortic stenosis in elderly persons
(Chapter 11).
Dystrophic calcification is initiated by the extracel-
lular deposition of crystalline calcium phosphate in
meinbrane-bound vesicles, which may be derived from
injured cells, or the intracellular deposition of calcium
in the mitochondria of dying cells. It is thought that the
extracellular calcium is concentrated in vesicles by its
affinity for meimbrane phospholipids, whereas phos-
phates accumulate as a result of the action of meimbrane-
Fig. 2.25 Lipofuscin granules in cardiac myocytes (deposits indicated by
bound phosphatases. The crystals are then propagated,
arrows).
foriming larger deposits.
Metastatic calcification.This forim is associated with hyper-
lcemia and can occur in norimal tissues. The major
ferritin micelles, readily visualized by light and electron
causes of hypercalcemia are (l) increased secretion of para-
microscopy; the iron can be unambiguously identified
thyroid hormone, due to either primary parathyroid
by the Prussian blue histocheimical reaction (Fig. 2.26).
tumors or production of parathyroid horimone-related
Although hemosiderin accumulation is usually patho-
protein by other malignant tumors; (2) destruction of bone
logic, simall ainounts of this pigiment are normal in the
due to the effects of accelerated turnover (e.g., Paget
mononuclear phagocytes of the bone marrow, spleen,
disease), iimnobilization, or tumors (increased bone
and liver, where aging red cells are normally degraded.
catabolism associated with multiple myeloma, leuke-
Excessive deposition of heimosiderin, called heimo-
mia, or diffuse skeletal metastases); (3) vitamin D-related
siderosis, and more extensive accumulations of iron
lisorders including vitamin D intoxication and sarcoidlosis
seen in hereditary hemochromatosis are described in
(in which macrophages activate a vitamin D precursor);
Chapter 16.
 and (4) renal failure, in which phosphate retention leads
to secondary hyperparathyroidism.
PATHOLOGIC CALCIFICATION
Pathologic calcification, a common process in a wide
MORPHOLOGY
variety of disease states, is the result of an abnormal
deposition of calcium salts, together with smaller amounts
Regardless of the site, calcium salts are seen on gross examina-
tion as fine white granules or clumps, often felt as gritty deposits.
of iron, magnesium, and other minerals. It can occur in two
Dystrophic calcification is common in areas of caseous necrosis
ways.
 Dystrophic calcificatior. In this forim, calcium metabolism
in tuberculosis. Sometimes a tuberculous lymph node is essen-
·
is norimal but it deposits in injured or dead tissue, such as
tially converted to radiopaque stone. On histologic examination,
 by a special staining process called the Prussian blue reaction.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
54
CHAPTER2
Cell Injury Cell Death, and Adaptations
Cellular aging is the result of a progressive decline in
calcification appears as intracellular and/or extracellular baso-
the life span and functional activity of cells. Several
philic deposits. With time, heterotopic bone may form in foci of 
calcification.
abnorimalities contribute to the aging of cells (Fig. 2.27):
·Accumulation of mutations in DNA. A variety of meta-
 Metastatic calcification can occur widely throughout the body
bolic insults over time may result in damage to nuclear
but principally affects the interstitial tissues of the vasculature.
and mitochondrial DNA. ROS induced by toxins and
kidneys, lungs, and gastric mucosa.The calcium deposits morpho-
radiation exposure contribute to DNA damage associ-
logically resemble those described in dystrophic calcification.
ated with aging. Although most DNA damage is
Although they generally do not cause clinical dysfunction, exten-
pue sisisiad auros sauzua ledan vNq Aq paniedan
sive calcifications in the lungs may be evident on radiographs and
accumulates as cells age, especially if repair mecha-
may produce respiratory deficits, and massive deposits in the
 kidney (nephrocalcinosis) can lead to renal damage.
nisms become inefficient over time. Accumulation of
mutations in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA ulti-
mately comproimise the functional activities and sur-
vival of cells.
· Decreased cellular replication. Norimal cells (other than
SUMMARY
stem cells) have a limited capacity for replication, and
ABNORMAL INTRACELlULAR DEPOSITIONS AND
after a fixed number of divisions, they becoime arrested
CALCIFICATIONS
 in a terminally nondividing state, known as replicative
+ Abnormal deposits of materials in cells and tissues are the
senescence. Aging is associated with progressive repli-
cative senescence of cells. Cells froim children have the
result of excessive intake or defective transport or
capacity to undergo more rounds of replication than do
catabolism.
+ Depositions of lipids
cells froim older people. In contrast, cells from patients
with Werner syndrome, a rare disease characterized
· Fatty change: accumulation of free triglycerides in cells,
by premature aging, have a markedly reduced in vitro
resulting from excessive intake or defective transport
life span.
(often because of defects in synthesis of transport pro-
teins); manifestation of reversible cell injury
 Replicative senescence occurs in aging cells because
of progressive shortening of telomeres, which ulti-
+ Cholesterol deposition: result of defective catabolism and 
mately results in cell cycle arrest. Telomeres are short
excessive intake; seen in macrophages and smooth muscle 
repeated sequences of DNA present at the ends of chro-
cells of vessel walls in atherosclerosis
mosoimes that are iinportant for ensuring the coimplete
· Deposition of proteins: reabsorbed proteins in kidney
replication of chroimosoime ends and for protecting the
tubules; immunoglobulins in plasma cells 
ends from fusion and degradation. Telomeric DNA
 Deposition of glycogen: in macrophages of patients with
also binds proteins that shield it, preventing activa-
defects in lysosomal enzymes that break down glycogen 
tion of a DNA damage response. When somatic cells
(glycogen storage diseases)
replicate, a simall section of the teloimere is not dupli-
 Deposition of pigments: typically indigestible pigments,
cated, and teloimeres become progressively shortened.
such as carbon, lipofuscin (breakdown product of lipid per-
As they shorten, the ends of chromosomes cannot be
oxidation), or iron (usually resulting from overload, as in
 protected and are sensed in cells as broken DNA, which
hemosiderosis)
signals cell cycle arrest. Teloimere length is maintained
+ Pathologic calcifications
by nucleotide addition mediated by an enzyime called
+ Dystrophic calcification: deposition of calcium at sites of cell
telomerase. Telomerase is_a specialized RNA-protein
injury and necrosis
 complex that uses its own RNA as a teinplate for adding
+ Metastatic calcification: deposition of calcium in normal
nucleotides to the ends of chromosoimes. Teloimerase is
tissues, caused by hypercalcemia (usually a consequence of
expressed in gerim cells and is present at low levels in
parathyroid hormone excess)
stem cells, but absent in most somatic cells (Fig. 2.28).
Therefore, as mature somatic cells age, their telomeres
become shorter and they exit the cell cycle, resulting in
an inability to generate new cells to replace damaged
ones. Conversely, in immortalized cancer cells, telom-
CELLULAR AGING
erase is usually reactivated and telomere length is sta-
bilized, allowing the cells to proliferate indefinitely.
nd ynora ae sias nan asnesaq ae stenri 
This is discussed more fully in Chapter 6. Telomere
attention on the aging process has traditionally focused on
shortening also may decrease the regenerative capac-
its cosimetic manifestations, aging has important health
ity of stem cells, further contributing to cellular aging.
consequences, because age is one of the strongest indepen-
Despite such alluring observations, however, the rela-
dent risk factors for many chronic diseases, such as cancer,
tionship of telomerase activity and telomere length to
Alzheiner disease, and ischeimic heart disease. Perhaps
aging has yet to be fully established. Abnorimalities in
one of the most striking discoveries about cellular aging is
telomere maintenance have been implicated in many
that it is not simply a consequence of cells' "running out
diseases, such as aplastic aneinia and other cytopenias
of steaim,” but in fact is regulated by a limited number of
(thought to be caused by a failure of hematopoietic stem
genes and signaling pathways that are evolutionarily con-
 pue juaid us 't jo suans ad (s
served from yeast to maminals.
abnorimalities, pulmonary and liver fibrosis, and others.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cellular Aging
55
Environmental and 
Telomere
Abnormal
Calorie
 metabolic insults 
shortening 
protein homeostasis
restriction
ROS?
↓ Insulin/IGF signaling
 Accumulation of
↓ Cellular 
+ Proteins.
↓ TOR
 mutations in DNA 
replication 
damaged 
 proteins
Defective
 Altered 
DNA repair
transcription
+
DECREASED CELL FUNCTIONS,
DECREASED
CELL LOSS
CELL LOSS
CELL FUNCTIONS
↑ DNA repair
CELLULARAGING
COUNTERACTS AGING
↑ Protein homeostasis
Fig. 2.27 Mechanisms that cause and counteract cellular aging. DNA damage, replicative senescence, and decreased and misfolded proteins are among the
best-described mechanisms of cellular aging. Some environmental influences, such as calorie restriction, counteract aging by activating various signaling pathways
These disorders are soimetimes considered the proto
proteins). The resultant decrease in intracellular pro-
typic "telomeropathies."
teins can have many deleterious effects on cell survival,
Defective protein homeostasis. With the passage of time,
replication, and functions. The concomitant accumula-
cells are unable to maintain normal protein homeostasis,
tion of imisfolded proteins exacerbates the loss of func-
because of increased turnover and decreased synthesis
caused by reduced translation of proteins and defective
 There has been great interest in defining biocheimical
activity of chaperones (which promote normal protein
signaling pathways that counteract the aging process,
folding) and proteasomes (which destroy misfolded
not only because of their obvious therapeutic potential
A
Increasing age
TTAGGG repeats
Repeated cell
divisions
Telomeres
 Telomere attrition 
Telomerase
+
DNA damage response
reactivation
Defective cell proliferation 
+ Cancer
Stem cells
ngth
cells
Ter
Senescence
Depletion of stem/
Cancer
of mature cells
 progenitor cells
cells
Senescence
Tissue dysfunction (aging)
Increasing age
B
Repeated cell divisions 
Fig. 2.28 The role of telomeres and telomerase in replicative senescence of cells. (A) Mechanisms and consequences of telomere attrition. Repeated cell
division associated with aging leads to progressive shortening of telomeres, which triggers senescence and loss of stem cell pools. (B) Telomere attrition is
characteristic of somatic cells. Stem cells maintain their telomeres and are, therefore, capable of more cycles of replication. Cancer cells frequently activate
telomerase and are thus able to maintain telomeres.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
56
CHAPTER２
 Cell Injury, Cell Death, and Adaptations 
(the search for the "elixir of youth") but also because
of organ injury and ultimately all cases of clinical disease
elucidating these pathways might tell us about the
 arise from derangeiments in cell structure and function.
mechanisims that cause aging. Calorie restriction has
been found to slow down aging and prolong life in
every species tested from flies to mice. Itis now thought
SUGGESTED READINGS
that calorie restriction alters signaling pathways that
Calado RT, Young NS: Telomere diseases, N Engl I Med 361:2353, 2009.
influence aging (Fig. 2.27). Anong the biochemical
[An excellent review of the basic biology of telomeres, and how their
alterations associated with calorie restriction that have
abnormalitiesmaycontributetocaner,aging,andotherdisese
been described as playing a role in counteracting the
Chipuk JE, Moldoveanu T, Llambl F, et al: The BCL-2 family reunion,
aging_ process is reduced activation of insulin-like
Mot Cell37:299, 2010. JA reriew of the biochemistry and biology of the
growth factor receptor signaling, which involves a
BCL-2 family of apoptosis-regulating proteins.!
downstream network of kinases and transcription
Choi AMK, Ryter S, Levine B: Autophagy in human health and
factors. Reduced IGF-1 signaling leads to lower rates of
disease, N Engl 」 Med 368:7, 2013. {An excellent discussion of the
mechanisms and significance of autophagy.!
cell growth and metabolisim and possibly reduced errors
 in DNA replication, better DNA repair and improve
Conrad M, Angeli JPF, Vandenabeele P, et al: Regulated necrosis:
 disease relevance and therapeutic opportunities, Nat Reo Drug
protein hoimeostasis. Calorie restriction also serves to
Discoo, 15:348, 2016. A reviezw of neoly discovered pathzoays of cell death
improve imnunity. All of these inhibit aging.
and possible therapeutic interventions.
Persistent inflammation. As individuals age, the accumu-
Dong Z, Saikumar P, Weinberg JM, et al: Calcium in cell injury and
lation of daimaged cells, lipids, and other endogenous
death, Ann Reo Pathol 1:405, 2006. {A review of the links betzween
substances may activate the inflammasome pathway
calcium and celt injury.!
(Chapter 5), resulting in persistent low-level inflaimna-
 Frey N, Olson EN: Cardiac hypertrophy: the good, the bad, and the
tion. Inflaimmation in turn induces chronic diseases,
ugly,Annu Reo Physiot 65:45,2003.Excellent discussion of the mecha-
such as atherosclerosis and type 2 diabetes. Cytokines
nisms of musele hypertrophy, using the heart as the paradigm.
produced during inflammatory reactions may thein-
Hotchkiss RS, Strasser A, McDunn JE, et al: Cell death, N Ergl J Med 
 selves induce cellular alterations that exacerbate aging,
(necrosis,apoptosisandatophagyassociateddeath)and theirclinical
and chronic metabolic disorders may accelerate the
implications and therapeufic targeting.!
aging process.
Kenyon CJ: The genetics of ageing, Nature 464:504, 2010. JAn excellenf
 Clinical observations and epidemiologic studies have
dromes and studies with mutant model organisms.
shown that physical activity and, as mentioned previously,
 Lambeth JD, Neish AS: Nox enzymes and new thinking on reactive
calorie restriction slow the aging process, whereas stresses,
Oxygen: a double-edged sword revisited, Ann Reo Pathol Mech Dis
perhaps acting via increased production of glucocorticoids,
9:47, 2014. fA discussion of reactioe oxygen speries and their roles in
accelerate aging. Alas, the precise mechanisims underlying
physiology and cell injury.!
Lopez-Otin C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, et al: The hallmarks of aging.
these effects remain to be defined, and for now we all
Cell 153:1194,2013.A tandmark review that suggests nine hatmarks of
reimain vulnerable to the ravages of age.
aging and directions for future research.!
Marquez FC, Volovik Y, Cohen E: The roles of cellular and organismal
SUMMARY
aging in the development of late-onset maladies, Ann Reo Pathol
MechDis10:1,015.Areewf themanyways bywhichceutaraging
CELLULAR AGING
contributes to the development ofchronic diseases.
· Results from a combination of multiple, progressive cellular
McKinnell IW, Rudnicki MA: Molecular mechanisms of muscle
 alterations, including:
atrophy, Cell 119:907, 2004. {Discussion of the mechanisms of celtular
atrophy.!
· Accumulation of DNA damage and mutations
Nathan C, Cunningham-Bussel A: Beyond oxidative stress: an
· Replicative senescence: reduced capacity of cells to divide
immunologist's guide to reactive oxygen species, Nat Reo fmmunol
 secondary to progressive shortening of chromosomal ends 
13:349, 2013. An excellent modern review of the production, catabolism,
(telomeres)
targets, and actions of reactive oxygen spercies, and their roles in
+ Defective protein homeostasis: loss of normal proteins and
inflammation.!
accumulation of misfolded proteins
 Newgard CB, Sharpless NE: Coming of age: molecular drivers of
· Aging is exacerbated by chronic diseases, especially those asso-
aging and therapeutic opportunities, ↓ Clin Inoest 3:946, 2013. {A
ciated with prolonged inflammation, and by stress, and is
summary ofkey motecular pathuays in aging.!
 slowed down by calorie restriction and exercise.
Oakes SA, Papa FR: The role of endoplasmic reticulum stress in
human pathology, An Reo Pathot Mech Dis 10:173, 2015. fAn up-fo-
date reviewoftheunfolded protein response and the pathogenicimportance
 It should be apparent that the various forms of cellular
of cell injury caused by misfolded proteins.!
Tosh D, Slack JM: How cells change their phenotype, Nat Rev Mot Cel!
derangements and adaptations described in this chapter
 cover a wide spectrum, ranging froim reversible and irre-
Biot 3:187, 2002. {Review of metaplasia and the roles of stem cells and
genetic reprogramming.!
versible forms of acute cell injury, to adaptations in cell
Vanden Berghe T, Linkermann A, Jouan-Lanhouet S, et al: Regulated
size, growth, and function, to largely unavoidable conse-
necrosis: the expanding network of non-apoptotic cell death path-
quences of aging. Reference is made to these many differ-
ways, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15:135, 2014. IA current review of various
ent alterations throughout this book, because all instances
forms ofprogrammed non-apoptotic pathways of cell death.!
http://ebooksmedicine.net
ee Targeted Therapy available online at studentconsult.com
CHAPTER
Inflammation and Repai
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Overview of Inflammation: Definitions
Termination of the Acute Inflammatory
 Chronic Inflammation 81
and General Features 57
Response 70
Couses of Chronic Inflammation 81
Causes of Inflammation 59
Mediators of Inflammation 70
Morphologic Features 81
 Recognition of Microbes and Damaged
Vasogctive Amines: Histamine and Serotonin 71
Cells and Mediators of Chronic
Cells 59
Arachidonic Acid Metobolites 71
Inflammation 82
Acute Inflammation 60
Cytokines and Chemokines 73
Systemic Effects of Inflammation 86
Reactions of Blood Vessels in Acute
Compiement System 75
Tissue Repair 87
Inflammation 60
Other Mediators of Inflammation 77
Overview of Tissue Repair 87
Leukocyte Recruitment to Sites of
Morphologic Patterns of Acute
Cell and Tissue Regeneration 88
Inflammotion 6z
Inflammation 78
Repair by Scaming 89
Phagocytosis and Ciearance of the Offending
Serous Inflammation 78
Factors That impair Tissue Repair 93
Agent 66
Fibninous Inflammation 78
 Clinical Exampies of Abnommar Wound Healing
Leukocyte-Mediated Tissue Injury 69
 Puruient (Suppurative) infilammation, Abscess 78
E6uS pUD
Other Functionai Responses of Activated
Uicers 79
Leukocytes 70
Outcomes of Acute Inflammation 79
OVERVIEW OF INFLAMMATION:
 heal, and injured tissues might remain permanent fester-
DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL
ing sores.
The typical inflamimatory reaction develops through a
FEATURES
series of sequential steps:
The offending agent, which is located in extravascular
Inflammation is a response of vascularized tissues to
tissues, is recognized by host cells and molecules.
 infections and tissue damage that brings cells and mol-
 Leukocytes and plasma proteins are recruited from the
ecules of host defense from the circulation to the sites
circulation to the site where the offending agent is
where they are needed, to eliminate the offending agents.
located.
Although in coimnon imedical and lay parlance, inflaimna-
 The leukocytes and proteins are activated and work
tion suggests a harmful reaction, it is actually a protective
together to destroy and eliminate the offending
response that is essential for survival. It serves to rid the
substance.
host of both the initial cause of cell injury (e.g., microbes,
 The reaction is controlled and terminated.
toxins) and the consequences of such injury (e.g., necrotic
 The damaged tissue is repaired.
cells and tissues). The inediators of defense include phago-
cytic leukocytes, antibodies, and complenent proteins (Fig.
Inflammation may be of two types, acute and chronic
3.1). Most of these norimally circulate in the blood, where
(Table 3.1). The initial, rapid response to infections and
they are sequestered so they cannot dainage norimal tissues
tissue daimage is called acute inflammation. It typically
but can be rapidly recruited to any site in the body. Some of
develops within minutes or hours and is of short duration,
the cells involved in inflaimmatory responses also reside in
lasting for several hours or a few days. Its main character-
tissues, where they function as sentinels on the lookout for
istics are the exudation of fluid and plasma proteins
threats. The process of inflammation delivers leukocytes
(edema) and the emigration of leukocytes, predominantly
and proteins to foreign invaders, such as microbes, and to
neutrophils (also called polymorphonuclear leukocytes).
daimaged or necrotic tissues, and it activates the recruited
When acute inflaimmation achieves its desired goal of elim-
cells and molecules, which then function to eliminate the
inating the offenders, the reaction subsides and residual
harmful or unwanted substances. Without inflammation,
 injury is repaired. But if the initial response fails to clear
infections would go unchecked, wounds would never
the stimulus, the reaction progresses to a protracted type
57
http://ebooksmedicine.net
58
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
STIMULUS
Microbes
Necrotic tissue
injured, the presence of the infection or damage is sensed
by resident cells, including macrophages, dendritic cells,
mast cells, and other cell types. These cells secrete mol-
ecules (cytokines and other mediators) that induce and
regulate the subsequent inflammatory response. Inflaim-
Recognition by
suord sed uon panord ose are sroeau o
macrophages,
that react to the microbes or to products of necrotic cells.
JCTI
other sentinel
Some of these mediators promote the efflux of plasima
MEDI
cells in tissues
Macrophage
and the recruitinent of circulating leukocytes to fhe site
Dendritic cell
Mast cell
where the offending agent is located. Mediators also acti-
 Mediators (amines, cytokines)
vate the recruited leukocytes, enhancing their ability to
destroy and remove the offending agent. Understanding
Recruitment
the role of chemical mediators is important because most
of leukocytes
anti-inflammatory drugs target specific mediators. We
shall discuss the mediators of inflamnation in detail later,
JKOCYTES,
 after we review the main steps in inflamnatory reactions.
OTEINS
Vasodilation,
The external manifestations of inflammation, often
Neutrophil
Monocyte
increased
called its cardinal signs, are heat (calor in Latin), redness
vascular
(rubor), swelling (tumor), pain (dolor), and loss of func-
 permeability
tion (functio laesa). The first four of these were described
OFI
more than 2000 years ago by a Roman encyclopedist naimed
Celsus, who wrote the then-faimous text De Medicina, and
the fifth was added in the late 19th century by Rudolf
Elimination
onoed uapour jo aey, a se umou 'moui
Edema
Macrophage
of microbes,
These manifestations occur as consequences of the vascular
 dead tissue 
changes and leukocyte recruitiment and activation, as will
Cytokines,
be evident from the discussion that follows.
growth factors
Although normally protective, in some situations, the
 inflammatory reaction becomes the cause of disease,
Fibroblasts
and the damage it produces is its dominant feature. For
example, inflaimnatory reactions to infections are often
?
 accompanied by local tissue damage and its associated signs
Extracellular matrix proteins and cells
and symptoms (e.g., pain and functional impairiment), Typi-
cally, however, these harmful consequences are self-limited
Repair
and resolve as the inflaimmation abates, leaving little or no
 perimanent damage. In contrast, there are imany diseases in
Fig. 3.l Sequence of events in an inflammatory reaction. Macrophages
which the inflamnatory reaction is imisdirected (e.g, against
and other cells in tissues recognize microbes and damaged cells and
iberate mediators, which trigger the vascular and cellular reactions of inflam-
self tissues in autoimimune diseases), occurs against norimally
mation. Recruitment of plasma proteins from the blood is not shown.
harmless environmental substances that evoke an immune
response (e.g., in allergies), or is excessively prolonged (e.g-
 in infections by microbes that resist eradicationj.
of inflammation that is called chroric inflammation. As dis-
 Inflammatory reactions underlie comnon chronic dis-
 cussed later in this chapter, chronic inflainimation may
eases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, atherosclerosis, and
follow acute inflammation or arise de novo. It is of longer
lung fibrosis, as well as life-threatening hypersensitivity
 duration and is associated with more tissue destruction,
1o (z'c ae) suxon pue shnp 'sna iasi oi suooea
the presence of lymphocytes and macrophages, the prolif-
this reason our pharimacies abound with anti-inflaimnatory
eration of blood vessels, and fibrosis.
drugs, which ideally would control the harimful sequelae
 Inflammation is induced by chemical mediators that
 of inflamunation yet not interfere with its beneficial effects.
are produced by host cells in response to injurious
In fact, inflaimnation may contribute to a variety of dis-
stimuli. When a microbe enters a tissue or the tissue is
eases that are thought to be primarily metabolic, degenera-
tive, or genetic disorders, such as type 2 diabetes, Alzheimer
Table 3.l Features of Acute and Chronic Inflammation
 disease, and cancer Hence, anti-inflammatory drugs may
Feature
Acute
well have a broader role than currently indicated. In rec-
Chronic
ognition of the wide-ranging harimful consequences of
Onset
Fast: minutes or
 Slow: days
inflamnation, the lay press has rather melodramatically
hours
referred to it as "the silent killer."
Cellular infltrate
Mainly neutrophils
 Monocytes/macrophages
 Not only excessive inflaimmation but also defective
and lymphocytes
inflammation is responsible for serious illness. Too little
Tissue injury,
Usually mild and
May be severe and
inflamnation, which is typically manifested by increased
fibrosis
self-limited 
progressive
susceptibility to infections, is most often caused by a
Local and systemic
 Prominent
Less
reduced number of leukocytes resulting from replacement
signs
of the bone marrow by cancers and suppression of the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
 Recognition of Microbes and Damaged Cells
59
Table 3.2 Disorders Caused by Inflammatory Reactions
morphologic pattern of the response can be useful in
Cells and Molecules Involved in
ades s ut laet assnss se onona sh suua
 Disorders
Injury
 Tissue necrosis elicits inflammation regardless of the
cause of cell death, which may include ischemia (reduced
Acute
blood flow, the cause of myocardial infarction), trauma,
Acute respiratory
Neutrophils
and physical and chemical injury (e.g-, therimal injury, as
distress syndrome
in burns or frostbite; irradiation; exposure to some envi-
Asthma
 Eosinophils; IgE antibodies 
ronmental chemicals). Several molecules released from
 Glomerulonephritis
 Antibodies and complement; neutrophils,
necrotic cells are known to trigger inflaimimation; soime
monocytes
of these are described later.
Septic shock
Cytokines
 Foreign bodies (splinters, dirt, sutures) may elicit
 Chronic
inflaimmation by theimselves or because they cause
Arthritis
Lymphocytes, macrophages; antibodies?
traumatic tissue injury or carry microbes. Even soime
Asthma
 Eosinophils; IgE antibodies 
endogenous substances stimulate potentially harmful
inflammation if large amounts are deposited in tissues;
Atherosclerosis
 Macrophages; ymphocytes
such substances include urate crystals (in the disease
Pulmonary fibrosis
 Macrophages; fibroblasts
gout), and cholesterol crystals (in atherosclerosis).
Listed are selected examples of diseases in which the inflammatory response plays a
 Immune reactions (also called rypersensitivity) are reac-
significant role in tissue injury. Some, such as asthma, can present with acute
inflammation or a chronic illness with repeated bouts of acute exacerbation. These
tions in which the normally protective immune system
dseases and their pathogenesis are discussed in relevant chapcers.
 damages the individual's own tissues. The injurious
imnune responses may be directed against self anti-
gens, causing autoimmune diseases, or may be inappro-
marrow by therapies for cancer and graft rejection. Recall
priate reactions against environimental substances, as in
that leukocytes, the cells of the inflaimunatory response,
allergies, or against microbes. Inflamnation is a major
arise from progenitors in the bone marrow, hence any coim-
cause of tissue injury in these diseases (Chapter 5).
proimise of imarrow function will diminish the generation
Because the stimuli for the inflammatory responses in
of mature leukocytes. Inherited genetic abnorimalities of
autoimnune and allergic diseases (self and environ-
leukocyte function are rare disorders but they provide
mental antigens) cannot be eliminated, these reactions
valuable information about the mechanisims of leukocyte
tend to be persistent and difficult to cure, are often asso-
responses. These conditions are described in Chapter 5, in
ciated with chronic inflamimation, and are important
the context of imnunodeficiency diseases.
causes of morbidity and mortality.
 Inflammation is terminated when the offending agent
 is eliminated. The reaction resolves because mediators are
RECOGNITION OF MICROBES AND
broken down and dissipated, and leukocytes have short
life spans in tissues. In addition, anti-inflammatory mecha-
DAMAGED CELLS
nisims are activated, serving to control the response and
prevent it froim causing excessive damage to the host. After
The first step in inflammatory responses is the recogni-
inflamnation has achieved its goal of eliminating the
tion of microbes and necrotic cells by cellular receptors
offending agents, it sets into motion the process of tissue
and circulating proteins. The cells and receptors that rec-
rpair. Repair consists of a series of events thatheal daimaged
ognize invaders evolved as adaptations of multicellular
tissue. In this process, the injured tissue is replaced through
 organisims to the presence of microbes in the environument,
rgeneration of surviving cells and filling of residual defects
and the responses they trigger are critical for survival.
with connective tissue (scarring).
Cellular receptors for microbes. Phagocytes, dendritic cells
This chapter describes the etiology of and stimuli for
(cells in epithelia and all tissues whose function is to
inflamnation, and then the sequence of events, inediators,
capture microbes), and many other cells express recep-
and morphologic patterns of acute inflaimmation. This is
tors that detect the presence of infectious pathogens.
followed by a discussion of chronic inflammation, and then
The best defined of these receptors belong to the faimily
 the process of tissue repair.
of Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are naimed for the
founding meimber, Toll, a gene that was discovered in
Drosophila (Chapter 5). TLRs are located in plasima
CAUSES OF INFLAMMATION
meimbranes and endosoimes, so they are able to detect
extracellular and ingested microbes. Other imicrobial
 Jo Aaea e Aq panasgn aq Aeu suonoa1 Kioeunreu
sensors are present in the cytoplasim of cells. TLRs rec-
stimuli:
 ognize motifs coimnon to many microbes, often called
· Infections (bacterial, viral, fungal, parasitic) and micro-
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Rec-
bial toxins are among the most coimunon and medically
 ognition of imicrobes by these receptors stimulates the
important causes of inflamunation. Different infectious
 production and expression of a numnber of secreted and
pathogens elicit distinct inflammatory responses, from
meimbrane proteins. These proteins include cytokines
imild acute inflammation that causes litle or no lasting
that induce inflaimnation, anti-viral cytokines (interfer-
damage and successfully eradicates the infection, to
ons), and cytokines and meimbrane proteins that
severe systeimic reactions that can be fatal, to prolonged
d a a p sao ard ao
chronic reactions that cause extensive tissue injury. The
imnune responses. We will return to TLRs in more
http://ebooksmedicine.net
60
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
detail in Chapter 5, when we discuss innate imnunity,
the early defense against infections.
ACUTE INFLAMMATION
 Sensors of cell damage. All cells have cytosolic receptors 
 that recognize molecules that are liberated or altered as
Acute inflammation has three major components: (1) dila-
 a consequence of cell damage, and are hence appropri-
tion of small vessels, leading to an increase in blood flow,
ately called damage-associated molecular patterns
(2)  increased  permeability  of  the  microvasculature,
(DAMPs). These molecules include uric acid (a product
enabling plasma proteins and leukocytes to leave the
of DNA breakdown), ATP (released from damaged
circulation, and (3) emigration of the leukocytes from the
mitochondria), reduced intracellular Kt concentrations
microcirculation, their accumulation in the focus of
(reflecting loss of ions because of plasima meimbrane
injury, and their activation to eliminate the offending
injury), DNA (when it is released into the cytoplasim and
agent (Fig. 3.1). When an injurious agent, such as an infec-
not sequestered in nuclei, as it should be normally), and
tious microbe or dead cells, is encountered, phagocytes
many others. The receptors activate a multiprotein cyto-
that reside in all tissues try to eliminate these agents. At
solic complex called the inflammasome, which induces
the saime time, phagocytes and other sentinel cells in the
the production of the cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1). IL-1
tissues recognize the presence of the foreign or abnorimal
recruits leukocytes and thus induces inflammation (dis-
substance and react by liberating soluble molecules that
cussed later). Gain-of-function mutations in the cyto-
mediate inflaimnation. Some of these mediators act on
solic receptors are the cause of rare diseases known as
simall blood vessels in the vicinity and promote the efflux
qutoinflammatory syndromes that are characterized by
of plasima and the recruitiment of circulating leukocytes to
 spontaneous inflaimmation; IL-1 antagonists are effec-
 the site where the offending agent is located.
tive treatinents for these disorders. The inflaimmasoime
also has been implicated in inflaimnatory reactions to
 Reactions of Blood Vessels in Acute Inflammation
urate crystals (the cause of gout), cholesterol crystals (in
atherosclerosis), lipids (in metabolic syndrome and obe-
The vascular reactions of acute inflammation consist
sity-associated diabetes), and amyloid deposits in the
 of changes in the flow of blood and the permeability
brain (in Alzheimer disease). These disorders are dis-
 of vessels, both designed to maximize the movement of
cussed in relevant chapters.
plasma proteins and leukocytes out of the circulation and
 Circulating proteins. Several plasma proteins recognize
into the site of infection or injury. The escape of fluid,
microbes and function to destroy blood-borne microbes
 proteins, and blood cells from the vascular systen into
and to stimulate inflammation at tissue sites of infection.
interstitial tissues or body cavities is known as exudation
The complement system reacts against microbes and pro-
(Fig. 3.2). An exudate is an extravascular fluid that has a
duces mediators of inflaimmation (discussed later). A
high protein concentration and contains cellular debris. Its
circulating protein called mannose-binding lectin recog-
 presence implies that there is an increase in the perimeabil-
of
ity of small blood vessels, typically during an inflamma-
microbes and activation of the complement system.
tory reaction. In contrast, a trarsudate is a fluid with low
Other proteins called collectirs also bind to microbes and
protein content, little or no cellular material, and low spe-
 promote their phagocytosis.
cific gravity. It is essentially an ultrafiltrate of blood plasima
that is produced as a result of osimotic or hydrostatic imbal-
ance across vessels with norimal vascular perimeability
SUMMARY
(Chapter 4). Edema denotes an excess of fluid in the inter-
GENERAL FEATURES AND CAUSES
stitial tissue or serous cavities; it can be either an exudate
OF INFLAMMATION
or a transudate. Pus, a purulert exudate, is an inflammatory
+ Inflammation is a beneficial host response to foreign invaders 
exudate rich in leukocytes (mostly neutrophils), the debris
and necrotic tissue, but also may cause tissue damage.
of dead cells, and, in many cases, microbes.
+ The main components of inflammation are a vascular reaction 
Changes in Vascular Flow and Caliber
and a cellular response; both are activated by mediators that
Changes in vascular flow and caliber begin early after
are derived from plasma proteins and various cells.
injury and consist of the following:
+ The steps of the inflammatory response can be remembered
· Vasodilation is induced by the action of several media-
as the five Rs: (l) recognition of the injurious agent, (2) recruit-
tors, notably histaimine, on vascular simooth muscle. It is
ment of leukocytes, (3) removal of the agent, (4) regulation
one of the earliest manifestations of acute inflammation,
(control) of the response, and (5) resolution (repair).
+ The causes of inflammation include infections, tissue necrosis,
Vasodilation first involves the arterioles and then leads
foreign bodies, trauma, and immune responses.
 to the opening of new capillary beds in the area. The
+ Epithelial cells, tissue macrophages and dendritic cells, leuko.
result is increased blood flow, which is the cause ofheat and
cytes, and other cell types express receptors that sense the
redness (erythema) at the site of inflamumation.
presence of microbes and necrotic cells. Circulating proteins
Vasodilation is quickly followed by increased permea-
recognize microbes that have entered the blood.
bility of the microvasculature, with the outpouring of
· The outcome of acute inflammation is either elimination of
 protein-rich fluid (an exudate) into the extravascular
 the noxious stimulus followed by decline of the reaction and 
tissues.
repair of the damaged tissue, or persistent injury resulting in 
 chronic inflammation.
 The loss of fluid and increased vessel diameter lead to
slower blood flow, concentration of red cells in simall
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acute Inflammation
61
Hydrostatic pressure
Colloid osmotic pressure
A. NORMAL
Plasma proteins
No net fluid or protein leakage
sed interendothelialspaces
B.EXUDATE
(high protein content, and 
Vasodilation and stasis
may contain some white
nf
and red cells)
Fluid and protein leakage
C. TRANSUDATE
(low protein content, few cells)
Increased hydrostatic pressure
Decreased colloid osmotic pressure
 (venous outflow obstruction,
(decreased protein synthesis [e.g., liver disease];
[e.g., congestive heart failure])
increased protein loss [e.g., kidney disease]: 
 protein malnutrition [e.g., kwashiokor])
Fluid leakage
Pe paq Aede e jo pua lne aya ne sh ww ze anoge s! (muo aa) nssaid sensopy ieon () sanepnsue pue saienxa jo uoeo Z'e a
I2 mm Hg at the venous end; the mean colloid osmotic pressure of tissues is approximately 25 mm Hg (green orrow), which is equal to the mean capillary
pressure.Therefore,the net flow of fluid across the vascular bed is almost nil.(B) An exudate is formed in inflammation because vascular permeability increases
of increased hydrostatic pressure or decreased osmotic pressure.
vessels, and increased viscosity of the blood. These
A NORMAL
Vessel fumen
changes result in stasis of blood flow, engorgement of
Leukocytes-
simall vessels jammed with slowly moving red cells,
seen histologically as vascular corngestior and externally
Plasma proteins
as localized redness (erythema) of the involved tissue.
Endothelium
 As stasis develops, blood leukocytes, principally neutro-
phils, accumulate along the vascular endothelium. At the
same time endothelial cells are activated by mediators
Tissues
produced at sites of infection and tissue damage, and
express increased levels of adhesion molecules. Leuko-
B RETRACTION OF
cytes then adhere to the endothelium, and soon after-
ENDOTHELIAL
ward they migrate through the vascular wall into the
CELLS
interstitial tissue, in a sequence that is described later.
● Induced by histamine,
Increased Vascular Permeability (Vascular Leakage)
 other mediators 
·Rapid and short-lived
Several mechanisims are responsible for increased vascular
(minutes)
 permeability in acuteinflamination (Fig. 3.3), which include:
·Re traction of endothelial cells resulting in opening of inter-
endothelial spaces is the most common mechanisim of
vascular leakage. It is elicited by histamine, bradykinin,
C ENDOTHELIAL INJURY
leukotrienes, and other cheimical mediators. It occurs
rapidly after exposure to the mediator (within 15 to 30
·Caused by burns, some
minutes) and is usually short-lived; hence, it is referred
microbial toxins
· Rapid; may be long-lived
to as the immediate transient response, to distinguish it
(hours to days)
from the delayed prolonged response that follows endo-
thelial injury, described next. The main sites for this
venules.
 Entdothelial injury, resulting in endothelial cell necrosis
Fig. 3.3 Principal mechanisms of increased vascular permeability in inflarm-
and detachiment. Direct damage to the endothelium is
 mation and their features and underlying causes.
encountered in severe injuries, for exaimple, in burns, or
is induced by the actions of microbes and microbial
http://ebooksmedicine.net
62
CH A PT E R 3Inflammation and Repair
toxins that target endothelial cells. Neutrophils that
· Increased vascular permeability allows plasma proteins and
adhere to the endothelium during inflammation may
leukocytes, the mediators of host defense, to enter sites of
also injure the endothelial cells and thus amplify the
infection or tissue damage. Fluid leak from blood vessels (exu-
reaction. In most instances leakage starts immediately
 dation) results in edema.
after injury and is sustained for several hours until the
+ Lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes also are involved in inflam-
 damaged vessels are thrombosed or repaired.
mation, and often show redness and swelling.
· Increased transport of fluids and proteins, called trars-
cytosis, through the endothelial cell. This process, docu-
Imented in experimental models, may involve intracellular
agents. The most important leukocytes in typical inflamma-
channels that open in response to certain factors, such as
tory reactions are the ones capable of phagocytosis, naimely,
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), that promote
neutrophils and macrophages. Neutrophils are produced in
vascular leakage. Its contribution to the vascular perime-
the bone marrow and rapidly recruited to sites of inflamma-
ability seen in acute inflammation in humans is unclear.
tion. Macrophages are slower responders. The principal
 functions of these cell types differ in subtle but important
Although these mechanisims of increased vascular per-
ways— neutrophils use cytoskeletal rearrangeiments and
meability are described separately, all probably contribute
enzyime asseimbly to mount rapid, transient responses,
in varying degreesin responses to moststimuli. For example,
whereas macrophages, being long-lived, make slower but
at different stages of a therimal burn, leakage results from
endothelial retraction caused by inflaimmatory mediators
scription (Table 3.3). Macrophages are discussed in more
 and direct and leukocyte-dependent endothelial injury.
detail later, in the context of chronic inflaimumation. These
leukocytes ingest and destroy bacteria and other microbes,
Responses of Lymphatic Vessels and Lymph Nodes
as well as necrotic tissue and foreign substances. Macro-
In addition to blood vessels, lymphatic vessels also partici-
phages also produce growth factors that aid in repair. A
pate in acute inflammation. The system of lymphatics and
 price that is paid for the defensive potency of leukocytes is
lymph nodes filters and polices the extravascular fluids.
that, when strongly activated, they may induce tissue
Lymphatics drain the simall amount of extravascular fluid
damage and prolong inflammation, because the leukocyte
that seeps out of capillaries under norimal circumstances.
products that destroy microbes and help "clean up" necrotic
In inflammation, lymph flow is increased to help drain
tissues can also produce "collateral damage" of norimal host
edeima fluid that accumulates because of increased vascu-
tissues. When there is systeinic activation of inflamunation,
lar permeability. In addition to fluid, leukocytes and cell
 as may occur when there is invasion of the bloodstreaim by
debris, as well as microbes, may find their way into lymph.
bacteria, the resulting systemic inflammatory response may
Lymphatic vessels, like blood vessels, proliferate during
even be lethal.
inflaimmatory reactions to handle the increased load. The
 The journey of leukocytes from the vessel lumen to
lyimphatics imay become secondarily inflamed (lymphangi-
the tissue is a multistep process that is mediated and
tis), as may the draining lymph nodes (lymphadenitis).
controlled by adhesion molecules and cytokines. Leuko-
Inflaimed lyimph nodes are often enlarged because of
cytes norimally flow rapidly in the blood, and in inflamna-
increased cellularity. This constellation of pathologic
tion, they have to be stopped and then brought to the
changes is termed ractive, or inflammatory, lymphadenitis
offending agent or the site of tissue daimage, outside the
(Chapter 12). For clinicians the presence of red streaks near
vessels. This process can be divided into phases, consisting
a skin wound is a telltale sign of an infection in the wound.
first of adhesion of leukocytes to endothelium at the site of
This streaking follows the course of the lymphatic channels
inflaimmation, then transmigration of the leukocytes
and indicates the presence of lymphangitis; it may be
through the vessel wall, and moveiment of the cells toward
accoimpanied by painful enlargement of the draining
the offending agent. Different molecules play important
lymph nodes, indicating lymphadenitis.
roles in each of these steps (Fig. 3.4).
Leukocyte Recruitment to Sites of Inflammation
Leukocyte Adhesion to Endothelium
When blood flows froim capillaries into postcapillary
Leukocytes that are recruited to sites of inflammation
venules, circulating cells are swept by laminar flow against
perform the key function of eliminating the offending
the vessel wall. Red cells, being simaller, tend to imove
faster than the larger white cells. As a result, red cells are
confined to the central axial column, and leukocytes are
SUMMARY
pushed out toward the wall of the vessel, but the flow
VaSCuLAR REACTIONS IN
prevents the cells from attaching to the endotheliun. As
ACUTE INFLAMMATION
the blood flow slows early in inflamnation (stasis), hemo-
dynaimic conditions change (wall shear stress decreases),
se yns shoeiau Aoeweu Aa pasnpu s! uoelosea 
and more white cells assume a peripheral position
histamine (described later), and is the cause of erythema and
along the endothelial surface. This process of leukocyte
stasis of blood flow.
redistribution is called margination. By moving close to the
+ Increased vascular permeability is induced by histamine, kinins,
and other mediators that produce gaps between endothelial
vessel wall, leukocytes are able to detect and react to
changes in the endothelium. If the endothelial cells are
cells, by direct or leukocyte-induced endothelial injury, and by
activated by cytokines and other mediators produced
increased passage of fluids through the endothelium.
locally, they express adhesion molecules to which the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acute Inflammation
63
Table 3.3 Properties of Neutrophils and Macrophages
Neutrophils
Macrophages
Origin
HSCs in bone marrow
· HSCs in bone marrow (in inflammatory reactions)
· Many tissue-resident macrophages: stem cells in yolk
 sac or fetal liver (early in development)
Life span in tissues
1-2 days
Inflarmmatory macrophages: days or weeks
Tissue-resident macrophages: years
 Responses to activating stirmuli
Rapid, short-lived, mostly degranulation 
 More prolonged, slower, often dependent on new gene
and enzymatic activity
transcription
· Reactive oxygen species
ahoeyd yo Aqwasse kg paonpu Aapided 
 Less prominent 
oxidase (respiratory burst)
· Nitric oxide
Low levels or none
Induced following transcriptional activation of iNOS
· Degranulation
 Major response; induced by cytoskeletal
Not prominent
rearrangement
· Cytokine production
Low levels or none
 Major functional activity, requires transcriptional
 activation of cytokine genes
· NET formation
 Rapidy induced, by extrusion of nuclear
No
contents
· Secretion of lysosomal enzymes
 Prominent 
Less
HSC, Hematopoietic stem cells iNOS, indueible nitric oxi de synthase; NET, neutrophil extracelular traps.
This table lists the major differences berween neutrophils and macrophages. The reaions summarized above are described in the text. Note that the cwo cell cypes share many
features, such as phagocycosis, ability to migrate through blood vessels into tissues, and chemocaxis.
leukocytes attach loosely. These cells bind and detach and
necrosis factor (TNF), cytokines that are produced by
thus begin to tumble on the endothelial surface, a process
tissue macrophages, dendritic cells, mast cells, and
called rolling. The cells finally come to rest at some point
endothelial cells themselves following encounters with
where they athere firmly (reseimbling pebbles over which
microbes and dead tissues. (These and other cytokines
a streain runs without disturbing themj.
 are described in more detail later.) Leukocytes express
The attachiment of leukocytes to endothelial cells is
L-selectin at the tips of their microvilli and also express
mediated by complementary adhesion molecules on the
ligands for E- and P-selectins, all of which bind to the
two cell types whose expression is enhanced by cytokines.
complementary molecules on the endothelial cells. These
Cytokines are secreted by cells in tissues in response to
are low-affinity interactions with a fast off rate, and they
Imicrobes and other injurious agents, thus ensuring that
are easily disrupted by the flowing blood. As a result,
leukocytes are recruited to the tissues where these stimuli
the bound leukocytes bind, detach, and bind again,
 are present. The two imajor faimilies of molecules involved
and thus begin to roll along the endothelial surface.
in leukocyte adhesion and migration are the selectins and
These weak selectin-imediated rolling interactions slow
integrins (Table 3.4). These molecules are expressed on
down the leukocytes and give theim the opportunity
leukocytes and endothelial cells, as are their ligands.
to recognize additional adhesion molecules on the
+
 Selectins mediate the initial weak interactions between
endotheliun.
 leukocytes and endothelium. Selectins are receptors
 Firm adhesion of leukocytes to endothelium is medi-
expressed on leukocytes and endothelium that contain
ated by a family of leukocyte surface proteins called
an extracellular domain that binds sugars (hence the
integrins. Integrins are transimeimbrane two-chain gly-
lectin part of the naime). The three members of this
coproteins that mediate the adhesion of leukocytes to
faimily are E-selectin (also called CD62E), expressed on
endothelium and of various cells to the extracellular
endothelial cells; P-selectin (CD62P), present on plate-
matrix. They are norimally expressed on leukocyte
lets and endothelium; and L-selectin (CD62L), found
plasima meinbranes in a low-affinity form and do not
on the surface of most leukocytes. The ligands for selec-
adhere to their specific ligands until the leukocytes are
tins are sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides bound to
activated by chemokines. Cheimokines are chemoattrac-
glycoprotein backbones. The endothelial selectins are
tant cytokines that are secreted by many cells at sites of
typically expressed at low levels or not at all on unac-
 inflaimnation, bind to endothelial cell proteoglycans,
tivated endothelium, and are upregulated after stim-
and are displayed at high concentrations on the endo-
ulation by cytokines and other mediators. Therefore,
thelial surface. When the rolling leukocytes encounter
binding of leukocytes is largely restricted to the endo-
the displayed cheimokines, the cells are activated, and
theliun at sites of infection or tissue injury (where the
their integrins undergo conforimational changes and
mediators are produced). For example, in unactivated
cluster together, thus converting to a high-affinity form.
endothelial cells, P-selectin is found prinarily in intra-
At the same time, other cytokines, notably TNF and
cellular Weibel-Palade bodies; however, within minutes
IL-1, activate endothelial cells to increase their expres-
of exposure to mediators such as histamine or thrombin,
sion of ligands for integrins. These ligands include inter-
P-selectin is distributed to the cell surface. Siimilarly,
cellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), which binds to
 E-selectin and the ligand for L-selectin are expressed on
the integrins leukocyte function-associated antigen-1
endothelium only after stimulation by IL-1 and tuumor
(LFA-1) (also called CD1laCD18) and macrophage-1
http://ebooksmedicine.net
64
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
ROLLING
 INTEGRIN ACTIVATION
 BY CHEMOKINES 
 Sialyl-Lewis X-modified glycoprotein
Leukocyte
 STABLE
ADHESION
 Integrin (low-affinity state)
MIGRATION
THROUGH
ENDOTHELIUM
Integrin (high-affinity state)
P-selectin
E-selectin
Proteoglycan
PECAM-1
7 (CD31)
Integrin ligand
{ICAM-1)
Cytokines
{TNF, IL-1)
Chemokines
Macrophage
 Fibrin and fibronectin
Microbes
with microbes
(extracellular matrix)
Fig. 3.4 The multistep process of leukocyte migration through blood vessels, shown here for neutrophils. The leukocytes first roll then become activated
and adhere to endothelium,then transmigrate across the endothelium, pierce the basement membrane, and move toward chemoattractants emanating from 
the source of injury. Different molecules play predominant roles at each step of this process: selectins in rolling; chemokines (usually displayed bound to
proteoglycans) in activating the neutrophils to increase avidity of integrins; integrins in frm adhesion; and CD3I (PECAM-1) in transmigration. ICAM-I, Inter-
cellular adhesion molecule-I; PECAM-I (CD3 I), platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-I; TNf, tumor necrosis factor.
Table 3.4 Endothelial and Leukocyte Adhesion Molecules
Family
Molecule
Distribution
Ligand
Selectin
L-selectin (CD62L)
 Neutrophils, monocytes 
 Sialyl-Lewis X/PNAd on GlyCAM-1, CD34, MAdCAM-I, others; 
T cells (naive and central mermory)
expressed on endothelium (HEV)
B cells (naive)
E-selectin (CD62E)
Endothelium activated by cytokines (TNF,
 Sialyl-Lewis X (eg., CLA) on gycoproteins; expressed on
IL-1}
neutrophils, monocytes, T cells (effector, memory)
P-selectin (CD62P)
H) sauyo ag paee wnayos
Sialyl-Lewis X on PSGL-l and other gycoproteins; expressed on 
IL-1), histamine, or thrormbin; platelets 
neutrophils, monocytes, T cels (effector, mermory)
Integrin
LFA-I (CDIlaCD18)
 Neutrophils, monocytes, T cells (naive,
ICAM-I (CD54), ICAM-2 (CDI02); expressed on endothelium 
effector, memory)
(upregulated on activated endothelium)
MAC-I (CDIIbCD18)
 Monocytes, DCs
ICAM-1 (CD54), ICAM-2 (CDI02); expressed on endothelium
 (upregulated on activated endothelium) 
VLA-4 (CD49aCD29)
Monocytes
VCAM-i (CDl06); expressed on endothelium (upregulated on 
T cells (naive, effector, mermory)
 activated endothelium)
α4β7 (CD49DCD29)
Monocytes
VCAM-1 (CDI06), MAdCAM-l; expressed on endothelium in
T cells (gut homing nave effector, mermory)
 gut and gut-associated lymphoid tissues
CD31
 Endothelial cels, leukocytes 
CD31 (homotypic interaction)
CLA, Cucaneous lymphocyte antigen-I; GlyCAM-, glycan-bearing cell adhesion molecule-l; HEV high endothelial venule; AM, intercelular adhesion molecule: g, immunoglobulin;
IL-1, interleukin-I; MAdCAM-1, mucosal adhesion cell adhesion molecule-I; PSGL-1, P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-I; TNF, cumor necrosis factor; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion
molecule.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acute Inflammation
65
antigen (Mac-1) (CD11bCD18), and vascular cell adhe-
pull an automobile with front-wheel drive. The net result is
sion imolecule-1 (VCAM-1), which binds to the integrin
that leukocytes migrate toward the inflaimmatory stimulus
very late antigen-4 (VLA-4) (Table 3.4). The combination
in the direction of the locally produced chemoattractants.
of cytokine-induced expression of integrin ligands on
The nature of the leukocyte infiltrate varies with the age
the endothelium and increased affinity of integrins on
 of the inflammatory response and the type of stimulus. In
the leukocytes results in firm integrin-mediated binding
most forms of acute inflamnation, neutrophils predominate
of the leukocytes to the endothelium at the site of inflaim-
 in the inflaimmatory infiltrate during the first 6 to 24 hours
mation. The leukocytes stop rolling, and engageiment of
and are gradually replaced by monocyte-derived macro-
integrins by their ligands delivers signals leading to
phages over 24 to48 hours (Fig. 3.5). There are severalreasons
 s  e   
for the early preponderance of neutrophils: they are more
firmly attach them to the endothelium.
numerous in the blood than other leukocytes, they respond
more rapidly to cheimokines, and they may attach more
The nost telling proof of the importance of leukocyte
firmly to the adhesion molecules that are rapidly induced on
adhesion molecules is the existence of genetic deficiencies
endothelial cells, such as P- and E-selectins. After entering
in these molecules that result in recurrent bacterial infec-
tissues, neutrophils are short-lived; they undergo apoptosis
 tions as a consequence of impaired leukocyte adhesion and
and disappear within 24 to 48 hours. Macrophages not only
defective inflamnation. These leukocyte adhesion defi-
survive longer but also may proliferate in the tissues, and
ciencies are described in Chapter 5.
thus they becoime the doiminant population in prolonged
inflaimnatory reactions. There are, however, exceptions to
Leukocyte Migration Through Endothelium
this stereotypic pattern of cellular infiltration. In certain
After being arrested on the endothelial surface, leukocytes
infections- for example, those produced by Pseudomoras
migrate through the vessel wall primarily by squeezing
bacteria - the cellular infiltrate is dominated by neutrophils
between cells at intercellular junctions. This extravasation
for several days; in viral infections, lymphocytes may be the
of leukocytes, called trarsmigratior, occurs mainly in post-
first cells to arrive; some hypersensitivity reactions are domi-
capillary venules, the site at which there is maximal retrac-
tion of endothelial cells. Further movement of leukocytes
cells (reflecting the immune response); and in allergic reac-
is driven by cheimokines produced in extravascular tissues,
tions, eosinophils may be a proiminent cell type.
which stimulate leukocytes to travel along a cheimical gra-
The molecular understanding of leukocyte recruitment
dient (described shortly). In addition, platelet endothelial
and migration has provided a large number of potential
cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) (also called CD31), an
therapeutic targets for controlling harmful inflammation.
adhesion molecule of the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfam-
Agents that block TNF, one of the major cytokines in
ily expressed on leukocytes and endothelial cells, medi-
leukocyte recruitment, are among the most successful
 ates the binding events needed for leukocytes to traverse
therapeutics ever developed for chronic inflammatory
the endothelium. After traversing the endothelium, leuko-
diseases,
 and antagonists of leukocyte integrins 
are
cytes pierce the baseiment meimbrane, probably by secret-
 approved for inflamimatory diseases and are being tested
ing collagenases, and they enter the extravascular tissue.
in clinical trials. Predictably, these antagonists not only
Typically, the vessel wall is not injured during leukocyte
have the desired effect of controlling the inflammation but
transmigration.
can also compromise the ability of treated patients to
defend theimselves against microbes, which, of course, is
Chemotaxis of Leukocytes
the physiologic function of the inflamnatory response.
After exiting the circulation, leukocytes move in the tissues
toward the site of injury by a process called chemotaxis,
which is defined as locoinotion along a cheimical gradient.
SUMMARY
Both exogenous and endogenous substances can act as che-
LEUKOCYTE RECRUITMENT TO SITES
moattractants, including the following:
OF INFLAMMATION
Bacterial products, particularly
peptides with N-
+ Leukocytes are recruited from the blood into the extravascu-
formylmethionine termini
lar tissue where infectious pathogens or damaged tissues may
Cytokines, especially those of the cheimokine family
be located, migrate to the site of infection or tissue injury, and 
Components of thecomplement systein, particularly C5a
Products of the lipoxygenase pathway of arachidonic
are activated to perform their functions.
· Leukocyte recruitment is a multistep process consisting of
acid (AA) metabolisim, particularly leukotriene B4 (LTB4)
loose attachment to and rolling on endothelium (mediated by
selectins); firm attachment to endothelium (mediated by inte-
These chemoattractants are produced by microbes and
 grins); and migration through interendothelial gaps.
by host cells in response to infections and tissue daimage and
+ Various cytokines promote the expression of selectins and 
during immunologic reactions. All act by binding to seven-
integrin ligands on endothelium (TNF, IL-I), increase the avidity
transimeimbrane G protein-coupled receptors on the surface
of integrins for their ligands (chemokines), and promote direc-
of leukocytes. Signals initiated froim these receptors activate
tional migration of leukocytes (also chemokines). Tissue mac-
second messengers that induce polymerization of actin,
rophages and other cells responding to the pathogens or
resulting in increased amounts at the leading edge of the cell
and localization of myosin filaments at the back. The leuko-
+ Neutrophils predominate in the early inflammatory infiltrate
cyte moves by extending filopodia that pull the back of the
'aeudouseu pue saouow Ag paoeidau yael aue pue
cell in the direction of extension, much like the front wheels
http://ebooksmedicine.net
66
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
 Monocytes/
 Edema Neutrophils Macrophages 
AA
ACT
3
C
DAYS
 Fig. 3.5 Nature of leukocyte infltrates in inflammatory reactions. The photomicrographs show an inflarmmatory reaction in the myocardium after ischemic 
necrosis (infarction). (A) Early (neutrophilic) infiltrates and congested blood vessels. (B) Later (mononuclear) cellular infiltrates. (C) The approxirmate kinetics 
 of edema and cellular infiltration. For simplicity, edema is shown as an acute transient response, although secondary waves of delayed edema and neutrophil 
 infiltration also can occur.
Phagocytosis and Clearance of
of infection or tissue injury they must be activated to
the Offending Agent
 perforim their functions. This makes perfect sense because,
while we want our defenders to patrol our body constantly,
Recognition of microbes or dead cells induces several
it would be wasteful to keep theim at a high level of alert
 responses in leukocytes that are collectively called leuko-
and expending energy before they are required. The func-
cyte activation (Fig. 3.6). After leukocytes (particularly
tional responses that are most important for destruction
neutrophils and monocytes) have been recruited to a site
of microbes and other offenders are phagocytosis and
Microbe-
Chemokines
N-formyl-
Cytokines
Lipid
Toll-like
LPS→
(e.g., IFN-y)
 methionyl
mediators
receptor
peptides
G-protein
coupled
CD14
Recognition
Cytokine
receptors
receptor
Phagocytic
of microbes,
receptor
mediators
Cellular
Cytoskeletal changes,
Production of
 Production of reactive 
 Phagocytosis of
response
 signal transduction
 mediators
oxygen species (ROS); 
 microbe into 
(e.g., arachidonic 
 lysosomal enzymes
phagosome
acid metabolites,
cytokines)
Increased
Chemotaxis
integrin avidity
Mi crobicidal activity of leukocytes 
Functional
outcomes
Adhesion to
 Migration
 Amplification of the 
 Killing of microbes 
endothelium
into tissues
inflammatory reaction 
Fig. 3.6 Leukocyte activation. Various types of leukocyte cell surface receptors recognize diferent agonists. Once stimulated, the receptors initiate
responses that mediate leukocyte functions. Only some receptors are depicted (see text for details). LPs first binds to a circulating LPs-binding protein (not
shown). IFN-y, Interferon-y, LPS, lipopolysaccharide.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acute Inflammation
67
A
1. RECOGNITION AND ATTACHMENT
Microbes bind to
phagocyte receptors
Lysosome
with enzymes
Fusion of
1
phagosome
Phagocytic
Microbe ingested
with
a
receptor
in phagosome
lysosome
Degradation of microbes
 2. ENGULFMENT
by lysosomal enzymes
 Phagocyte membrane
Phagolysosome
 in phagolysosome
zips up around 
Phagosome with
microbe
ingested microbe 
3. KILLING AND DEGRADATION
Cytoplasmic
Primary
oxidase
granule
MPO
MPO
NADPH
O2
+ CF
Active oxidase
NADP+
iNOS
0
+H2O2
OCI
~Arginine
Membrane
Fet+
 oxidase
NO
OH*
ROS
Membrane
Phagocyte
oxidase
02
B
PHAGOCYTIC VACUOLE
C
Fig. 3.7 Phagocytosis and intracellular destruction of microbes. (A) Phagocytosis of a particle (e.g.,a bacterium) involves binding to receptors on the leukocyte
membrane, engulfment, and fusion of the phagocytic vacuoles with lysosomes. This is followed by destruction of ingested particles within the phagolysosomes
by lysosomal enzymes and by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. (B) In activated phagocytes, cytoplasmic components of the phagocyte oxidase enzyme
peroxidase, present in the granules of neutrophils, converts HO to hypochlorite. (C) Microbicidal reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) kill
ingested microbes. During phagocytosis, granule contents may be released into extracellular tissues (not shown). iNOS, Inducible NO synthase; MPO, myelo-
 peroxidase; ROs, reactive oxygen species.
 intracellular killing. Several other responses aid in the
mannose receptor recognizes microbes and not host cells.
defensive functions of inflammation and may contribute to
its injurious consequences.
tein (LDL) particles as well as a variety of imicrobes. The effi-
ciency of phagocytosis is greatly enhanced when microbes
Phagocytosis
are opsonized (coated) by specific proteins (opsonins)
Phagocytosis involves three sequential steps: (1) recogni-
for which the phagocytes express high-affinity receptors.
tion and attachment of the particle to be ingested by the
The major opsonins are imnunoglobulin (Ig)G antibod-
leukocyte; (2) engulfment, with subsequent formation of
ies,f
the' C3b breakdown product of compleiment activa-
 a phagocytic vacuole; and (3) killing or degradation of the
 tion, and certain plasima lectins, notably mannose-binding
ingested material (Fig. 3.7). These steps are triggered by
 lectin, all of which are recognized by specific receptors on
activation of phagocytes by microbes, necrotic debris, and
leukocytes.
various mediators.
Engutfment. After a particle is bound to phagocyte recep-
Recognitiorn by Phagocytic Receptors. Mannose receptors,
tors, extensions of the cytoplasim (pseudopods) flow
scavenger receptors, andreceptorsfor variousopsonins bind
around it, and the plasima meimbrane pinches off to form a
 and ingest imicrobes. The macrophage mannose receptor is
cytosolic vesicle (phagosome) that encloses the particle.
a lectin that binds teriminal mannose and fucose residues
The phagosome then fuses with lysosoimes, resulting in the
discharge of lysosoimal contents into the phagolysosoime
part of molecules found on microbial cell walls, whereas
(Fig. 3.7). During this process the phagocyte also may
release some granule contents into the extracellular space,
nal sialic acid or N-acetylgalactosaimine. Therefore, the
thereby daimaging innocent bystander normal cells.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
68
CHAPTER 3
 Inflammation and Repair
dismutase, which is found in or can be activated in a variety
intracellular Destruction of Microbes and Debris
of cell types; (2) catalase, which detoxifies HOz; and (3)
The killing of microbes and the destruction of ingested
glutathione peroxidase, another powerful HOz detoxifier.
materials are accomplished by reactive oxygen species
The role of oxygen-derived free radicals in any given
(ROS, also called reactive oxygen intermediates), reactive
inflammatory reaction depends on the balance between
nitrogen species, mainly derived from nitric oxide (NO),
  sai  o   s
 and lysosomal enzymes (Fig. 3.7). This is the final step
and tissues.
in the elimination of infectious agents and necrotic cells.
Genetic defects in the generation of ROS are the cause
The killing and degradation of microbes and elimination
 of an imnunodeficiency disease called chronic granuloma-
 of dead-cell debris within neutrophils and macrophages
tous disease, described in Chapter 5.
occur most efficiently after their activation. All these killing
Nitric Oxide. NO, a soluble gas produced from arginine
mechanisims are normally sequestered in lysosomes, to
by the action of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), also partici-
which phagocytosed materials are brought. Thus, poten-
pates in microbial killing. There are three different types of
tially harmful substances are segregated froim the cell's
NOS: endothelial (eNOS), neuronal (nNOS), and inducible
cytoplasim and nucleus to avoid damage to the phagocyte
(iNOS). eNOS and nNOS are constitutively expressed at
while it is performing its norimal function.
low levels, and the NO they generate acts to maintain vas-
cular tone and as a neurotransmitter, respectively. iNOS,
asseinbly and activation of a mulicoimponent enzyime,
the type that is involved in microbial killing, is expressed
phagocyte oxidase (also called NADPH oxidase), which
when macrophages are activated by cytokines (e.g., IFN-)
oxidizes NADPH (reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinu-
or microbial products, and induces the production of NO.
cleotide phosphate) and, in the process, reduces oxygen
In Imacrophages, NO reacts with superoxide (O) to gener-
to the superoxide anion (O2) (Fig. 3.7B). In neutrophils,
ate the highly reactive free radical peroxynitrite (ONOO*)
this oxidative reaction is tightly linked to phagocytosis,
(Fig. 3.7C). These nitrogen-derived free radicals, similar to
and is called the respiratory burst. Phagocyte oxidase is an
ROS, attack and damage the lipids, proteins, and nucleic
enzyime coimplex consisting of at least seven proteins. In
acids of microbes and host cells.
resting neutrophils, different components of the enzyime
In addition to its role as a microbicidal substance, NO
are located in the plasima membrane and the cytoplasin. In
produced by endothelial cells relaxes vascular simooth
response to activating stimuli, the cytosolic protein com-
muscle and promotes vasodilation. It is not clear if this
ponents translocate to the phagosoimal membrane, where
action of NO plays an important role in the vascular reac-
they asseimble and form the functional enzyime coimplex.
tions of acute inflamnation.
Thus, the ROS are produced within the phagolysosome,
Granule Enzymes and Other Proteins. Neutrophils and
where they can act on ingested particles without damag-
 monocytes contain granules packed with enzymes and
ing the host cell. O so produced is then converted into
anti-microbial proteins that degrade microbes and dead
hydrogen peroxide (HO2), mostly by spontaneous dis-
 tissues and may contribute to tissue damage. These gran-
mutation, a process of simultaneous oxidation and reduc-
ules are actively secretory and thus distinct from classical
tion. HO, is not able to kill microbes efficiently by itself.
lysosoimes. Neutrophils have two main types of granules.
However, the azurophilic granules of neutrophils contain
The simaller specific (or secondary) granules contain lyso-
the enzyme myeloperoxitdase (MPO), which, in the presence
zyme, collagenase, gelatinase, lactoferrin, plasiminogen
of a halide such as Cl , converts HO, to hypochlorite (OCl)
activator, histaminase, and alkaline phosphatase. 
The
, the active ingredient in household bleach). The latter is a
larger azurophil (or primary) granules contain MPO, bacte-
potent anti-microbial agent that destroys microbes by halo-
ricidal factors (such as defensins), acid hydrolases, and a
genatior (in which the halide is bound covalently to cellular
variety of neutral proteases (elastase, cathepsin G, nonspe.
constituents) or by oxidation of proteins and lipids (lipid
cific collagenases, proteinase 3). Phagocytic vesicles con-
peroxidation). The HO-MPO-halide system is the most
taining engulfed material may fuse with these granules
efficient bactericidal system of neutrophils. Nevertheless,
paisau a pue (iaea paqsap se saosos um pue)
inherited deficiency of MPO only causes a modest increase
 materials are destroyed. In addition, both types of granules
in susceptibility to infection, emphasizing the redundancy
also undergo exocytosis (degranulation), leading to the
of microbicidal mechanisms in leukocytes. HO also is
extracellular release of granule contents.
converted to hydroxyl radical (OH·), another powerful
 Different granule enzymes serve different functions.
destructive agent. As discussed in Chapter 2, these oxygen-
 Acid proteases degrade bacteria and debris within phagoly.
derived free radicals bind to and modify cellular lipids,
sosomes, which are acidified by membrane-bound proton
proteins, and nucleic acids, and thus destroy cells such as
pumps. Neutral proteases are capable of degrading various
microbes.
extracellular components, such as collagen, baseiment
 Oxygen-derived radicals may be released extracellu-
meimbrane, fibrin, elastin, and cartilage, resulting in the
larly from leukocytes after exposure to microbes, cheimo-
tissue destruction that accoimpanies inflamnatory pro-
kines, and antigen-antibody coimplexes, or following a
cesses. Neutrophil elastase combats infections by degrad-
phagocytic challenge. These ROS are implicated in tissue
 ing virulence factors of bacteria. Macrophages also contain
damage accompanying inflaimmation
acid hydrolases, collagenase, elastase, phospholipase, and
Serum, tissue fluids, and host cells possess anti-oxidant
plasiminogen activator.
 mechanisms that protect against these potentially harimful
Because of the destructive effects of granule enzyimes,
Oxygen-derived radicals. These anti-oxidants are discussed
the initial leukocytic infiltration, if unchecked, can potenti-
in Chapter 2; they include (l) the enzyime superoxide
 ate further inflammation by damaging tissues. These
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acute Inflammation
69
harmful proteases, however, are norimally controlled by a
Leukocyte-Mediated Tissue Injury
system of anti-proteases in the serum and tissue fluids. Fore-
most among these is Q-anti-trypsin, which is the major
Leukocytes are important mediators of injury to normal
inhibitor of neutrophil elastase. A deficiency of these inhib-
cells and tissues under several circumstances:
itors may lead to sustained action of leukocyte proteases,
 As part of a norimal defense reaction against infectious
as is the case in patients with Q-anti-trypsin deficiency
microbes, when tissues at or near the site of infection
(Chapter 13).
suffer collateral damage. In some infections that are
difficult to eradicate, such as tuberculosis and certain
Neutrophil Extracellular Traps
viral diseases such as hepatitis, the prolonged host
Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are extracellu-
response contributes more to the pathology than does
lar fibrillar networks that concentrate anti-microbial
the microbe itself.
substances at sites of infection and prevent the spread
When the inflamnatory response is inappropriately
of the microbes by trapping them in the fibrils. They
 directed against host tissues, as in certain autoimmune
are produced by neutrophils in response to infectious
diseases.
-eueu pue (iuny pue eiaoeq Aqureu) suaoqed
 When the host "hyper-reacts" against usually harimless
tory 1mediators (e.g., chemokines, cytokines, and comple-
environmental substances, as in allergic diseases, includ-
ment proteins). The extracellular traps consist of a viscous
ing asthima, and some drug reactions.
meshwork of nuclear chromatin that binds and concen-
trates granule proteins such as anti-microbial peptides
 Leukocytes damage tissues by releasing injurious mol-
and enzyimes (Fig. 3.8). NETs provide an additional mech-
  go s  d a sa
anisin of killing microbes that does not involve phago-
released by leukocytes into the extracellular milieu by
cytosis. In the process of NET forimation, the nuclei of
several mechanisims. Controlled secretion of granule con-
the neutrophils are lost, leading to the death of the cells,
 tents following degranulation is a norimal response of acti-
sometimes called NETosis, representing a distinctive form
vated leukocytes. If phagocytes encounter materials that
of cell death affecting neutrophils. NETs also have been
 detected in the blood during sepsis. The nuclear chroma-
deposited on immovable flat surfaces (e.g., glomerular
tin in the NETs, which includes histones and associated
baseiment meimbrane), the inability of the leukocytes to sur-
 DNA, imay be a source of nuclear antigens in systeimic
round and ingest these substances ("frustrated phagocyto-
autoimmune diseases, particularly lupus, in which indi-
sis") triggers strong activation and also the release of large
viduals react against their own DNA and nucleoproteins
anounts of granule enzyimes into the extracellular environ-
(Chapter 5).
ment. Soime phagocytosed substances, such as urate and
B
Fig. 3.8 Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). (A) Healthy neutrophils with nuclei stained red and cytoplasm green. (B) Release of nuclear material from
neutrophils (note that two have lost their nuclei),forming extracellular traps.(C) An electron micrograph of bacteria (staphylococci) trapped in NETs. (From
http://ebooksmedicine.net
70
CH A PT E R 3Inflammation and Repair
silica crystals, may daimage the imeimbrane of the phagolyso-
soime and also lead to the release of daimaging contents.
+ Neutrophils can extrude their nuclear contents to form extra-
cellular nets that trap and destroy microbes.
Other Functional Responses of
· Granule enzymes may be released into the extracellular
environment.
Activated Leukocytes
+ The mechanisms that function to eliminate microbes and dead
 In addition to eliminating microbes and dead cells, acti-
cells (the physiologic role of inflammation) also are capable of
damaging normal tissues (the pathologic consequences of
vated leukocytes play several other roles in host defense.
inflammation).
Importantly, these cells, especially macrophages, produce
● Anti-inflammatory mediators terminate the acute inflamma-
cytokines that can either amplify or limit inflamimatory
tory reaction when it is no longer needed.
reactions, growth factors that stimulate the proliferation
of endothelial cells and fibroblasts and the synthesis of
collagen, and enzyimes that remodel connective tissues.
Because of these activities, macrophages also have centrial
MEDIATORS OF INFLAMMATION
roles in orchestrating chronic inflamumation and tissue
repair, after the inflaimmation has subsided. These func-
The mediators of inflammation are the substances that
tions of macrophages are discussed later in the chapter.
initiate and regulate inflammatory reactions. Although
 In this discussion of acute inflaimunation, we emphasize
the harried student may find the list of mediators daunting
the iimportance of neutrophils and macrophages. However,
(as do professors!), it is worthy of note that this knowledge
it has becoime clear that some T lyimphocytes, which are cells
-ue jo uniejuauiue aiel e uisap ot pasn uaaq sey
of adaptive iimnunity, also contribute to acute inflaimma-
inflaimnatory agents that are used every day by many
tion. The most important of these cells are those that produce
people and which include faimiliar drugs such as aspirin
the cytokine IL-17 (so-called "T17 cells"), which are dis-
and acetaminophen. The most important mediators of acute
cussed in more detail in Chapter 5. IL-17 induces the secre-
inflamnation are vasoactive amines, lipid products (pros-
tion of cheinokines that recruit other leukocytes. In the
taglandins and leukotrienes), cytokines (including chemo-
absence of effective T17 responses, individuals are suscep-
kines), and products of complement activation (Table 3.5).
tible to fungal and bacterial infections, and the skin abscesses 
We begin by sumunarizing the general properties of the
that develop are "cold abscesses," lacking the classic fea-
tures of acute inflaimmation, such as warimth and redness.
Table 3.5 Principal Mediators of Inflammation
Mediator
Termination of the Acute Inflammatory Response
Source
Action
Histamine
Mast cells,
Vasodilation, increased 
 Such a powerful systein of host defense, with its inher-
basophils,
yascular permeability,
ent capacity to cause tissue injury, needs tight controls to
platelets
endothelial activation 
minimize damage. In part, inflamnation declines after the
Prostaglandins
Mast cells,
Vasodilation, pain, fever
offending agents are removed simply because the media-
leukocytes
tors of inflamnation are produced in rapid bursts, only as
Leukotrienes
Mast cells,
Increased vascular
long as the stimulus persists, have short half-lives, and are
leukocytes
permeability,
degraded after their release. Neutrophils also have short
chermotaxis, leukocyte
adhesion, and activation 
half-lives in tissues and die by apoptosis within hours to a
day or two after leaving the blood. In addition, as inflam-
Cytokines (TNF,
Macrophages,
Local: endothelial
 mation develops, the process itself triggers a variety of stop
IL-I, IL-6)
endothelial cells, 
 activation (expression 
rmast cells 
of adhesion molecules).
signals that actively teriminate the reaction. These active
Systemic: fever,
termination mechanisims include a switch in the type of
 metabolic abnormalities,
arachidonic acid metabolite produced, from proinflamna-
hypotension (shock)
tory leukotrienes to anti-inflammatory lipoxins (described
Chemokines
Leukocytes,
Chemotaxis, leukocyte
later), and the liberation of anti-inflaimmatory cytokines,
activated
activation
including transforming growth factor-β (TGF-B) and IL-10,
macrophages
from macrophages and other cells. Other control mecha-
Platelet-activating
Leukocytes, mast
Vasodilation, increased 
nisms that have been demonstrated experimentally include
factor
cells
yascular permeability, 
neural impulses (cholinergic discharge), which inhibit the 
leukocyte adhesion, 
 production of TNF in macrophages.
chemotaxis,
degranulation, oxidative
burst
SUMMARY
Complement
Plasma (produced
 Leukocyte chemotaxis and
LEUKOCYTE ACTIVATION AND REMOVAL OF
in liver)
activation, direct target
 killing (membrane attack
OFFENDING AGENTS
complex), vasodilation
+ Leukocytes can eliminate microbes and dead cels by phagocy-
(rmast cell stirmulation)
tosis, followed by their destruction in phagolysosomes.
Kinins
Plasma (produced
Increased vascular
· Destruction is caused by free radicals (ROs, NO) generated
in liver)
 permeability, smooth
muscle contraction,
in activated leukocytes and by granule enzymes.
vasodilation, pain
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mediators of Inflammation 
mediators of inflaimmation and then discuss some of the
underlies immediate hypersensitivity (allergic) reactions
more important molecules.
(Chapter 5); and (3) products of compleiment called anα-
·  Mediators may be produced locally by cells at the site
phylatoxirs (C3a and C5a), described later. Antibodies and
 of inflammation, or may be derived from circulating.
complement products bind to specific receptors on mast
inactive precursors that are activated at the site of
cells and trigger signaling pathways that induce rapid
inflammation. Cell-derived mediators are rapidly released
degranulation. Neuropeptides (e.g., substance P) and cyto-
 from intracellular granules (e.g., amines) or are synthe-
kines (IL-1, IL-8) also may trigger release of histaimine.
sized de novo (e.g, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, cyto-
Histamine causes dilation of arterioles and increases
kines) in response to a stimulus. The major cell types 
the permeability of venules. Histamine is considered the
that produce mediators of acute inflammation are
principal mediator of the immediate transient phase of
tissue macrophages, dendritic cells, and mast cells, but
increased vascular permeability, producing interendothe-
 platelets, neutrophils, endothelial cells, and most epi-
lial gaps in postcapillary venules, as discussed earlier. Its
thelia also can be induced to elaborate some of the medi-
vasoactive effects are imediated mainly via binding to
ators. Therefore, cell-derived mediators are most
receptors, called H, receptors, on microvascular endothe-
inportant for reactions against offending agents in
lial cells. The antihistamine drugs that are commonly used
tissues. Plasma-derived mediators (e.g., complement pro-
to treat some inflamnatory reactions, such as allergies, are
teins) are present in the circulation as inactive precur-
H, receptor antagonists that bind to and block the receptor.
sors that must be activated, usually by a series of
Histamine also causes contraction of soime simooth imuscles,
proteolytic cleavages, to acquire their biologic proper-
but leukotrienes, described later, are much more potent
ties. They are produced mainly in the liver, are effective
 and relevant for causing spasms of bronchial muscles, for 
against circulating microbes, and also can be recruited
exaimple, in asthima.
into tissues.
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptaimine) is a preformed vaso-
Active mediators are produced only in response
active mediator present in platelets and certain neuroen-
to  various molecules that stimulate inflammation,
docrine cells, such as in the gastrointestinal tract, and in
including microbial products and substances released
mast cells in rodents but not humans. Its primary function
from necrotic cells. Many of these stimuli trigger well-
is as a neurotransimitter in the gastrointestinal tract. It also
 defined receptors and signaling pathways, as described
is a vasoconstrictor, but the importance of this action in
earlier. The usual requirement for microbes or dead
inflaimmation is unclear.
tissues as the initiating stimulus ensures that inflam-
Imation is normally triggered only when and where it is
Arachidonic Acid Metabolites
needed.
· Most of the mediators are short-lived. They quickly
The lipid mediators prostaglandins and leukotrienes are
decay, or are inactivated by enzymes, or they are other-
 produced from arachidonic acid present in membrane
wise scavenged or inhibited. There is thus a system of
 phospholipids, and they stimulate vascular and cellular
checks and balances that regulates mediator actions.
reactions in acute inflammation. Arachidonic acid is a
These built-in control mechanisims are discussed with
 20-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acid that is derived from
each class of mediator.
dietary sources or by conversion from the essential fatty
 One mediator can stimulate the release of other media-
acid linoleic acid. Most cellular arachidonic acid is esteri-
tors. For instance, products of compleinent activation
fied and incorporated into meimbrane phospholipids.
stimulate the release of histaimine, and the cytokine TNF
Mechanical, chemical, and physical stimuli or other media-
acts on endothelial cells to stimulate the production of
 tors (e.g, C5a) trigger the release of arachidonic acid from
another cytokine, IL-l, and many cheimokines. The sec-
membranes by activating cellular phospholipases, mainly
ondary mediators may have the same actions as the
phospholipase Az. Once freed from the meinbrane, arachi-
initial mediators but also may have different and even
donic acid is rapidly converted to bioactive mediators.
opposing activities, thus providing mechanisims for
These mediators, also called cicosanoids (because they are
anplifying— or, in certain instances, counteracting— the
derived from 20-carbon fatty acids; Greek eicosa = 20), are
initial action of a mediator.
synthesized by two major classes of enzyimes: cyclooxygen-
Vasoactive Amines: Histamine and Serotonin
 (  (soil pe soa ad m)
sanoids bind to G protein-coupled receptors on many cell
The two major vasoactive amines, so named because they
types and can mediate virtually every step of inflammation
have important actions on blood vessels, are histamine
(Table 3.6).
and serotonin. They are stored as preforimed molecules in
cells and are therefore among the first mediators to be
Prostaglandins
released during inflammation. The richest sources of hista-
Prostaglandins (PGs) are produced by mast cells, macro-
mine are mast cells, which are norimally present in the
phages, endothelial cells, and many other cell types, and
connective tissue adjacent to blood vessels. Histaimine also
are involved in the vascular and systemic reactions of
is found in blood basophils and platelets. It is stored in
inflammation. They are generated by the actions of two
 uonenueioap Aq paseaan si pue sanueio las jsu
cyclooxygenases called COX-1 and COX-2. COX-1 is pro-
response to a variety of stimuli, including (l) physical
duced in response to inflaimmatory stimuli and also is con-
injury, such as trauma, cold, or heat, by unknown mecha-
stitutively expressed in most tissues, where it may serve a
nisims; (2) binding of antibodies to mast cells, which
homeostatic function (e.g., fluid and electrolyte balance in 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
77
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
 Cell membrane phospholipids
Steroids
Phospholipases
COOH
^CH3
Other
COX-1 and COx-2
 ARACHIDONIC ACID
HPETEs
HETES
 lipoxygenases
 inhibitors, aspirin,
indomethacin
- Lipoxygenase inhibitors
Cyclooxygenase
5-Lipoxygenase
Prostaglandin G2 (PGG2)
5-HPETE
5-HETE
Prostaglandin H2 (PGH2)
Chemotaxis
Prostacyclin
Leukotriene
PGl2
Leukotriene A4 (LTA4) -
→ Leukotriene B4
receptor
 antagonists
Causes
vasodilation,
 inhibits platelet
Leukotriene C4 (LTC4)
 aggregation
Bronchospa sm
Leukotriene D4 (LTD4)
Increased
Thromboxane A2
vascular
TXA2
permeability
Leukotriene E4 (LTE4) 
Causes
vasoconstriction,
 promotes platelet
aggregation
12-Lipoxygenase
PGD2
PGE2
Lipoxin A4 (LXA4)
Lipoxin B4 (LXB4)
Causes
vasodilation,
Inhibition of 
 increased
vascular
inflammation 
permeability
Fig. 3.9 Production of AA metabolites and their roles in inflarmmation. Clinically useful antagonists of different enzymes and receptors are indicated in red.
While leukotriene receptor antagonists inhibit all actions of leukotrienes, they are used in the clinic to treat asthrma, as shown. Cox-i, Cox-2, Cyclooxygenase
the kidneys, cytoprotection in the gastrointestinal tract). In
Prostaglandins are named based on structural features
contrast, COX-2 is induced by inflammatory stimuli and
coded by a letter (e.g., PGD, PGE, PGF, PGG, and PGH)
 thus generates the PGs that are involved in inflaimmatory
and a subscript numeral (e.g., 1, 2), which indicates the
reactions, but it is low or absent in most norimal tissues.
number of double bonds in the compound. The most
important prostaglandins in inflammation are PGE, PGD,
PGF2, PGI, (prostacyclin), and TXAz (thromboxane Az),
Table 3.6 Principal Actions of Arachidonic Acid Metabolites in
each of which is derived by the action of a specific enzyime
Inflammation
 on an interimediate in the pathway. Soime of these enzyines
Action
Eicosanoid
have restricted tissue distribution and functions.
Prostaglandins PGl, (prostacyclin),
· PGD, is the major prostaglandin made by mast cells;
Vasodilation
 along with PGE2 (which is more widely distributed), it
PGE, PGE, PGD,
causes vasodilation and increases the permeability of
Vasoconstriction
Thromboxane A, leukotrienes C4,
D4, E4
 postcapillary venules, thus potentiating exudation and
 Increased vascuar permeability
Leukotrienes C4, D4, E4
resultant edema. PGD, also is a chemoattractant for
neutrophils.
 Chemotaxis, leukocyte adhesion
Leukotriene B4
· Platelets contain the enzyme thromboxane synthase,
 Smooth muscle contraction
Prostaglandins PGC4, PGD4, PGE4
which is responsible for synthesizing TXA2, the major
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mediators of Inflammation
73
functions such as protecting gastric epithelial cells
agent and vasoconstrictor, and thus proimotes throimbosis.
froim acid-induced injury, whereas COX-2 generates
 In contrast, vascular endothelium contains prostacyclin
prostaglandins that are involved only in inflaimna-
synthase, which is responsible for the forimation of pros-
tion. If this idea is correct, the selective COX-2 inhibi-
tacyclin (PGI,) and its stable end product PGF,a. Prosta-
tors should be anti-inflammatory without having the
laeid jo rou juaod e pue noosa e si u
toxicities of the nonselective inhibitors, such as gastric
aggregation, and thus serves to prevent throimbus for-
ulceration. However, these distinctions are not abso-
mation on norimal endothelial cells. A thromboxane-
lute, as COX-2 also seeims to play some role in norimal
homeostasis. Furtherimore, selective COX-2 inhibitors
and cerebral artery thrombosis (Chapter 4).
may increase the risk of cardiovascular and cerebrovas-
 In addition to their local effects, prostaglandins are
cular events, possibly because they impair endothelial
involved in the pathogenesis of pain and fever, two
cell production of prostacyclin (PGI), which prevents
comimon systeinic manifestations of inflamnation. PGE,
throimbosis, while leaving intact the COX-1-imediated
makes the skin hypersensitive to painful stimuli, and
causes fever during infections (described later).
aggregation. Thus, selective COX-2 inhibition may tilt
the balance toward vascular throimbosis, especially in
Leukotrienes
combination with other factors that increase the risk
Leukotrienes are produced in leukocytes and mast cells
of thrombosis. Nevertheless, these drugs are used in
by the action of lipoxygenase and are involved in vascu-
individuals who do not have risk factors for cardiovas-
lar and smooth muscle reactions and leukocyte recruit-
cular disease and when the drugs' benefits outweigh
ment. The synthesis of leukotrienes involves multiple
their risks.
steps, the first of which generates leukotriene A4 (LTA4),
 Lipoxygenase inhibitors. 5-lipoxygenase is not affected
which in turn gives rise to LTB4 or LTCq. LTBq is produced
by NSAIDs, and many new inhibitors of this enzyime
by neutrophils and some macrophages, and is a potent
pathway have been developed. Pharimacologic agents
cheinotactic agent and activator of neutrophils, causing
that inhibit leukotriene production (e.g, zileuton) are
aggregation and adhesion of the cells to venular endothe-
useful in the treatment of asthima.
lium, generation of ROS, and release of lysosoimal enzyimes.
 Corticosteroids are broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory
The cysteinyl-containing leukotriene LTC4 and its metabo-
agents that reduce the transcription of genes encoding
lites, LTD4 and LTE4, are produced mainly in mast cells and
COX-2, phospholipase Az proinflaimimatory cytokines
cause intense vasoconstriction, bronchospasin (important
(e.g., IL-1 and TNF), and iNOS.
in asthima), and increased permeability of venules.
 Leukotriene receptor antagonists block leukotriene
receptors and prevent the actions of the leukotrienes.
Lipoxins
These drugs (e.g., Montelukast) are useful in the treat-
Lipoxins also are generated from arachidonic acid by the
ment of asthima.
lipoxygenase pathway, but unlike prostaglandins and
leukotrienes, the lipoxins suppress inflammation by
Cytokines and Chemokines
inhibiting the recruitment of leukocytes. They inhibit
neutrophil chemotaxis and adhesion to endotheliun. They
Cytokines are proteins secreted by many cell types (prin-
also are unusual in that two cell populations are required
cipally activated lymphocytes, macrophages, and den-
for the transcellular biosynthesis of these mediators. Leu-
dritic cells, but also endothelial, epithelial, and connective
kocytes, particularly neutrophils, produce intermediates in
tissue cells) that mediate and regulate immune and
lipoxin synthesis, and these are converted to lipoxins by
inflammatory reactions. By convention, growth factors
platelets interacting with the leukocytes.
that act on epithelial and imesenchyimal cells are not
grouped under cytokines. The general properties and func-
Pharmacologic Inhibitors of Prostaglandins
tions of cytokines are discussed in Chapter 5. Here the
and Leukotrienes
cytokines involved in acute inflaimunation are reviewed
The importance of eicosanoids in inflaimnation has driven
(Table 3.7).
 attempts to develop drugs that inhibit their production
or actions and thus suppress inflammation. These anti-
Tumor Necrosis Factor and Interleukin-I
TNF and IL-1 serve critical roles in leukocyte recruitment
·(
 Cyclooxygenase inhibitors include aspirin and other
by promoting adhesion of leukocytes to endothelium
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such
 and their migration through vessels. Activated macro-
as ibuprofen. They inhibit both COX-1 and COX-2
phages and dendritic cells mainly produce these cytokines;
 a sisas srd   s p
TNF also is produced by Tlymphocytes and mast cells, and
s saop udse (aaag pue ued suean u aoesa
some epithelial cells produce IL-1 as well. Microbial prod-
by irreversibly inactivating cyclooxygenases. Selective
ucts, foreign bodies, necrotic cells, and a variety of other
COX-2 inhibitors are a newer class of these drugs that
inflaimmatory stimuli can stimulate the secretion of TNF
are 200- to 300-fold more potent in blocking COX-2 than
seuais Aq pasnpu sI HNL Jo uononpond ayL 'T-Tl pue
COX-1. There has been great interest in COX-2 as a
through TLRs and other microbial sensors, and the synthe-
therapeutic target because of the possibility that COX-1
sis of IL-1 is stimulated by the same signals, but the genera-
is responsible for the production of prostaglandins that
tion of the biologically active form of this cytokine is
are involved in both inflaimnation and physiologic
dependent on the inflaimumasome, described earlier.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
74
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
Table 3.7 Cytokines in Inflammation
syndrome (SIRS), resulting from disseininated bacterial
Principal
 Principal Actions in
infection (sepsis) and other serious conditions, described
Cytokine
Sources
Inflammation
later.
 pue pidil Suouond Aq aoueeq Aiaua sajensai HNL
 In Acute Inflammation
protein catabolism and by suppressing appetite. There-
TNF
Macrophages,
 Stimulates expression of
fore, sustained production of TNF contributes to αchexia,
mast cells, T
 endothelial adhesion 
ymphocytes
 molecules and secretion of 
a pathologic state characterized by weight loss, muscle
other cytokines; systemic
atrophy, and anorexia that accompanies some chronic
effects
infections and cancers.
IL-1
Macrophages,
 Similar to TNF; greater role 
endothelial cells,
in fever
As mentioned earlier, TNF antagonists have been
some epithelial
 remarkably effective in the treatment of chronic inflam-
cells
 matory diseases, particularly rheumatoid arthritis, psoria-
IL-6
Macrophages,
 Systermic effects (acute phase
sis, and soime types of inflaimmatory bowel disease. One
other cells
response)
complication of this therapy is increased susceptibility to
Chemokines
Macrophages,
Recruitment of leukocytes to
mycobacterial infection, resulting from reduced ability of
endothelial cells,
 sites of inflammation;
macrophages to kill intracellular microbes. Although many
T ymphocytes,
migration of cells in 
 of the actions of TNF and IL-1 are overlapping, IL-1 antago-
mast cells,
normal tissues
other cell types
nists are not as effective, for reasons that reimain obscure.
Also, blocking either cytokine has no effect on the outcome
IL-17
T ymphocytes
 Recruitment of neutrophils
and monocytes
of sepsis, perhaps because other cytokines contribute to
 this serious systemic inflamimatory reaction.
 In Chronic Inflammation
IL-12
Dendritic cells,
 Increased production of 
Chemokines
macrophages
IFN-Y
 Chemokines are a family of small (8-10 kD) proteins that
IFN-Y
T lymphocytes, 
Activation of macrophages
act primarily as chemoattractants for specific types of leu-
NK cells
(increased ability to kill
kocytes. About 40 different cheinokines and 20 different
microbes and tumor cells)
receptors for chemokines have been identified. They are
IL-17
T ymphocytes
 Recruitment of neutrophils
classified into four major groups, according to the arrange-
 and monocytes
ment of cysteine (C) residues in the proteins:
The most important cytokines involved in inflammatory reactions are listed. Many
● C-X-C chemokines have one aimino acid residue separat-
other cytokines may play lesser roles in inflammation. There is also considerable 
overlap between the cytokines involved in acute and chronic inflammation.
ing the first two of the four conserved cysteines. These
Speifically all the cycokines listed under acute inflammation may also contribute to
chemokines act primarily on neutrophils. IL-8 (now
chronic inflammatory reactions.
Aq paiaias sili dno s yo leid si (sx pa
IFN-, Interferon-, I-t, interleukin-I; NK, natural killer; Nf, tumor necrosis factor.
activated macrophages, endothelial cells, and other cell
types, and causes activation and chemotaxis of neutro-
phils, with limited activity on monocytes and eosino-
The actions of TNF and IL-1 contribute to the local and
phils. Its most important inducers are microbial products
systemic reactions of inflammation (Fig. 3.10). The most
and cytokines, mainly IL-1 and TNF.
important roles of these cytokines in inflainnation are the
· C-C chemokines have the first two conserved cysteine
following:
residues adjacent. The C-C chemokines, which include
 Endothelial activation. Both TNF and IL-l act on endo-
Imonocyte chenoattractant protein (MCP-1, CCL2),
 thelium to induce a spectrum of changes referred to as
entdothelial activation. These changes include increased
1α (MIP-1α, CCL3), mainly serve as chemoattractants for
 expression of endothelial adhesion molecules, imostly
monocytes, eosinophils, basophils, and lymphocytes.
E- and P-selectins and ligands for leukocyte integrins;
Although most of the cheimokines in this class have over-
increased production of various mediators, including
lapping actions, eotaxin selectively recruits eosinophils.
other cytokines and cheimokines, and eicosanoids; and
C chemokines lack the first and third of the four con-
increased procoagulant activity of the endothelium.
served cysteines. The C cheimokines (e.g., lymphotactin,
 Activation of leukocytes and other cells. TNF augiments
XCL1) are relatively specific for lymphocytes.
responses of neutrophils to other stimuli such as bacterial
+
CX,C chemokines contain three aimino acids between the
endotoxin and stinulates the microbicidal activity of
first two cysteines. The only known meimber of this class
macrophages. IL-1 activates fibroblasts to synthesize col-
is called fractalkine (CX,CL1). This chemokine exists in
lagen and stimulates proliferation of synovial cells and
two forms: a cell surface-bound protein induced on
other mesenchymal cells. IL-1 and IL-6 also stimulate the
endothelial cells by inflaimmatory cytokines that pro-
 generation of a subset of CD4+ helper T cells called Th17
 Imotes strong adhesion of monocytes and T cells, and a
cells, described later and in Chapter 5.
soluble form, derived by proteolysis of the meimbrane-
 Systemic acute-phase response. IL-1 and TNF (as well
bound protein, that has potent chemoattractant activity
 as IL-6) induce the systeimic acute-phase responses asso-
for the saine cells.
ciated with infection or injury, including fever (described
later in the chapter). They also are implicated in the
Chemokines imediate their activities by binding
to
 pathogenesis of the systemic inflaimunatory response
seven-transimeimbrane G protein-coupled receptors. These
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mediators of Inflammation
75
LOCAL INFLAMMATION
SYSTEMICPROTECTIVEEFFECTS
 SYSTEMIC PATHOLOGICAL EFFECTS
TNF.
Increased
Brain
TNF
Heart
IL-1
permeability
TNE
TNF
Increased
expression of
 adhesion molecules 
M Low
Fever
ndno
Endothelial cells
IL-1,
Liver
Endothelial cells, blood vessels
IL-6
IL-1,
TNF
Leukocytes
chemokines
 Acute
 IL-1, IL-6, 
phase
chemokines
proteins
Thrombus
Increased
TNF
Activation
 permeability
IL-1
TNE
Bonemarrow
Multiple tissues
TNF,
Skeletal
IL-1
muscle
T cell
Other
-1
IL-17→cell
Leukocyte
L-6
types
production
Insulinresistance
Fig. 3.10 Major roles of cytokines in acute inflammation. PDGF, Platelet-derived growth factor; PGE, prostaglandin E; PGl, prostaglandin I.
earlier, two that have received considerable interest are
and leukocytes generally express multiple receptors. As
 IL-6, made by macrophages and other cells, which is
discussed in Chapter 5, certain chemokine receptors
involved in local and systeimic reactions, and IL-17, pro-
(CXCR4, CCR5) act as coreceptors for a viral envelope gly-
 duced mainly by T lymphocytes, which promotes neutro-
coprotein of human imnunodeficiency virus (HIV), the
a u pasn are sisuee ra g-l puan r
cause of AIDS, and are thus involved in binding and entry
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, and IL-17 antagonists
 of the virus into cells.
are very effective in psoriasis and other inflaimmatory dis-
Chemokines bind to proteoglycans and are displayed at
eases. Type I interferons, whose norimal function is to
high concentrations on the surface of endothelial cells and
inhibit viral replication, contribute to soime of the systeimic
in the extracellular matrix. They have two main functions:
 manifestations of inflaimimation. Cytokines also play key
Acute inflammation. Most cheimokines stimulate leuko-
roles in chronic inflaimimation; these are described later in
cyte attachiment to endothelium by acting on leukocytes
the chapter.
to increase the affinity of integrins, and also serve as
chemoatractants, thereby guiding leukocytes to sites of
Complement System
infection or tissue daimage. Because they mediate aspects
of the inflaimmatory reaction, they are sometimes called
The complement system is a collection of soluble pro-
inflammatory chemokines. Their production is induced by
teins and their membrane receptors that function mainly
microbes and other stimuli.
in host defense against microbes and in pathologic
· Maintenance of tissue architecture. Soine chemokines
inflammatory reactions. There are more than 20 comple-
are produced constitutively by stromal cells in tissues
 ment proteins, some of which are numbered C1 through
and are sometimes called homeostatic chemokines. These
C9. They function in both innate and adaptive iimmunity
 organize various cell types in different anatomic regions
for defense against microbial pathogens. In the process of
 of the tissues, such as T and B lymphocytes in discrete
coimplement activation, several cleavage products of com-
areas of the spleen and lymph nodes (Chapter 5)
plement proteins are elaborated that cause increased vas-
cular permeability, chemotaxis, and opsonization. The
Although the role of chemokines in inflamumation is well
activation and functions of complement are outlined in
established, it has proved difficult to develop chemokine
Fig. 3.11.
 antagonists that suppress inflamimation, perhaps because
 Complement proteins are present in inactive forms in
 of the functional redundancy of these proteins.
the plasima, and many of them are activated to become
 proteolytic enzyimes that degrade other coimplement pro-
Other Cytokines in Acute Inflammation
teins, thus foriming an enzyimatic cascade capable of tre-
The list of cytokines implicated in inflammation is huge
 mendous amplification. The critical step in complement
and constantly growing. In addition to the ones described
activation is the proteolysis of the third (and most
http://ebooksmedicine.net
76
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
EFFECTOR FUNCTIONS
C5a, C3a: Inflammation
Alternative
Microbe
pathway
Recruitment and
Destruction of microbes
activation of leukocytes
by leukocytes
C3b: Phagocytosis
C3al
Classical
pathway
C3b is deposited
Antibody
Recognition of bound C3b 
Phagocytosis
on microbe
by phagocyte C3b receptor
 of microbe
MAC: Lysis of
Lectin
microbe
pathway
Mannose
Formation of
binding lectin
membrane attack
complex (MAC)
Fig. 3.ll The activation and functions of the complerment system.Activation of complerment by different pathways leads to cleavage of C3.The functions of
the complerment system are mediated by breakdown products of C3 and other complement proteins, and by the membrane attack complex (MAC).
abundant) coimponent, C3. Cleavage of C3 can occur by
because they have effects similar to those of mast cell
one of three pathways:
mediators thatare involved in thereaction called anaphy-
 The classical pathway, which is triggered by fixation of
D je  e st ose e ( d s
C1 to antibody (IgM or IgG) that has combined with
neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils. In
antigen
addition, C5a activates the lipoxygenase pathway of ara-
       
chidonic acid metabolism in neutrophils and monocytes,
microbial surface molecules (e.g, endotoxin, or LPS),
causing release of more inflainimatory mediators.
complex polysaccharides, and other substances, in the 
Opsonization and phagocytosis. C3b and its cleavage
absence of antibody
 product iC3b (inactive C3b), when fixed to a imicrobial
 The lectin pathway, in which plasima mannose-binding
cell wall, act as opsonins and promote phagocytosis by
lectin binds to carbohydrates on microbes and directly
 neutrophils and macrophages, which bear cell surface
activates C1
receptors for these complement fragiments.
Cell lysis. The deposition of the MAC on cells drills
All three pathways of complement activation lead to
holes in the cell meimbrane, making the cells permeable
the formation of an enzyme called the C3 convertase,
to water and ions and resulting in their osimotic death
which splits C3 into two functionally distinct fragments,
(lysis). This function of complement is important mainly
C3a and C3b. C3a is released, and C3b becoimes covalently
for the killing of microbes with thin cell walls, such as
attached to the cell or molecule where the compleiment is
Neisseria bacteria. Hence, deficiency of the teriminal
being activated. More C3b then binds to the previously
components of complement predisposes to infections by
 generated fragiments to form C5 convertase, which cleaves
the Neisseria species meningococci and gonococci. In
C5 to release C5a and leave C5b attached to the cell surface.
patients with compleiment deficiencies, these microbes
C5b binds the late components (C6-C9), culiminating in the
can cause serious disseiminated infections.
forimation of the meimbrane attack complex (MAC, com-
posed of multiple C9 molecules). The enzyimatic activity of
The activation of complement is tightly controlled by
cell-associated and circulating regulatory proteins. Dif-
cation that millions of molecules of C3b can deposit on the 
ferent regulatory proteins inhibit the production of active
surface of a microbe within 2 or 3 minutes!
coimplement fraginents or remove fragiments that deposit
The complement systeim has three main functions
 on cells. These regulators are expressed on norimal host
(Fig. 3.11):
cells and thus prevent healthy tissues froim being injured
Inflammation. C5a, and, to a lesser extent, C4α and C3a,
 at sites of compleiment activation. Regulatory proteins can
 are cleavage products of the corresponding complement
be overwhelmed when large aimounts of coimpleiment are
coimponents that stimulate histaimine release from mast
deposited on host cells and in tissues, as happens in auto-
cells and thereby increase vascular perimeability and
imnune
diseases,
in
which
individuals
produce
cause vasodilation. They are called anaphylatoxins
complement-fixing antibodies against their own cell and
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mediators of Inflammation
77
tissue antigens (Chapter 5). The most important of these
dissociate clotting and inflamimation, because virtually all
regulatory proteins are the following:
forims of tissue injury that lead to clotting also induce
• C1 inhibitor blocks the activation of Cl, the first protein
inflammation, and inflammation causes changes in endo-
of the classical compleiment pathway. Inherited deficiency
thelial cells that increase the likelihood of abnorimal clot-
of this inhibitor is the cause of hereditary angioedema.
ting (thrombosis, described in Chapter 4). Whether the
 Decay accelerating factor (DAF) and CD59 are two pro-
 products of coagulation, per se, have a significant role in
ea s d n  are s
stimulating inflammation is still not established.
phosphatidyl (GPI) anchor. DAF prevents formation of
C3 convertases and CD59 inhibits forimation of the
Kinins
MAC. An acquired deficiency of the enzyme that creates
 Kinins are vasoactive peptides derived from plasina pro-
GPI anchors leads to deficiency of these regulators and
teins, called kininogens, by the action of specific proteases
excessive complement activation and lysis of red cells
called kallikreins. The enzyme kallikrein cleaves a plasima
(which are sensitive to complement-mediated cell lysis).
glycoprotein precursor, high-imolecular-weight kininogen,
This gives rise to a disease called paroxysmal nocturnal
to produce bracykirin. Bradykinin increases vascular per-
hemogiobinuria (PNH) (Chapter 12).
meability and causes contraction of smooth muscle, dila-
· Other coimpleiment regulatory proteins proteolytically
tion of blood vessels, and pain when injected into the
cleave active complement components. For instance,
skin. These effects are similar to those of histaimine. The
Factor H is a plasima protein that serves as a cofactor
action of bradykinin is short-lived, because it is quickly
for the proteolysis of the C3 convertase; its deficiency
 inactivated by an enzyime called kininase. Bradykinin has
results in excessive complement activation. Mutations
ae jo sug aos u oiaui e se padu uaan
s asasip au e im paioss are H roieg 
reaction, such as anaphylaxis.
the hemolytic ureimic syndrome (Chapter 14), as well as
increased perimeability of retinal vessels in wet macular 
Neuropeptides
degeneration of the eye.
Neuropeptides are secreted by sensory nerves and various
leukocytes, and may play a role in the initiation and regula-
 The compleiment system contributes to disease in several
tion of inflamimatory responses. These simall peptides,
ways. The activation of compleiment by antibodies or
including substance P and neurokinin A, are produced in
antigen-antibody complexes deposited on host cells and
the central and peripheral nervous systems. Nerve fibers
tissues is an important imechanisim of cell and tissue injury
containing substance P are prominent in the lung and
(Chapter 5). Inherited deficiencies of complement proteins
gastrointestinal tract. Substance P has many biologic func-
cause increased susceptibility to infections, and, as men-
tions, including the transimission of pain signals, regulation
 tioned earlier, deficiencies of regulatory proteins cause a
of blood pressure, stimulation of hormone secretion by
variety of disorders.
endocrine cells, and in increasing vascular permeability.
Other Mediators of Inflammation
When Lewis discovered the role of histamine in inflam-
mation, one mediator was thought to be enough. Now, we
Platelet-Activating Factor
are wallowing in theim! Yet, from this large compendium,
PAF is a phospholipid-derived mediator that was discov-
it is likely that a few mediators are most important for the
st 1t inq uogeaise iaaeid pasnes ieu roioey e se pana
reactions of acute inflaimumation in vivo, and these are sum-
now known to have multiple inflaimnatory effects. A
marized in Table 3.8. This list is compiled in part froim the
variety of cell types, including platelets theimselves, baso-
phils, mast cells, neutrophils, macrophages, and endothe-
lial cells, can elaborate PAF. In addition to platelet
Table 3.8 Role of Mediators in Different Reactions of
aggregation, PAF causes vasoconstriction and bronchocon-
Inflammation
striction, and at low concentrations it induces vasodilation
Reaction of
and increased vascular perimeability. Despite these docu-
Inflammation
Principal Mediators
 mented actions, trials of PAF antagonists in various inflam-
Vasodilation
Histarmine
 matory conditions have been disappointing.
Prostaglandins
Products of Coagulation
Increased vascular
Histamine
 permeability
C3a and C5a (by liberating vasoactive
 Studies perforimed more than 50 years ago suggested that
 amines from mast cells, other cells)
inhibiting coagulation reduced the inflaimmatory reaction
Leukotrienes C4, D4, E4
to some microbes, leading to the idea that coagulation and
Chemotaxis, leukocyte
TNF,IL-1
inflaimmation are linked processes. This concept was sup-
recruitment and 
Chemokines
ported by the discovery of protease-activated receptors
activation
C3a, C5a
(PARs), which are activated by thrombin (the protease that
Leukotriene B4
cleaves fibrinogen to produce a fibrin clot). PARs are
Fever
IL-I, TNF
 expressed on leukocytes, suggesting a role in inflamma-
Prostaglandins
tion, but their clearest role is in platelets, in which throm-
Pain
Prostaglandins
bin activation of a PAR known as the thrombin receptor is
Bradykinin 
 a potent trigger of platelet aggregation during the process
Tissue damage
Lysosomal enzymes of leukocytes
Reactive oxygen species
of clot forimation (Chapter 4). In fact, it is difficult to
http://ebooksmedicine.net
78
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
observed anti-inflaimmatory effects of antagonists to these
molecules, thus highlighting the importance of basic
biology to the practice of medicine. The redundancy of the
 mediators and their actions ensures that this protective
 response remains robust and is not readily subverted.
SUMMARY
ACTIONS OFTHE PRINCIPAL MEDIATORS OF
INFLAMMATION 
+ Vasoactive amines, mainly histamine: vasodilation and increased 
vascular permeability
· Arachidonic acid metabolites (prostaglandins and leukotri-
 enes): several forms exist and are involved in vascular reactions,
leukocyte chemotaxis, and other reactions of inflammation;
Fig. 3.12 Serous inflarmmation. Low-power view of a cross section of a skin
 antagonized by lipoxins
blister showing the epidermis separated from the dermis by a focal collection
ioe Ajensn sada lao Auew Aq paonpoud suanoud :sauyonko *
of serous effusion.
at short range; mediate multiple effects, mainly in leukocyte
recruitment and migration; principal ones in acute inflamma-
 or into body cavities lined by the peritoneum, pleura, or
tion are TNF, IL-I, and chemokines 
+ Complement proteins: Activation of the complement system 
pericardium. Typically, the fluid in serous inflamnation is
by microbes or antibodies leads to the generation of multiple
not infected by destructive organisins and does not contain
large numbers of leukocytes (which tend to produce puru-
breakdown products, which are responsible for leukocyte che-
motaxis, opsonization and phagocytosis of microbes and other
lent inflamnation, described later). In body cavities the fluid
 Imay be derived froin the plasima (as a result of increased
 particles, and cell killing
+ Kinins:produced by proteolytic cleavage of precursors; mediate
vascular perimeability) or from the secretions of mesothelial
vascular reaction, pain
cells (as a result of local irritation); accumulation of fluid in
these cavities is called an effusion. (Effusions consisting of
transudates also occur in noninflaimmatory conditions, such
MORPHOLOGIC PATTERNS OF
as reduced blood outflow in heart failure, or reduced plasima
 protein levels in soime kidney and liver diseases.) The skin
ACUTE INFLAMMATION
blister resulting from a burn or viral infection represents
accumulation of serous fluid within or immediately beneath
The morphologic hallmarks of acute inflammatory reac-
the damaged epidermis of the skin (Fig. 3.12).
tions are dilation of small blood vessels and accumula-
tion of leukocytes and fluid in the extravascular tissue.
Fibrinous Inflammation
 The vascular and cellular reactions account for the signs
and symptoms of the inflammatory response. Increased
A fibrinous exudate develops when the vascular leaks are
blood flow to the injured area and increased vascular per-
large or there is a local procoagulant stimulus. With a
meability lead to the accumulation of extravascular fluid
large increase in vascular permeability, higher-molecular-
rich in plasma proteins (edema) and account for the redness
weight proteins such as fibrinogen pass out of the blood,
(rubor), warimth (calor), and swelling (tumor) that accom-
and fibrin is formed and deposited in the extracellular
pany acute inflaimnation. Leukocytes that are recruited
space. A fibrinous exudate is characteristic of inflamnation
and activated by the offending agent and by endogenous 
in the lining of body cavities, such as the meninges, peri
mediators may release toxic metabolites and proteases
cardium (Fig. 3.13A), and pleura. Histologicaly, fibrin
extracellularly, causing tissue damage and loss of function
appears as an eosinophilic imeshwork of threads or soime-
(functio laesa). During the damage, and in part as a result
times as an aimorphous coagulum (Fig. 3.13B). Fibrinous
of the liberation of prostaglandins, neuropeptides, and
exudates may be dissolved by fibrinolysis and cleared by
cytokines, one of the local syimptoms is pain (dolor).
Imacrophages If the fibrin is not removed, with time, it may
Although these general features are characteristic of
stimulate the ingrowth of fibroblasts and blood vessels and
thus lead to scarring. Conversion of the fibrinous exudate
 patterns are often superinposed on them, depending
to scar tissue (organization) within the pericardial sac leads
on the severity of the reaction, its specific cause, and the
to opaque fibrous thickening of the pericardium and epi-
 particular tissue and site involved. The importance of rec-
cardium in the area of exudation and, if the fibrosis is
ognizing distinct gross and microscopic patterns of inflam-
Extensive, obliteration of the pericardial space.
mation is that they often provide valuable clues about the
underlying cause.
Purulent (Suppurative) Inflammation, Abscess
Serous Inflammation
Purulent inflammation is characterized by the produc-
tion of pus, an exudate consisting of neutrophils, the
Serous inflammation is marked by the exudation of cell-
liquefied debris of necrotic cells, and edema fluid. The
most frequent cause of purulent (also called suppurative)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Outcomes of Acute Inflammation
79
Fig. 3.13 Fibrinous pericarditis. (A) Deposits of fibrin on the pericardium. (B) A pink meshwork of fibrin exudate (f) overlies the pericardial surface (P).
inflamnation is infection with bacteria that cause lique-
(shedding) of inflamed necrotic tissue (Fig. 3.15). Ulcer-
factive tissue necrosis, such as staphylococci; these patho-
ation can occur only when tissue necrosis and resultant
ioea (unpond-snd) ouatod se on panaar are sa
inflammation exist on or near a surface. It is most com-
A coimnon example of an acute suppurative inflamnation
Imonly encountered in (l) the mucosa of the mouth,
is acute appendicitis. Abscesses are localized collections of
stomach, intestines, or genitourinary tract, and (2) the skin
pus caused by suppuration buried in a tissue, an organ, or
and subcutaneous tissue of the lower extreinities in older
-OAd jo Suipaas Aq paonpoid are KauL aoeds pauyuos e
 persons who have circulatory disturbances that predispose
genic bacteria into a tissue (Fig. 3.14). Abscesses have a
to extensive ischeimic necrosis. Acute and chronic inflam-
central region that appears as a mass of necrotic leukocytes
mation often coexist in ulcers, such as peptic ulcers of the
and tissue cells. There is usually a zone of preserved neu-
stoinach or duodenum and diabetic ulcers of the legs.
trophils around this necrotic focus, and outside this region
During the acute stage there is intense polymorphonuclear
there may be vascular dilation and parenchymal and fibro-
infiltration and vascular dilation in the margins of the
blastic proliferation, indicating chronic inflaimmation and
defect. With chronicity, the margins and base of the ulcer
repair. In time the abscess may become walled off and
develop fibroblast proliferation, scarring, and the accumu-
ultimately replaced by connective tissue. When persistent
lation of lyimphocytes, macrophages, and plasima cells.
 or at critical locations (such as the brain), abscesses may
have to be drained surgically.
OUTCOMES OF ACUTE
Ulcers
INFLAMMATION
An ulcer is a local defect, or excavation, of the surface of
Although, as might be expected, many variables may
 an organ or tissue that is produced by the sloughing
modify the basic process of inflammation, including the
Fig. 3.I4 Purulent inflammation. (A) Multiple bacterial abscesses (orrows) in the lung in a case of bronchopneumonia. (B) The abscess contains neutrophils
and cellular debris, and is surrounded by congested blood vessels.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
80
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
Fig. 3.15 The morphology of an ulcer. (A) A chronic duodenal ulcer. (B) Low-power cross-section view of a duodenal ulcer crater with an acute inflamma-
tory exudate in the base.
nature and intensity of the injury, the site and tissue
destruction and the damaged parenchymal cells can
affected, and the responsiveness of the host, acute inflam-
regenerate. Resolution involves reimoval of cellular
matory reactions typically have one of three outcomes
debris and microbes by macrophages, and resorption of
(Fig. 3.16):
edema fluid by lymphatics.
 Complete resolution. In a perfect world, all inflamna-
 Healing by connective tissue replacement (scarring, or
tory reactions, after they have succeeded in eliminating
fibrosis). This occurs after substantial tissue destruction,
the offending agent, should end with restoration of the
ae j sanss saou An aout a um
site of acute inflaimnation to norimal. This is called reso-
incapable of regeneration, or when there is abundant
lution and is the usual outcome when the injury is
fibrin exudation in tissue or in serous cavities (pleura,
limited or short-lived or when there has been little tissue
peritoneuin) that cannot be adequately cleared. In all
ACUTE INFLAMMATION
RESOLUTION
·Vascular changes
· Clearance of injurious stirmuli
•Neutrophil recruitment
· Clearance of mediators and acute
•Mediators
 inflammatory cells
· Replacerment of injured cells
+ Normal function
INJURY
▪Infarction
·Bacterial infections
▪Toxins
▪ Trauma
Pus formation (abscess)
Progression
Healing
Healing
 INJURY
Healing
+Viral infections
• Chronic infections 
·Persistent injury
FIBROSIS
· Autoirmmune diseases
•Loss of function
CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
Angiogenesis
•Mononuclear cell infitrate 
▪ Fibrosis (scar)
Fig. 3.l6 Outcomes of acute inflammation: resolution, healing by fibrosis, or chronic inflammation. The components of the various reactions and their func-
tional outcomes are listed.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Chronic Inflammation 
81
these situations, connective tissue grows into the area of
ally thoughtof as inflammatory disorders. These include
 damage or exudate, converting it into a inass of fibrous
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer disease,
tissue.
metabolic syndrome and the associated type 2 diabetes,
● Progression of the response to chronic inflammation.
and certain cancers in which inflaimmatory reactions
Acute to chronic transition occurs when the acute
 promote tumor development. The role of inflamnation
 inflaimunatory response cannot be resolved, as a result
in these conditions is discussed in the relevant
of either the persistence of the injurious agent or some
chapters.
 interference with the norimal process of healing.
Morphologic Features
CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
In contrast to acute inflamnation, which is manifested by
vascular changes, edema, and predominantly neutrophilic
Chronic inflammation is a response of prolonged dura-
infiltration, chronic inflaimmation is characterized by the
tion (weeks or months) in which inflammation, tissue
following:
 injury, and attempts at repair coexist, in varying combi-
 Infiltration with mononuclear cells, which include
nations. It may follow acute inflaimmation, as described
 Imacrophages, lynphocytes, and plasima cells (Fig. 3.17)
earlier, or may begin insidiously, as a simoldering, some-
Tissue destruction, induced by the persistent offending
times progressive, process without any signs of a preced-
agent or by the inflaimmatory cells
ing acute reaction.
r ss     s
-d) siaou Aq pausduo ans paeurp go
Causes of Chronic Inflammation
eration of simall blood vessels) and, in particular,
fibrosis
 Chronic inflamnation arises in the following settings:
· Persistent infections by imicroorganisms that are diffi-
cult to eradicate, such as mycobacteria and certain
viruses, fungi, and parasites. These organisims often
evoke an iminune reaction called delayed-type hypersen-
sitivity (Chapter 5). The inflammatory response some.
times takes a specific pattern called granulomatous
inflammation (discussed later). In other cases, unresolved
acute inflaimunation evolves into chronic inflaimnation,
such as when an acute bacterial infection of the lung
progresses to a chronic lung abscess.
 Hypersensitivity diseases. Chronic inflamnation plays
by excessive and inappropriate activation of the immune
system (Chapter 5). In autoimmune diseases, self (auto)
antigens evoke a self-perpetuating immune reaction
that results in chronic inflaimnation and tissue damage;
examples of such diseases are rheunatoid arthritis and
A
multiple sclerosis. In allergic diseases, chronic inflamma-
tion is the result of excessive imimune responses against
comnon environmental substances, as in bronchial
asthma. Because these autoimmune and allergic reac-
aou are je suanue isuee panain are suon
harimless, the reactions serve no useful purpose and
only cause disease. Such diseases may show morpho-
logic patterns of mixed acute and chronic inflammation
because they are characterized by repeated bouts of
inflaimunation. Fibrosis may dominate the late stages.
· Prolonged exposure to potentially toxic agents, either
exogenous or endogenous. An example of an exoge-
nous agent is particulate silica, a nondegradable inani-
 mate material that, when inhaled for prolonged periods,
results in an inflaimmatory lung disease called silicosis
B
(Chapter 13). Atherosclerosis (Chapter 10) is a chronic
inflaimnatory process affecting the arterial wall that is
Fig. 3.17 (A) Chronic inflammation in the lung, showing all three charac-
thought to be induced, at least in part, by excessive
production and tissue deposition of endogenous choles-
(2) destruction of parenchyma (normal alveoli are replaced by spaces lined
by cuboidal epithelium, arrowheads),and (3) replacement by connective tissue
terol and other lipids.
(fibrosis, orrows). (B) In contrast, in acute inflarmrmation of the lung (acute
 Some forms of chronic inflammation may be important
bronchopneumonia), neutrophils fill the alveolar spaces and blood vessels
in the pathogenesis of diseases that are not convention-
are congested.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
82
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
 Because angiogenesis and fibrosis are also components 
found in specific locations in organs such as the liver
of wound healing and repair, they are discussed later, in 
(where they are called Kupffer cells), spleen and lymph
the context of tissue repair.
nodes (sinus histiocytes), central nervous system (imicrog-
n (s ro) s pe ( l
Cells and Mediators of Chronic Inflammation
these cells comprise the mononuclear phagocyte system, also
known by the older (and inaccurate) name of reticuloen-
The combination of leukocyte infiltration, tissue damage,
dothelial system.
and fibrosis that characterize chronic inflaimmation is the
 In inflaimnatory reactions, progenitors in the bone
result of the local activation of several cell types and the
 marrow give rise to monocytes, which enter the blood,
 production of mediators.
migrate into various tissues, and differentiate into macro-
phages. Entry of blood monocytes into tissues is governed
Role of Macrophages
by the same factors that are involved in neutrophil emigra-
The dominant cells in most chronic inflammatory reac-
tion, such as adhesion molecules and cheimokines.
.The
tions are macrophages, which contribute to the reaction
half-life of blood monocytes is about 1 day, whereas the
by secreting cytokines and growth factors that act on
life span of tissue macrophages is several months or years.
various cells, by destroying foreign invaders and tissues,
Thus, macrophages often becoime the doiminant cell popu-
and by activating other cells, notably T lymphocytes.
lation in inflamunatory reactions within 48 hours of onset.
Macrophages are professional phagocytes that act as filters
The macrophages that reside in tissues in the steady state
for particulate matter, imicrobes, and senescent cells. They
(in the absence of tissue injury or inflaimunation), such as
also function as effector cells that eliminate microbes in
 microglia, Kupffer cells, and alveolar macrophages, arise
cellular and humoral immune responses (Chapter 5). But
from the yolk sac or fetal liver very early in einbryogenesis,
they serve many other roles in inflaimnation and repair.
 populate the tissues, stay for long periods, and are replen-
ished mainly by the proliferation of resident cells.
ing their developiment and functional responses.
There are two major pathways of macrophage activa-
Macrophages are tissue cells derived from hematopoi-
tion, called classical and alternative (Fig. 3.19). Which of
 etic sten cells in the bone marrow and froim progenitors in
aqono uaa e Aq uan si semd omi asa
the eimbryonic yolk sac and fetal liver during early devel-
 depends on the nature of the activating signals.
opment (Fig. 3.18). Circulating cells of this lineage are
Aq p a A  d pss
known as monocytes. Macrophages are norimally diffusely
microbial products such as endotoxin, which engage
scattered in most connective tissues. In addition, they are
TLRs and other sensors, and by T cell-derived signals,
Bone marrow
Hemopoietic
Blood monocyte
stem cell
Activated macrophages in inflammation
 Macrophages in skin, intestinal tract
Resident tissue macrophages
Yolk
(Kupffer cells, alveolar macrophages,
sac
microglia, etc.)
Liver
Progenitor in
 yolk sac, fetal liver
A
B
Monocyte
 Activated macrophage
Fig. 3.18 Maturation of mononuclear phagocytes. (A) During inflarmmatory reactions, the majority of tissue macrophages are derived from hematopoietic
precursors. Some long-lived resident tissue macrophages are derived from ermbryonic precursors that populate the tissues early in development. (B) The
morphology of a monocyte and activated macrophage.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Chronic Inflammation 
83
CLASSICALLY
ALTERNATIVELY
 Macrophages secrete mediators of inflammation, such
ACTIVATED
ACTIVATED
 as cytokines (TNF, IL-1, chemokines, and others) and
MACROPHAGE (M1)
MACROPHAGE (M2)
eicosanoids. Thus, macrophages are central to the initia-
Microbial
tion and propagation of inflaimmatory reactions.
TLR-ligands,
IL-13
 Macrophages display antigens to T lymphocytes and
IFN-y
IL-4
-paap e dn suas sn 'shn I woy seuis on puods
Au isu asuap ron ienuassa si ie don 
microbes by cell-mediated imnune responses. These
Monocyte
interactions are described further in the discussion of
the role of lymphocytes in chronic inflammation, later
ROS, NO,
IL-10,
in this chapter, and in more detail in Chapter 5 where
lysosomal
TGF-β
cell-mediated immunity is considered.
enzymes
IL-1, TNF, IL-12, 
IL-6,
Their impressive arsenal of mediators makes macro-
chemokines
Anti-inflammatory
phages powerful allies in the body's defense against
 Microbicidal
effects, wound
unwanted invaders, but the saime weaponry can also
 actions
repair, fibrosis
+
induce considerable tissue destruction when macrophages
Phagocytosis
 and killing
are inappropriately or excessively activated. It is because
of bacteria 
of these activities of macrophages that tissue destruction is
 and fungi
hflammation
 one of the hallmarks of chronic inflaimmation.
In some instances if the irritant is eliminated, macro-
Fig. 3.19 Classical and alternative macrophage activation. Different stimuli
 phages eventually disappear (either dying off or making
activate monocytes/macrophages to develop into functionaly distinct popu-
s u (   s  m 
lations. Classicaly activated macrophages are induced by microbial products
and cytokines, particularly IFN-y. They phagocytose and destroy microbes 
 macrophage accunulation persists, as a result of continu-
and dead tissues and can potentiate inflarmmatory reactions. Alternatively
ous recruitment from the circulation and local proliferation
activated macrophages are induced by other cytokines and are important in
at the site of inflamunation.
tissue repair and the resolution of inflammation.
Role of Lymphocytes
Microbes and other environmental antigens activate T
importantly the cytokine IFN-, in immune responses.
 and B lymphocytes, which amplify and propagate chronic
Classically activated (also called M1) imacrophages
inflammation. Although the major function of these lym-
produce NO and ROS and upregulate lysosoimal
phocytes is as the mediators of adaptive imnunity, which
enzyimes, all of which enhance their ability to kill
provides defense against infectious pathogens (Chapter 5),
ingested organisims, and secrete cytokines that stimulate
these cells are often present in chronic inflaimmation and,
inflaimmation. These macrophages are important in host
when they are activated, the inflamimation tends to be per-
Arouuru Auu u pue saqor jsue asuaan
sistent and severe. Some of the strongest chronic inflam-
reactions.
 matory reactions, such as granulomatous inflaimnation,
 Alternative macrophage activation is induced by cyto-
described later, are dependent on lymphocyte responses.
kines other than IFN-, such as IL-4 and IL-13, produced
Lymphocytes may be the doiminant population in the
by T lymphocytes and other cells. These macrophages
chronic inflammation seen in autoimnune and other
are not actively microbicidal; instead, the principal func-
hypersensitivity diseases.
tion of alternatively activated (M2) macrophages is in
By virtue of their ability to secrete cytokines, CD4+ T
tissue repair. They secrete growth factors that promote
 lymphocytes promote inflammation and influence the
angiogenesis, activate fibroblasts, and stimulate colla-
nature of the inflammatory reaction. These T cells greatly
 gen synthesis.
 recognition of microbes and dead cells as part of the innate
 It seeins plausible that in response to most injurious
imnune response. There are three subsets of CD4+ T cells
stimuli, the first activation pathway is the classical one,
that secrete different cytokines and elicit different types of
 designed to destroy the offending agents, and this is fol-
inflamnation.
lowed by alternative activation, which initiates tissue
 T1 cells produce the cytokine IFN-, which activates
 repair. However, such a precise sequence is not well docu-
 macrophages by the classical pathway.
mented in most inflaimmatory reactions. In addition,
 TH2 cells secrete IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, which recruit and
although the concept of M1 and M2 macrophages provides
activate eosinophils and are responsible for the alterna-
a useful framework for understanding macrophage hetero-
tive pathway of macrophage activation.
geneity, nunerous (
 other subpopulations have
been
T17 cells secrete IL-17 and other cytokines, which
described and the M1 and M2 subsets are not fixed.
induce the secretion of cheimokines responsible for
 The products of activated macrophages eliminate inju-
 recruiting neutrophils into the reaction.
rious agents such as microbes and initiate the process of
repair, but are also responsible for much of the tissue
Both T1 and T17 cells are involved in defense against
injury in chronic inflammation. Several functions of mac-
 many types of bacteria and viruses and in autoiminune
rophages are central to the developiment and persistence of
 chronic inflammation and the accoimpanying tissue injury.
s I asa uogueun sane un pue sased s
http://ebooksmedicine.net
84
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
T lymphocyte
Cytokines
(e.g., IL-12,
IL-6, IL-23)
 Activated
T lymphocyte
Activated
(TH1, Th17)
macrophage
Presents
antigen to
T cells
IL-17,
TNF,
TNF
IL-1,
chemokines
IFN-Y
Leukocyte
Leukocyte
Other
Other
recruitment,
recruitment,
inflammatory
inflammatory
inflammation
inflammation
mediators
Classical
macrophage
mediators
 activation
Macrophage
Fig. 3.20 Macrophage-lymphocyte interactions in chronic inflarmmation.Activated T cells produce cytokines that recruit macrophages (TNF, IL-17, chermo-
 kines) and others that activate macrophages (IFN-v).Activated macrophages in turn stirmulate T cells by presenting antigens and via cytokines such as IL-I2.
subsets and their functions are described in more detail in
cells. Eosinophils have granules that contain major basic
Chapter 5.
protein, a highly cationic protein that is toxic to parasites
-baiq e un ioraui saedonur pue sarordu
but also injures host epithelial cells. This is why eosino-
tional way, and these interactions play an important role
phils are of benefit in controlling parasitic infections, yet
 (oe  uo s sunond u
 also contribute to tissue daimage in immune reactions
phages display antigens to T cells, express membrane
such as allergies (Chapter 5).
molecules (called costimulators) that activate T cells,
Mast cells are widely distributed in connective tissues
and produce cytokines (IL-12 and others) that also
and participate in both acute and chronic inflamna-
stimulate T cell responses (Chapter 5). Activated T lym-
tory reactions. Mast cells arise from precursors in the
 phocytes, in turn, produce cytokines, described earlier,
bone marrow. They have many similarities with circu-
which recruit and activate macrophages, promoting more
lating basophils, but they do not arise froin basophils,
antigen presentation and cytokine secretion. The result is
are tissue-resident, and therefore play more significant
 a cycle of cellular reactions that fuel and sustain chronic
roles in inflamumatory reactions in tissues than baso-
inflamnation.
phils do. Mast cells (and basophils) express on their
Activated B
 lymphocytes  and  antibody-producing
surface the receptor FceRI, which binds the Fc portion
plasima cells are often present at sites of chronic inflaimma-
of IgE antibody. In immediate hypersensitivity reac-
 tion. The antibodies may be specific for persistent foreign
tions, IgE bound to the mast cells' Fc receptors spe-
or self antigens in the inflammatory site or against altered
cifically recognizes antigen, and in response the cells
tissue components. However, the specificity and even the
degranulate and release mediators, such as histamine
importance of antibodies in most chronic inflamimatory
and prostaglandins (Chapter 5). This type of response
disorders are unclear.
Occurs during allergic reactions to foods, insect venom,
 In some chronic inflaimumatory reactions, the accumu-
or drugs, sometimes with catastrophic results (e.g., ana-
 lated lyimphocytes, antigen-presenting cells, and plasma
 phylactic shock). Mast cells also are present in chronic
cells cluster together to form lymphoid structures resem-
inflaimmatory reactions, and because they secrete a
bling the follicles found in lyimph nodes. These are called
tertiary lymphoid organs; this type of lymphoid organogen-
esis is often seen in the synovium of patients with long-
standing rheumatoid arthritis, in the thyroid in Hashimoto
thyroiditis, and in the gastric mucosa in the setting of Heli-
cobacter pyloriinfection. It has been postulated that thelocal
formation of lymphoid organs may perpetuate the imimune
reaction, but the significance of these structures is not
established.
Other Cells in Chronic inflammation
 Other cell types may be prominent in chronic inflammation
induced by particular stimuli.
· Eosinophils are abundant in immnune reactions medi-
 ated by IgE and in parasitic infections (Fig. 3.21). Their
recruitiment is driven by adhesion molecules similar to
those used by neutrophils, and by specific cheimokines
(e.g, eotaxin) derived from leukocytes and epithelial
Fig. 3.2l A focus of inflammation containing numerous eosinophils.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Chronic Inflammation
85
plethora of cytokines, they can promote inflammatory
reactions.
 Although neutrophils are characteristic of acute inflam-
 mation, many forims of chronic inflaimnation, lasting for
 months, continue to show large numbers of neutrophils,
induced either by persistent microbes or by cytokines
and other mediators produced by activated macro-
phages and T lymphocytes. In chronic bacterial infec-
tion of bone (osteomyelitis), a neutrophilic exudate can
persist for many months. Neutrophils also are impor-
tant in the chronic damage induced in lungs by smoking.
H d s ( d) s j o 
inflammation has been called acute on chronic.
Granulomatous infammation
Granulomatous inflammation is a form of chronic inflam-
mation characterized by collections of activated macro-
Fig. 3.22 Typical tuberculous granuloma showing an area of central necrosis
phages, often with T lymphocytes, and sometimes
surrounded by multiple multinucleate giant cells, epithelioid cells, and
associated with central necrosis. The activated macro-
ymphocytes.
 phages imay develop abundant cytoplasim and begin to
reseimble epithelial cells, and are called epithelioid cells.
Some activated macrophages may fuse, foriming multinu-
 granulomas; these are called Langhans giant cells.They consist of
cleate giart cells. Granuloma formation is a cellular attempt
a large mass of cytoplasm and many nuclei. Granulomas associ-
to contain an offending agent that is difficult to eradicate.
ated with certain infectious organisms (classically Mycobacterium
In this attempt there is often strong activation of T lyimpho-
tuberculosis) often contain a central zone of necrosis. Grossly, this
cytes leading to macrophage activation, which can cause
has a granular, cheesy appearance and is therefore called caseous
injury to norimal tissues.
necrosis. Microscopically, this necrotic material appears as
There are two types of granulomas, which differ in their
amorphous, structureless, eosinophilic, granular debris, with loss
pathogenesis.
 of cellular details. The granulomas in Crohn disease, sarcoidosis,
· Immune granulomas are caused by a variety of agents
and foreign body reactions tend to not have necrotic centers
 that are capable of inducing a persistent T celi-imediated
and are said to be noncaseating. Healing of granulomas is accom-
immune response. This type of immune response pro-
 panied by fibrosis that may be extensive.
duces granulomas usually when the inciting agent
cannot be readily eliminated, such as a persistent
microbe or a self antigen. In such responses, macro-
phages activate T cells to produce cytokines, such as
IL-2, which activates other T cells, perpetuating the
response, and IFN-, which activates the macrophages.
Granulomas are encountered in certain specific patho-
-ean oi asuodsan u uas are srnu aoq uia
logic states; recognition of the granulomatous pattern is
tively inert foreign bodies, in the absence of T cell-
important because of the limited nunber of conditions
 mediated immune responses. Typically, foreign body
(some life threatening) that cause it (Table 3.9). In the
 granulomas form around materials such as talc (associ-
setting of persistent T cell responses to certain imicrobes 
ated with intravenous drug abuse), sutures, or other
(e.g., M. tuberculosis, Treponema pallidum, or fungi), T cell-
fibers that are large enough to preclude phagocytosis by
derived cytokines are responsible for chronic macrophage
a macrophage but are not immunogenic. Epithelioid
activation and granuloma formation. Granulomas may
cells and giant cells are apposed to the surface of the
also develop in some immune-mediated inflammatory
foreign body. The foreign material can usually be identi-
diseases, notably Crohn disease, which is one type of
fied in the center of the granuloma, particularly if
inflammatory bowel disease and an important cause of
e A h m   pd m p
 granulomatous inflamnation in the United States, and in
refractile.
a disease of unknown etiology called sarcoidosis. Tubercu-
losis is the prototype of a granulomatous disease caused
by infection and should always be excluded as the cause
when granulomas are identified. In this disease the granu-
MORPHOLOGY
 loma is referred to as a tubercle. The morphologic patterns
in the various granulomatous diseases may be sufficiently
In the usual H&E stained tissue samples (Fig. 3.22), the activated
 different to allow a reasonably accurate diagnosis (Table
macrophages in granulomas have pink granular cytoplasm with
3.9), but it is always necessary to identify the specific etio-
indistinct cell boundaries and are called epithelioid cells. A
logic agent by special stains for organisms (e.g., acid-fast
collar of lymphocytes surrounds the aggregates of epithelioid
stains for tubercle bacilli), by culture methods (e.g., in
macrophages. Older granulomas may have a rim of fibroblasts
tuberculosis and fungal diseases), by molecular techniques
and connective tissue. Frequently, but not invariably, multinucle-
(e.g., the polymerase chain reaction in tuberculosis), and
ated giant cells 40 to 50 μm in diameter are found in
by serologic studies (e.g., in syphilis).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
86
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
Table 3.9 Examples of Diseases With Granulomatous Inflammation
Disease
Cause
Tissue Reaction
Tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Caseating granuloma (tubercle): focus of activated macrophages
(epithelioid cells), rimmed by fibroblasts, ymphocytes,
histiocytes, occasional Langhans giant cells; central necrosis
with amorphous granular debris; acid-fast bacilli
Leprosy
 Mycobacteriturm leprae
Acid-fast bacilli in macrophages; noncaseating granulomas
 Syphilis
Treponerma pallidum
Gumma: microscopic to grossy visible lesion, enclosing wall of
 macrophages; plasma cell infltrate; central cells are necrotic
without loss of cellular outline; organisms difficult to identify in
tissue
Cat-scratch disease
Gram-negative bacillus
 Rounded or stellate granuloma containing central granular debris
and recognizable neutrophils; giant cells uncommon
Sarcoidosis
Unknown etiology
 Noncaseating granulomas with abundant activated macrophages
Crohn disease (inflammatory
Immune reaction against
Occasional noncaseating granulomas in the wall of the intestine,
bowel disease)
undefined gut microbes
with dense chronic inflammatory infiltrate 
and, possibly, self antigens
SUMMARY
The acute-phase response consists of several clinical and
pathologic changes:
CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
·Fever, characterized by an elevation of body teimpera-
+ Chronic inflammation is a prolonged host response to persis-
ture, usually by 1° to 4°C, is one of the most prominent
tent stimuli that may follow unresolved acute inflammation or
Imanifestations of the acute-phase response, espe-
be chronic from the outset.
cially when inflaimunation is associated with infection.
· It is caused by microbes that resist elimination, immune
 Substances that induce fever are called pyrogers. The
responses against self and environmental antigens, and some
-eisond Aq pasnes si aiaduan Apoq ui asea
toxic substances (e.g, silica); underlies many medically impor-
dins that are produced in the vascular and perivascular
tant diseases.
cells of the hypothalamus. Bacterial products, such as
+ It is characterized by coexisting inflammation, tissue injury,
LPS (called exogenous pyrogers), stimulate leukocytes to
-ua pa) N pue ITlse ns sau ase
 attempted repair by scarring, and immune response.
+ The cellular infiltrate consists of macrophages, lymphocytes,
enous pyrogers) that increase the enzyimes (cyclooxygen-
plasma cells, and other leukocytes.
ases) that convert arachadonic acid into prostaglandins.
+ It is mediated by cytokines produced by macrophages and
 In the hypothalamus, the prostaglandins, especially
lymphocytes (notably T lymphocytes); bidirectional interac-
PGEz, stinulate the production of neurotransmitters
tions between these cells tend to amplify and prolong the
that reset the temperature set point at a higher level.
 inflammatory reaction.
NSAIDs, including aspirin, reduce fever by inhibiting
+ Granulomatous inflammation is a morphologically specific
 prostaglandin synthesis. How, and even if, fever con-
 pattern of chronic inflammation induced by T cell and macro-
tributes to the protective host response remains unclear.
phage activation in response to an agent that is resistant to
 Acute-phase proteins are plasima proteins, mostly syn-
eradication.
thesized in the liver, whose plasma concentrations may
increase several hundred-fold as part of the response
to inflaimnatory stimuli. Three of the best-known of
these proteins are C-reactive protein (CRP), fibrinogen,
a jo sisas uand ()  proe us p
molecules in hepatocytes is stinulated by cytokines.
Many acute-phase proteins, such as CRP and SAA, bind
SYSTEMIC EFFECTS OF
to microbial cell walls, and they may act as opsonins
INFLAMMATION
and fix complement. Fibrinogen binds to red cells and
causes them to form stacks (rouleaux) that sediment
Inflammation, even if it is localized, is associated with
 more rapidly at unit gravity than do individual red cells.
cytokine-induced systemic reactions that are collectively
This is the basis for measuring the erythrocyte sedimenta-
called the acute-phase response. Anyone who has suf-
tion rate as a simple test for an inflaimumatory response
fered through a severe bout of a bacterial or viral illness
caused by any stimulus. Acute-phase proteins have ben-
(e.g, pneumonia or influenza) has experienced the sys-
eficial effects during acute inflaimmation, but prolonged
teimic inanifestations of acute inflaimmation. These changes
production of these proteins (especially SAA) in states
are reactions to cytokines whose production is stimulated
of chronic inflammation can, in some cases, cause sec-
by bacterial products such as LPS, viral double stranded
oncdary amyloidosis (Chapter 5). Elevated serun levels of
RNA and by other inflamnatory stimuli. The cytokines
CRP serve as a marker for increased risk of myocardial
TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 are important mediators of the acute-
     s n 
 is postulated that inflammation involving atheroscle-
also contribute to the reaction.
rotic plaques in the coronary arteries predisposes to
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tissue Repair
87
thrombosis and subsequent infarction. Another peptide
whose production is increased in the acute-phase
SUMMARY
response is the iron-regulating peptide hepcidin. Chroni-
 SYSTEMIC EFFECTS OF INFLAMMATION 
cally elevated plasima concentrations of hepcidin reduce
+ Fever: Cytokines (TNF, IL-I) stimulate production of PGs in
the availability of iron and are responsible for the anemia
hypothalamus 
associated with chronic inflamnation (Chapter 12).
+ Production of acute-phase proteins: C-reactive protein, others;
Leukocytosis is a coinmon feature of inflamimatory
 synthesis stimulated by cytokines (IL-6, others) acting on liver
reactions, especially those induced by bacterial infec-
cells
tions. The leukocyte count usually climbs to 15,000 or
+ Leukocytosis: Cytokines (CsFs) stimulate production of leuko-
20,000 cells/mL, but sometimes it may reach extraordi-
cytes from precursors in the bone marrow
narily high levels of 40,000 to 100,000 cells/mL. These
+ In some severe infections, septic shock: Fall in blood pressure,
extreime elevations are referred to as leukemoid reactions,
disseminated intravascular coagulation, metabolic abnormali-
because they are similar to (and must be distinguished
ties; induced by high levels of TNF and other cytokines
from) the white cell counts observed in leukemia. The
leukocytosis occurs initially because of accelerated
release of cells from the bone imarrow postimitotic reserve
pool (caused by cytokines, including TNF and IL-l) and
TISSUE REPAIR
is therefore associated with a rise in the number of more
immature neutrophils in the blood, referred to as a shift
Overview of Tissue Repair
 to the left. Prolonged infection also induces proliferation
of precursors in the bone marrow, caused by increased
Critical to the survival of an organisin is the ability to
production of colony-stimulating factors (CSFs). Thus,
repair the damage caused by toxic insults and inflamna-
if inflammation is sustained the bone marrow output of
 tion. In fact, the inflamimatory response to microbes and
leukocytes increases, an effect that usually more than
 injured tissues not only serves to eliminate these dangers
conpensates for the loss of these cells in the inflaimma-
 but also sets into motion the process of repair.
tory reaction. (See also the discussion of leukocytosis in
Repair of damaged tissues occurs by two types of
Chapter 12.) Most bacterial infections induce an increase
reactions: regeneration by proliferation of residual (unin-
in the blood neutrophil count, called reutrophilia. Viral
jured) cells and maturation of tissue stem cells, and the
 infections, such as infectious imononucleosis, mumps,
deposition of connective tissue to form a scar (Fig. 3.23).
and Geriman measles, cause an absolute increase in the
 Regeneration. Some tissues are able to replace the
number of lymphocytes (lymphocytosis). In soime aller-
damaged components and essentially return to a norimal
 gies and parasitic infestations, there is an increase in the
number of blood eosinophils, creating an cosinophilia.
NORMAL
Certain infections (typhoid fever and infections caused
by some viruses, rickettsiae, and certain protozoa) are
associated with a decreased number of circulating white
cells (leukopenia).
 Other manifestationsof the acute-phase response include
increased heart rate and blood pressure; decreased
sweating, mainly because of redirection of blood flow
from cutaneous to deep vascular beds, to minimize heat
loss through the skin; rigors (shivering), chills (search for
Mild, superficial injury
Severe injury
warimth), anorexia, somnolence, and malaise, probably
because of the actions of cytokines on brain cells.
In severe bacterial infections (sepsis), the large amounts
of bacteria and their products in the blood stimulate the
production of enorimous quantities of several cytokines,
notably TNF and IL-1. High blood levels of cytokines
sive shock, and metabolic disturbances including insulin
REGENERATION
SCAR FORMATION
resistance and hyperglycemia. This clinical triad is known
as septic shock; it is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
A syndrome similar to septic shock may occur as a coim-
plication of noninfectious disorders, such as severe burns,
trauma, pancreatitis, and other serious conditions. Col-
lectively these reactions are called systemic inflammatory
rsponse syndrome (SIRS).
We next consider the process of repair, which is a
Fig. 3.23 Mechanisms of tissue repair: regeneration and scar formation.
Following mild injury, which damages the epithelium but not the underlying
healing response to tissue destruction resulting froim
tissue, resolution occurs by regeneration, but after more severe injury with
inflaimumation or other causes.
damage to the connective tissue, repair is by scar formation.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
88
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
state; this process is called regeneration. Regeneration
that are derived froim tissue stem cells and rapidly prolifer-
occurs by proliferation of cells that survive the injury
ating immature progenitors. These types of tissues include
and retain the capacity to proliferate, for exaimple, in the
hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow and many surface
rapidly dividing epithelia of the skin and intestines, and
epithelia, such as the basal layers of the squamous epithelia
 in some parenchymal organs, notably the liver. In other
of the skin, oral cavity, vagina, and cervix; the cuboidal epi-
cases, tissue stem cells may contribute to the restoration
thelia of the ducts draining exocrine organs (e.g, salivary
of damaged tissues. However, whereas lower animals
 glands, pancreas, biliary tract); the columnar epithelium
such as salamanders and fish can regenerate entire
of the gastrointestinal tract, uterus, and fallopian tubes;
 and the transitional epithelium of the urinary tract. These
to regenerate damaged tissues and organs, and only
tissues can readily regenerate after injury as long as the
some components of most tissues are able to fully restore
 pool of stem cells is preserved.
themselves.
Other tissues (called stable tissues) are made up of cells
 Connective tissue deposition (scar formation). If the
that are norimally in the Go stage of the cell cycle and
injured tissues are incapable of complete restitution, or
hence not proliferating, but they are capable of dividing in
if the supporting structures of the tissue are severely
response to injury or loss of tissue mass. These tissues
-au jo umop sue au Aq snno redan paseun
include the parenchyma of most solid organs, such as
tive (fibrous) tissue, a process that may result in forima-
liver, kidney, and pancreas. Endothelial cells, fibroblasts,
tion of a scar. Although the fibrous scar is not norimal, it
and simooth muscle cells are also norimally quiescent but
provides enough structural stability that the injured
can proliferate in response to growth factors, a reaction
tissue is usually able to function. The term fibrosis is
that is particularly important in wound healing.
most often used to describe the extensive deposition of
Some tissues (called permanent tissues) consist of termi-
collagen that occurs in the lungs, liver, kidney, and
nally differentiated nonproliferative cells, such as the
other organs as a consequence of chronic inflaimnation,
 majority of neurons and cardiac muscle cells. Injury to
or in the myocardium after extensive ischeimic necrosis
these tissues is irreversible and results in a scar, because
(infarction) If fibrosis develops in a tissue space occu-
the cells cannot regenerate. Skeletal muscle cells are
pied by an inflamnatory exudate, it is called organiza-
usually considered nondividing, but satellite cells attached
tior (as in organizing pneumonia affecting the lung).
to the endomysial sheath provide some regenerative
capacity for muscle.
After many coimmon types of injury, both regeneration
Cell proliferation is driven by signals provided by
and scar forimation contribute in varying degrees to the
growth factors and from the extracellular matrix. Many
ultimate repair. Both processes involve the proliferation of
different growth factors have been described, soime of
various cells, and close interactions between cells and the
which act on multiple cell types, while others are
exracellular imatrix (ECM). We first discuss the general
cell-type specific (Chapter 1). Growth factors are typically
produced by cells near the site of damage. The most impor-
then the salient features of regeneration and healing by
tant sources of these growth factors are macrophages that
scar forimation, and conclude with a description of cutane-
are activated by the tissue injury, but epithelial and stromal
ous wound healing and fibrosis (scarring) in parenchymal
cells also produce soime of these factors. Several growth
organs as illustrations of the repair process.
factors bind to ECM proteins and are displayed at the site
of tissue injury at high concentrations. All growth factors
Cell and Tissue Regeneration
 in gene expression that drive cells through the cell cycle
The regeneration of injured cells and tissues involves cell
and support the biosynthesis of imolecules and organelles
proliferation, which is driven by growth factors and is
that are needed for cell division (Chapter l). In addition to
critically dependent on the integrity of the extracellular
responding to growth factors, cells use integrins to bind to
matrix, and by the development of mature cells from
ECM proteins, and signals from the integrins can also stim-
stem cells. Before describing examples of repair by regen-
ulate cell proliferation.
eration, we discuss the control of cell proliferation in this
 In the process of regeneration, proliferation of residual
process. The general principles of cell proliferation were
cells is suppleimented by developiment of mature cells from
sumnarized in Chapter 1.
Cell Proliferation: Signals and Control Mechanisms
stem cells. In adults, the most important steim cells for
regeneration after injury are tissue stem cells. These stem
Several cell types proliferate during tissue repair. These
cells live in specialized niches, and it is believed that injury
include the remnants of the injured tissue (which attempt
triggers signals in these niches that activate quiescent stem
to restore norimal structure), vascular endothelial cells (to
cells to proliferate and differentiate into mature cells that
create new vessels that provide the nutrients needed for
repopulate the injured tissue.
the repair process), and fibroblasts (the source of the fibrous
tissue that forims the scar to fill defects that cannot be cor-
Mechanisms ofTissue Regeneration
rected by regeneration).
The importance of regeneration in the replaceinent of
The ability of tissues to repair themselves is determined,
injured tissues varies in different types of tissues and with
in part, by their intrinsic proliferative capacity. In some
the severity of injury.
tissues (sometimes called μbile tissues), cells are constantly
· In epithelia of the intestinal tract and skin, injured cells
being lost and must be continually replaced by new cells
are rapidly replaced by proliferation of residual cells
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tissue Repair
89
and differentiation of cells derived froim tissue stem
cells, providing the underlying baseiment meimbrane is
SUMMARY
intact. The residual epithelial cells produce the growth
REPAIR BY REGENERATION
factors involved in these processes. The newly gener-
+ Different tissues consist of continuously dividing cells (epithe-
 ated cells migrate to fill the defect created by the injury,
lia, hematopoietic tissues), normally quiescent cells that are
and tissue integrity is restored (Fig. 3.23).
capable of proliferation (most parenchymal organs), and non-
· Tissue regeneration can occur in parenchymal organs
dividing cells (neurons, skeletal and cardiac muscle).The regen-
whose cells are capable of proliferation, but with the
exception of the liver, this is usually a limited process.
erative capacity of a tissue depends on the proliferative
potential of its constituent cells.
Pancreas, adrenal, thyroid, and lung have some regen-
+ Cell proliferation is controlled by the cell cycle, and is stimu-
lated by growth factors and interactions of cells with the
je asuodsan Anojesuaduos e Aaup burureuan a u
consists of both hypertrophy and hyperplasia of proxi-
extracellular matrix.
mal ductcells. The mechanisims underlying this response
· Regeneration of the liver is a classic example of repair by
regeneration. It is triggered by cytokines and growth factors
produced in response to loss of liver mass and inflammation.
tion of growth factors and interactions of cells with the
ECM. The extraordinary capacity of the liver to regener-
In different situations, regeneration may occur by proliferation
of surviving hepatocytes or repopulation from progenitor cells.
ate has made it a valuable model for studying this
process, as described below.
Restoration of normal tissue architecture can occur only
if the residual tissue is structurally intact, for exaimple after 
Repair by Scarring
 partial surgical resection of the liver. By contrast, if the
entire tissue is damaged by infection or inflaimmation,
If repair cannot be accomplished by regeneration alone,
regeneration is incomplete and is accompanied by scarring.
it occurs by replacement of the injured cells with connec-
For example, extensive destruction of the liver with col-
tive tissue, leading to the formation of a scar, or by a
lapse of the reticulin fraimework, as occurs in a liver abscess,
combination of regeneration of some residual cells and
leads to scar forimation even though the remaining liver
scar formation. As discussed earlier, scarring may happen
 cells have the capacity to regenerate.
if the tissue injury is severe or chronic and results in
damage to parenchymal cells and epithelia as well as to the
Liver Regeneration
connective tissue fraimework, or if nondividing cells are
 The human liver has a remarkable capacity to regenerate,
injured. In contrast to regeneration, which involves the
as demonstrated by its growth after partial hepatectomy.
restitution of tissue components, scar formation is a
-ua o ro uonaan run g pauad aq Aeur ym
response that "patches" rather than restores the tissue. The
donor hepatic transplantation. The mythologic image of
terim scar is most often used in connection to wound healing
liver regeneration is the regrowth of the liver of Pro-
in the skin, but also may be used to describe the replace-
 ps aea ue  p a a sm m sa
ment of parenchymal cells in any tissue by collagen, as in
Zeus as punishiment for stealing the secret of fire, and
the heart after myocardial infarction.
regrew every night. The reality, although less dramatic, is
still quite impressive.
Steps in Scar Formation
 Regeneration of the liver occurs by two major mecha-
Repair by connective tissue deposition consists of a series
nisms: proliferation of remaining hepatocytes and repop-
 of sequential steps that follow tissue injury (Fig. 3.24).
ulation from progenitor cells. Which mechanism plays the
Within minutes after injury, a henostatic plug com-
dominant role depends on the nature of the injury.
prised of platelets (Chapter 4) is forimed, which stops
·Proliferation of hepatocytes following partial hepatec-
bleeding and provides a scaffold for infiltrating inflam-
tomy. In humans, resection of up to 90% of the liver can
matory cells.
be corrected by proliferation of the residual hepatocytes.
 Inflammation. This step is coimprised of the typical
This process is driven by cytokines such as IL-6 produced
acute and chronic inflammatory responses. Break-
by Kupffer cells, and by growth factors such as hepato-
down products of complement activation, chemokines
cyte growth factor (HGF) produced by many cell types.
released from activated platelets, and other mediators
Liver regeneration from progenitor celis. In situa-
produced at the site of injury function as cheinotac-
tions in which the proliferative capacity of hepato-
tic agents to recruit neutrophils and then monocytes
 ra  re s rns a si s
during the next 6 to 48 hours. As described earlier, these
or inflammation, progenitor cells in the liver contrib-
inflamnatory cells eliminate the offending agents, such
ute to repopulation. In rodents, these progenitor cells
as microbes that may have entered through the wound,
have been called cual cells because of the shape of their
and clear the debris. Macrophages are the central cel-
nuclei. Some of these progenitor cells reside in special-
 lular players in the repair process-M1 macrophages
ized niches called canals of Hering, where bile cana-
clear microbes and necrotic tissue and promote inflam-
liculi connect with larger bile ducts. The signals that
Imation in a positive feedback loop, and M2 macrophages
drive proliferation of progenitor cells and their differ-
produce growth factors that stimulate the prolifera-
entiation into mature hepatocytes are topics of active
tion of many cell types in the next stage of repair. As
investigation.
the injurious agents and necrotic cells are cleared, the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
06
CHAPTER3
 Inflammation and Repair
Platelet
Eschar
Fibroblast
Epithelial cells
Macrophage
 Granulation
Collagen scar
Neutrophil
tissue
Capillary
New blood vessels
A
B
C
Fig. 3.24 Steps in repair by scar formation: healing of a large v
ound in the skin.This is an example of healing by second intention. (A) Hermostatic plug and
inflammation. (B) Proliferation of epithelial cells; formation of granulation tissue by vessel growth and proliferating fibroblasts. (C) Rermodeling to produce the 
fibr ous scar.
inflaimnation resolves; how this inflammatory flame is
Imake this distinction in our discussion of the key events in
extinguished in most situations of injury is still not well
tissue repair.
defined.
 Cell proliferation. In the next stage, which takes up to
Angiogenesis
10 days, several cell types, including epithelial cells,
Angiogenesis is the process of new blood vessel develop-
endothelial and other vascular cells, and fibroblasts,
ment from existing vessels. It is critical in healing at sites
 proliferate and imigrate to close the now-clean wound.
of injury, in the development of collateral circulations at
Each cell type serves unique functions.
sites of ischeimia, and in allowing tumors to increase in size
 Epithelial cells respond to locally produced growth
beyond the constraints of their original blood supply.
factors and migrate over the wound to cover it.
 Much work has been done to understand the mechanisins
Endothelial and other vascutar cells proliferate to forin
of angiogenesis, and therapies have been developed either
new blood vessels, a process known as angiogenesis.
to augment the process (e.g., to improve blood flow to a
Because of the importance of this process in physio-
heart ravaged by coronary atherosclerosis) or to inhibit it
logic host responses and in many pathologic condi
(to frustrate tuimor growth or block pathologic vessel
tions, it is described in more detail later.
growth, as in wet macular degeneration of the eye).
Fibroblasts proliferate and migrate into the site of
Angiogenesis involves sprouting of new vessels froin
injury and lay down collagen fibers that form the
existing ones, and consists of the following steps (Fig. 3.25):
scar.
Vasodilation in response to NO and increased perimea-
 The combination of proliferating fibroblasts, loose
bility induced by VEGF
connective tissue, new blood vessels and scattered
 Separation of pericytes from the abluminal surface and
chronic inflamnatory cells, forms a type of tissue that
breakdown of the baseiment meimbrane to allow forima-
is unique to healing wounds and is called granulatior
tion of a vessel sprout
tissue. This term derives from its pink, soff, granular
 Migration of endothelial cells toward the area of tissue
 gross appearance, such as that seen beneath the scab
injury
of a skin wound.
Proliferation of endothelial cells just behind the leading
 Remodeling. The connective tissue that has been depos-
front ("tip") of migrating cells
ited by fibroblasts is reorganized to produce the stable
 Remodeling into capillary tubes
fibrous scar. This process begins 2 to 3 weeks after injury
Recruitment of periendothelial cells (pericytes for small
 and may continue for months or years.
capillaries and simooth muscle cells for larger vessels) to
forim the mature vessel
Healing of skin wounds can be classified into healing by
 Suppression of endothelial proliferation and migration
frst intention (primary union), referring to epithelial regen-
and deposition of the basement meimbrane
eration with minimal scarring, as in well-apposed surgical
incisions, and healing by second intention (secondary union),
It has been suggested that endothelial progenitor cells 
referring to larger wounds that heal by a combination of
are present in the bone marrow and can be recruited to
regeneration and scarring. Because the fundaimental pro-
 promote new vessel formation. However, these cells likely
cesses involved in both types of wound healing represent
play a minor, if any, role in the angiogenesis associated
a continuum froim regeneration to scarring, we do not
with the healing of most wounds.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tissue Repair
16
Quiescent
Vasodilation
 Notch signaling. Through "cross talk" with VEGF, the
vessel
(VEGF)
Notch signaling pathway regulates the sprouting and
branching of new vessels and thus ensures that the new
vessels that are formed have the proper spacing to effec-
Leading ('tip") cell
 tively supply the healing tissue with blood.
Angiogenic
(VEGF, Notch
signals)
ECM proteins participate in the process of vessel sprout-
factors
 s   sia  
Pericyte
-Pericyte detachment
(angiopoietin)
the scaffold for vessel growth.
Basement
 Enzymes in the ECM, notably the matrix metallopro-
membrane
 Basement membrane
teinases (MMPs), degrade the ECM to perimit remodel-
Endothelium
degradation (MMPs)
ing and extension of the vascular tube.
Newly forimed vessels are leaky because of incomplete
Pericyte
 interendothelial junctions and because VEGF, the growth
recruitment
factor that drives angiogenesis, increases vascular perme-
ECM
ability. This leakiness accounts in part for the edema that 
 may persist in healing wounds long after the acute inflam-
matory response has resolved.
 Elongation of vascular stalk
Activation of Fibroblasts and Deposition of
Connective Tissue
The laying down of connective tissue occurs in two steps:
(1) migration and proliferation of fibroblasts into the site
of injury and (2) deposition of ECM proteins produced
by these cells. These processes are orchestrated by locally
Formation ofnew vessel
produced cytokines and growth factors, including PDGF,
FGF-2, and TGF-β. The major sources of these factors are
inflammatory cells, particularly alternatively activated
 (M2) macrophages that infiltrate sites of injury.
 In response to cytokines and growth factors, fibroblasts
enter the wound from the edges and migrate toward the
center. Soime of these cells imay differentiate into cells
called myofibroblasts, which contain simooth muscle actin
Fig. 3.25 Angiogenesis. In tissue repair, angiogenesis occurs mainly by the 
and have increased contractile activity, and serve to close
sprouting of new vessels. The steps in the process, and the major signals
the wound by pulling its margins toward the center. Acti-
involved, are illustrated. The newly formed vessel joins up with other vessels 
vated fibroblasts and myofibroblasts also increase their
(not shown) to form the new vascular bed.
synthetic activity and produce connective tissue proteins,
Imainly collagen, which is the major coimponent of the fully
developed scar.
TGF-βis the most important cytokine for the synthesis
 The proces of angiogenesis involves several signaling
and deposition of connective tissue proteins. It is pro-
 pathways, cell-cell interactions, ECM proteins, and tissue
duced by most of the cells in granulation tissue, including
enzyimes.
alternatively activated macrophages. The levels of TGF-β
· Growth factors. VEGFs, mainly VEGF-A (Chapter 1),
 in tissues are primarily regulated not by the transcription
stimulates both migration and proliferation of endothe-
of the gene but by the post-transcriptional activation of
lial cells, thus initiating the process of capillary sprout-
latent TGF-β, the rate of secretion of the active molecule,
ing in angiogenesis. It promotes vasodilation
by
and factors in the ECM, notably integrins, that enhance or
stimulating the production of NO and contributes to the
diminish TGF-β activity. In addition, microfibrils made up
forimation of the vascular lumen. Fibroblast growth factors
of fibrillin also regulate the bioavailability of TGF-β
(FGFs), mainly FGF-2, stinulate the proliferation of
(Chapter 6). TGF-β stimulates fibroblast migration and
endothelial cells. They also promote the migration of
proliferation, increases the synthesis of collagen and fibro-
 Imacrophages and fibroblasts to the damaged area, and
nectin, and decreases the degradation of ECM by inhibiting
stimulate epithelial cell migration to cover epidermal
metalloproteinases. TGF-β is involved not only in scar for-
wounds. Newly forimed vessels need to be stabilized by
 mation after injury but also in the development of fibrosis
the recruitnent of pericytes and sinooth muscle cells
in lung, liver, and kidneys that follows chronic inflaimna-
and by the deposition of connective tissue. Multiple
tion. TGF-β also has anti-inflaimmatory effects that serve to
growth factors, including PDGF and TGF-β, likely par-
 limit and terminate inflaimunatory responses. It does this by
ticipate in the stabilization process: PDGF recruits
inhibiting lymphocyte proliferation and the activity of
simooth muscle cells and TGF-β suppresses endothelial
other leukocytes.
proliferation and migration, and enhances the produc-
As healing progresses, the number of proliferating
tion of ECM proteins.
fibroblasts and new vessels decreases, but the fibroblasts
http://ebooksmedicine.net
92
CHAPTER 3 
 Inflammation and Repair
progressively assume a more synthetic phenotype, and
than the MMPs. In addition, activated collagenases can
hence there is increased deposition of ECM. Collagen syn-
- jo so anss sas aa p Ain a
thesis, in particular, is necessary for the healing wound to
loproteinases (TIMPs), produced by most mesenchymal
become strong and mechanically stable. Collagen synthesis
cells. Thus, a balance of MMPs and TIMPs regulates the
by fibroblasts begins early in wound healing (days 3-5)
size and nature of the scar.
and continues for several weeks, depending on the size of
the wound. Net collagen accumulation depends not only
on increased synthesis but also on diminished collagen
degradation (discussed later). As the scar matures, there is
progressive vascular regression, which eventually trans-
MOROPHOLOGY
forims the highly vascularized granulation tissue into a
+ Granulation tissue is characterized by proliferation of fbro.
pale, largely avascular scar.
blasts and new thin-walled, delicate capillaries in a loose extra-
Rermodeling of Connective Tissue
cellular matrix, often with admixed inflammatory cells, mainly
macrophages (Fig. 3.26A). This tissue progressively invades the
After the scar is formed, it is remodeled to increase its
site of injury; the amount of granulation tissue that is formed
strength and contract it. Wound strength increases because
depends on the size of the tissue deficit created by the wound
of cross-linking of collagen and increased size of collagen
and the intensity of inflammation.
fibers. In addition, there is a shift of the type of collagen
· A scar or fibrosis in tissues is composed of largely inactive,
deposited, from type Ill collagen early in repair to more
spindle-shaped fibroblasts, dense collagen, fragments of elastic 
resilient type I collagen. In well-sutured skin wounds,
tissue, and other ECM components (Fig. 3.26B). Pathologists
strength 1may recover to 70% to 80% of norimal skin by 3
often use special stains to identify different protein constitu-
months. Wound contraction is initially caused by myofi-
ents of scars and fibrotic tissues. The trichrome stain detects
s s jo ssr aq ri e si
collagen fibers, and the elastin stain identifies delicate fibers of
With time, the connective tissue is degraded and the
elastin, which is the major component of pliable elastic tissue.
scar shrinks. The degradation of collagens and other ECM
(The trichrome actually contains three stains—hence its
components is accomplished by a family of matrix metal-
name—that stain red cells orange, muscle red, and collagen
loproteinases (MMPs), so called because they are dependent
blue.) Another extracellular matrix protein that makes up the
on metal ions (e.g, zinc) for their enzyimatic activity. MMPs
connective tissue stroma of normal organs and is present in
are produced by a variety of cell types (fibroblasts, mac-
early scars is reticulin, which is composed of type ll collagen,
rophages, neutrophils, synovial cells, and soime epithelial
Aq paennar are uonanas pue sisaus ra pue (s
and it too can be identified with a special stain.
growth factors, cytokines, and other agents. They include
interstitial collagenases, which cleave fibrillar collagen
(MMP-1, -2, and -3); gelatinases (MMP-2 and 9), which
SUMMARY
degrade amorphous collagen and fibronectin; and strome-
REPAIR BY SCAR FORMATION
lysins (MMP-3, -10, and -11), which degrade a variety
of ECM constituents, including proteoglycans, laminin,
· Repair occurs by deposition of connective tissue and scar
fibronectin, and amorphous collagen. Neutrophil elastase,
formation if the injured tissue is not capable of regeneration
cathepsin G, plasimin, and other serine proteinases can also
or if the structural framework is damaged and cannot support
 degrade ECM but are less important in wound remodeling
regeneration.
Fig. 3.26 (A) Granulation tissue showing numerous blood vessels, edema, and a loose extracellular matrix containing occasional inflarmmatory cells. Collagen
blue) and scattered vascular channels.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tissue Repair
93
inflaimmation and restoration of normal tissue architec-
+ The main steps in repair by scarring are clot formation, inflam-
ture. However, when the exudate is too large to be fully
mation, angiogenesis and formation of granulation tissue,
resorbed it undergoes organization, a process during
migration and proliferation of fibroblasts, collagen synthesis,
 and connective tissue remodeling.
which granulation tissue grows into the exudate, and a
fibrous scar ultimately forims.
+ Macrophages are critical for orchestrating the repair process,
by eliminating offending agents and producing cytokines and
Clinical Examples of Abnormal Wound Healing
 growth factors that stimulate the proliferation of the celltypes
and Scarring
involved in repair.
+ TGF-β is a potent fibrogenic agent; ECM deposition depends
 on the balance among fibrogenic agents, matrix metallopro-
Complications in tissue repair can arise from abnorimalities
in any of the basic components of the process, including
teinases (MMPs) that digest ECM, and the tissue inhibitors of
deficient scar formation, excessive forimation of the repair
MMPs (TIMPs).
components, and formation of contractures.
Defects in Healing: Chronic Wounds
These are seen in numerous clinical situations, as a result
Factors That Impair Tissue Repair
of local and systeinic factors. The following are soime
common examples.
Tissue repair may be iimpaired by a variety of factors that
Verous leg ulcers (Fig. 3.27A) develop most often in
reduce the quality or adequacy of the reparative process.
 elderly people as a result of chronic venous hyperten-
Factors that interfere with healing may be extrinsic (e.g-
sion, which may be caused by severe varicose veins or
infection) or intrinsic to the injured tissue, and systeinic or
congestive heart failure. Deposits of iron pigiment 
local:
(hemosiderin) are commnon, resulting froim red cell
· Infection is one of the most important causes of delayed
breakdown, and there may be accompanying chronic
Auaod pue uouuu shuonond in oue
inflaimnation. These ulcers fail to heal because of poor
increases the local tissue injury.
delivery of oxygen to the site of the ulcer.
· Diabetes is a metabolic disease that compromises tissue
Arteriai ulcers (Fig. 3.27B) develop in individuals with
repair for many reasons (Chapter 24), and is an impor-
atherosclerosis of peripheral arteries, especially associ-
 tant systeimic cause of abnorimal wound healing.
ated with diabetes. The ischemia results in atrophy and
Nutritional status has profound effects on repair;
 then necrosis of the skin and underlying tissues. These
protein malnutrition and vitamin C deficiency, for
lesions can be quite painful.
example, inhibit collagen synthesis and retard healing.
 Pressure sores (Fig. 3.27C) are areas of skin ulceration
Glucocorticoids (steroids) have well-docunented anti-
and necrosis of underlying tissues caused by prolonged
inflaimunatory effects, and their adiministration may
compression of tissues against a bone, for example, in
result in weak scars because they inhibit TGF-β produc-
bedridden, imnobile elderly individuals with numer-
 tion and diminish fibrosis. In some instances, however,
ous morbidities. The lesions are caused by mechanical
the anti-inflaimumatory effects of glucocorticoids
are
 pressure and local ischeimia.
desirable. For exaimple, in corneal infections, glucocor-
 Diabetic ulcers (Fig. 3.27D) affect the lower extreimities,
ticoids imay be prescribed (along with antibiotics) to
 particularly the feet. Tissue necrosis and failure to heal
reduce the likelihood of opacity due to collagen
are the result of simall vessel disease causing ischeimia,
deposition.
neuropathy, systeimic metabolic abnorinalities, and
 Mechanical factors such as increased local pressure or
secondary infections. Histologically, these lesions are
 torsion may cause wounds to pull apart (dehisce).
characterized by epithelial ulceration (Fig. 3.27E) and
 Poor perfusion, resulting either from arteriosclerosis
extensive granulation tissue in the underlying derimis
 and diabetes or from obstructed venous drainage (e.g)
(Fig. 3.27F).
 in varicose veins), also impairs healing.
 Foreign bodies such as fragiments of steel, glass, or even
 In some cases failure of healing may lead to dehiscence
bone impede healing.
(wound rupture). Although not common, this occurs most
 The type and extent of tissue injury affects the subse-
 frequently afer abdominal surgery and is a result of
quent repair. Complete restoration can occur only in
increased abdominal pressure, such as may occur with
tissues coimposed of cells capable of proliferating; even
voimiting, coughing, or ileus.
then, extensive injury will probably result in incoinplete
Excessive Scarring
tissue regeneration and at least partial loss of function.
Injury to tissues composed of nondividing cells must
Excessive formation of the components of the repair
inevitably result in scarring; such is the case with healing
process can give rise to hypertrophic scars and keloids.
of a myocardial infarct.
The accuinulation of excessive aimounts of collagen may
 The location of the injury and the character of the tissue
result in a raised scar known as a hrypertrophic scar. These
in which the injury occurs also are important. For
often grow rapidly and contain abundant myofibroblasts,
example, in inflainination arising in tissue spaces (e.g--
pleural, peritoneal, synovial cavities), simall exudates
Hypertrophic scars generally develop after therimal or
ooaond au Aq paisap pue paqrosan aq Aeu
traumatic injury that involves the deep layers of the derimis.
enzyimes of leukocytes, resulting in resolution of the
If the scar tissue grows beyond the boundaries of the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
94
CHAPTER3 
 Inflammation and Repair
repair ond regeneration: mechonisms,signaling, ond translation, Sci Transl Med 6:265, 2014.) (A) Venous leg ulcer; (B) arterial ulcer, with more extensive tissue
necrosis; (C) diabetic ulcer; and (D) pressure sore.(E-F) Histologic appearance of a diabetic ulcer. (E) ulcer crater;(F) chronic inflarmmation and granulation
tissue.
original wound and does not regress, it is called a keloid
Fibrosis in Parenchymal Organs
(Fig. 3.28B). Certain individuals seem to be predisposed to
keloid formation, particularly those of African descent.
The term fibrosis is used to denote the excessive deposi-
Exuberant granulation is another deviation in wound
tion of collagen and other ECM components in a tissue.
healing characterized by the forimation of excessive
The terims scar and fbrosis may be used interchangeably,
anounts of granulation tissue, which protrudes above the
but fbrosis most often refers to the abnorimal deposition of
level of the surrounding skin and blocks reepithelialization
collagen that occurs in internal organs in chronic diseases.
(this process has been called, with more literary fervor,
The basic mechanisins of fibrosis are the saine as those of
scar formation in the skin during tissue repair. Fibrosis is
cautery or surgical excision to perinit restoration of epithe-
snonu juaisisiad Aq paonpu ssaond oononed e
lial continuity. Rarely, incisional scars or traumatic injuries
stimuli such as chronic infections and imnunologic reac-
may be followed by exuberant proliferation of fibroblasts
tions, and is typically associated with loss of tissue (Fig.
and other connective tissue elements that may, in fact,
3.29). It may be responsible for substantial organ dysfunc-
recur affer excision. Called desmoids, or aggressive fibroma-
 tion and even organ failure.
toses, these neoplasims lie at the gray zone of benign and
As discussed earlier, the major cytokine involved in
malignant low-grade tumors.
fibrosis is TGF-β. The mechanisins that lead to increased
Wound contraction is an important part of the norimal
TGF-β activity in fibrosis are not precisely known, but cell
healing process. An exaggeration of this process gives
death by necrosis or apoptosis and the production of ROS
rise to contracture and results in deforimities of the wound
seeim to be important triggers, regardless of the tissue. The
and the surrounding tissues. Contractures are particularly
cells that produce collagen in response to TGF-β stimula-
prone to develop on the palns, the soles, and the ante-
tion inay vary depending on the tissue. In most organs,
rior aspect of the thorax. Contractures are commonly seen
a are siseqoiqyou 'Kaup pue Sunl ay ui se yons 
after serious burns and can compromise the movement
main source of collagen, but stellate cells are the major col-
of joints.
lagen producers in liver cirrhosis.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tissue Repair
95
0000o
 Epithelium
Tissue injury, loss of
 epithelial integrity
REGENERATION
dooaoo
Limited injury
Repeated or severe injury
ooaoo
Inflammation
Macrophages
T lymphocytes
 and other 
lymphoid cells
Cytokines
TGF-β
(e.g., IL-13)
MMPs
Fibroblast recruitment
and differentiation *
Myofibroblasts 
Extracellular matrix
FIBROSIS
Fig. 3.28 Clinical examples of excessive scarring and collagen deposition.
(A) Hypertrophic scar. (B) Keloid. (C) Microscopic appearance of a keloid.
Fig. 3.29 Mechanisrms of fibrosis. Persistent tissue injury leads to chronic
inflammation and loss of tissue architecture. Cytokines produced by macro-
Note the thick connective tissue deposition in the dermis. (A-B from Eming
SA, Margin P, Tomic-Canic M: Wound repair ond regeneration: mechanisms,
phages and other leukocytes stimulate the migration and proliferation of
signaling, ond translation, Sci Transl Med 6:265, 2014, p. 2.)
fibroblasts and myofibroblasts and the deposition of collagen and other
extracellular matrix proteins.The net result is replacement of normal tissue
by fibr osis.
Fibrotic disorders include diverse chronic and debilitat-
ing diseases such as liver cirrhosis, systeimic sclerosis
+ Wound healing can be altered by many conditions, particularly
(scleroderma), fibrosing diseases of the lung (idiopathic
infection and diabetes; the type, volume, and location of
pulmonary fibrosis,
 pneumoconioses, and drug-
or
the injury are important factors that influence the healing
radiation-induced pulimonary fibrosis), end-stage kidney
process.
disease, and constrictive pericarditis. These conditions are
 Excessive production of ECM can cause keloids in the skin.
discussed in the relevant chapters later in the book. Because
+ Persistent stimulation of collagen synthesis in chronic inflam-
fibrosis is the major cause of morbidity and death in these
matory diseases leads to tissue fibrosis, often with extensive
conditions, there is great interest in the developiment of
loss of the tissue and functional impairment.
 anti-fibrotic drugs.
SUMMARY
SUGGESTED READINGS
CUTANEOUS WOUND HEALING AND
PATHOLOGICASPECTS OF REPAIR
Alitalo K: The lymphatic vasculature in disease, Nat Med 17:1371-
1380, 20ll. fAn excellent review of the cell biology of lymphatic vessels,
+ The main phases of cutaneous wound healing are inflammation,
theirfunctions in immuneand inflammatory reactions,and their roles in
formation of granulation tissue, and ECM remodeling.
inflammatory, neoplastic,and other diseases.
· Cutaneous wounds can heal by primary union (first inten-
 Dennis EA, Norris PC: Eicosanoid storm in infection and inflamma-
tion) or secondary union (secondary intention); secondary
tion, Nat Reo Immunot 15:511, 2015. [A review of the pro- and antin-
healing  involves more  extensive  scarring  and  wound
flammatory activities of eicosanoids.!
Duffield JS, Lupher M, Thannickal VJ, et al: Host responses in tissue
contraction.
repair and fibrosis, An Rev Pathol Mech Dis 8:241, 2013. [An 00erview
http://ebooksmedicine.net
96
CH A PT E R 3Inflammation and Repair
Okin D, Medzhitov R: Evolution of inflammatory diseases, Curr Biot
immune system infibrotic reactions to chronicinfections.
22:R733-R740, 2012. fAn interesting conceptuat discussion of the batance
Eming SA, Martin P, Tomic-Canic M: Wound repair and regeneration:
between the high potentialcost andbenefit of theinflammatoryresponse
mechanisms, signaling, and translation, Sri Transt Med 6:265r6,
and how this batance may bedisturbed byenvironmentat changes,arcount-
2014. fA modern review of host responses that contribute to tissue repair.
ingfor theassociation betzween inflammation andmany of the diseasesof
 Flannagan RS, Jaumouille V, Grinstein S: The cell biology of phago-
the modern worltd.!
cytosis, Ann Reo Pathol Mech Dis 7:61-98, 2012. [A modern discussion
Page-McCaw A, Ewald AJ, Werb Z: Matrix metalloproteinases and
of the receptors inoolved in phagocytosis, the molecutar control of the
the regulation of tissue remodelling, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:221,
process, and the biology and functions of phagosomes.
2007.jA review of the function ofmatrix modifying enzymes in tissue
 Friedman SL, Sheppard D, Duffield JS, et al: Therapy for fibrotic dis-
repair.!
eases: nearing the starting line, Sei Transt Med 5:167sr1, 2013. {A
 Ricklin D, Lambris JD: Complement in immune and inflammatory
disorders, Jfmmumol 190:3831-3838, 3839-3847, 2013. {Tzu0 compan-
emphasizing the roles of different cellpopulations and the extraceltular
ion articles on the biochemistry and biology of the complement system,and
matrix,and the potentiat for franslating basic knowledge to the develop-
the deoelopment of therapeutic agents to alter complement activity in
ment of new therapies.
disease.!
 Gabay C, Lamacchia C, Palmer G: IL-1 pathways in inflammation and 
Rock KL, Latz E, Ontiveros F, et al: The sterile inflammatory response,
human diseases, Nat Rev Rheumatol 6:232, 2010. {An excellent review
Annu Rev rmmunot 28:321-342, 2010. {An excelent discussion of hou
of the biology of IL-1and the therapeutic targeting of this cytokine in
the immune system recognizes necrotic cells and other noninfectious
inflammatory diseases.!
harmfut agents.!
Hubmacher D, Apte SS: The biology of the extracellular matrix: novel
Romito A, Cobellis G: Pluripotent stem cells: current understanding
insights, Curr Opin Rheumatol 25:65-70, 2013. {A brief review of the
and future directions, Stem Cells fnf 2016. [Epub 2015] {A cogenf
structurat and biochemicat properties of the ECM.]
summary of endogenous and induced pluripotent stem cells.!
 Kalliolias GD, Ivashkiv LB: TNF biology, pathogenic mechanisms and
Schmidt S, Moser M, Sperandio M: The molecular basis of leukocyte
emerging therapeutic strategies, Nat Reo Rheu matol 12:49, 2016. [A 
recruitment and its deficiencies, Mol fmmunol 55:49-58, 2013. [A
excellent review of TNF and its signating pathways, and the development
review of the mechanisms of leukocyte recruitment and leukocyte adhesion
and clinicat efficacy of TNF inhibitors.
deficiencies.!
 Khanapure SP, Garvey DS, Janero DR, et al: Eicosanoids in inflamma-
Sica A, Mantovani A: Macrophage plasticity and polarization: in vivo
tion: biosynthesis, pharmacology, and therapeutic frontiers, Curr
veritas, J Clin Inoest 122:787-795, 2012. ↓An exrellenf review of macro-
Top Med Chem 7:311, 2007. IA summary of the properties of this impor-
phage subpoputations,their generation,and theirrolesininflammation,
tant class of inflammatory mediators.!
infections,cancer,and metabolic disorders.
 Kolaczkowska E, Kubes P: Neutrophil recruitment and function in 
Stappenbeck TS, Miyoshi H: The role of stromal stem cells in tissue
health and inflammation, Nat Reo fmmunol 13:159-175, 2013. {A
regeneration and wound repair, Srience 324:1666, 2009. [A excellenf
excellentreviewofneutrophi generation,reruiment,functionsandfates,
review of the role of fissue stem cels in repair.
and their roles in different types of inflammatory reactions.
Stearns-Kurosawa DJ, Osuchowski MF, Valentine C, et al: The patho-
 Kopp JL, Grompe M, Sander M: Stem cell versus plasticity in liver and 
genesis of sepsis, Ann Reo Pathol Mech Dis 6:19, 2011. IA discussion
pancreas regeneratin, Nat CellBio 18:238,2016.Aexcellent reve
of the current concepts of pathogenic mechanisms in sepsis and septic
of the relative contributions of parenchymal cels and stem cells to organ
shock.
regeneration.!
Welti J, Loges S, Dimmeler S, et al: Recent molecular discoveries in
 Mayadas TN, Cullere X, Lowell CA: The multifaceted functions of
angiogenesis and antiangiogenic therapies in cancer, ↓ Clin froesf
neutrophils, Ann Reo Pathol Mech Dis 9:181, 2014. ↓An excellent review
123:3190, 2013. fA review of new adoances in elucidating the stimuli and
Asopog mydougnau fo
controt of angiogenesis,and the development of therapies targeting the
 McAnully RJ: Fibroblasts and myofibroblasts: their source, function,
process.!
and role in disease, Int J Biochem Cell Biot 39:666, 2007. [A discussion
Zlotnik A, Yoshie O: The chemokine superfamily revisited, Immunity
ofthe tuo major typesof stroma elsand theirroles in tissue repairand
36:705-716, 2012. {An excellent update on fhe classification, functions,
fibrosis.!
and clinical releoance of chemokines and their receptors.
 Nathan C, Ding A: Nonresolving inflammation, Cel! 140:871, 2010. [A
discussionof the abnormalities that tead to chronic inflammation.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
俄
See Targeted Therapy available online at studentconsult.com
CHAPTER
Hemodynamic Disorders
Thromboembolism, and Shock
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Hyperemia and Congestion 97
Normmal Hemostasis 101
Amniotic Fuid Embolism I 1 3
Edema 98
Thrombosis 106
Air Embolism I 13
Increased Hydrostatic Pressure 99
Disseminated Intravascular Coogulation
Infarction I14
Reduced Piasma Osmotic Pressure 99
(DIC) II 1
Foctors That influence infarct Deveiopment ↑ 1 5
Lymphatic Obstruction 99
Embolism 112
Shock 115
Sodium and Water Retention 100
Puimonary Thromboemboism I / 2 
Pathogenesis of Sebtic Shock I16
Hemorrhage 100
Systemic Thromboembolism I / 2
Stages of Shock 118
Hemostasis and Thrombosis 101
Fat Embolism ↑ 1 2
The health of cells and tissues depends on the circulation
of blood, which delivers oxygen and nutrients and
HYPEREMIA AND CONGESTION
removes wastes generated by cellular metabolisim. Under
norimal conditions, as blood passes through capillary beds,
u aseaiu ue on rajan qoq uonsauos pue euanadAH
proteins in the plasima are retained within the vasculature
blood volume within a tissue, but have different underly-
and there is little net moveiment of water and electrolytes
ing mechanisims. Hyperemia is an active process resulting
 into the tissues. This balance is often disturbed by patho-
from arteriolar dilation and increased blood inflow, as
logic conditions that alter endothelial function, increase
occurs at sites of inflaimmation or in exercising skeletal
vascular hydrostatic pressure, or decrease plasima protein
muscle. Hypereimic tissues are redder than norimal because
content, all of which promote edema - the accumulation
of engorgeiment with oxygenated blood. Congestion is a
of fluid in tissues resulting from a net moveiment of water
passive process resulting from impaired outflow of venous
into extravascular spaces. Depending on its severity and
blood from a tissue. It can occur systeimically, as in cardiac
location, edeina may have minimal or profound effects. In
failure, or locally as a consequence of an isolated venous
the lower extreimities, it may only make one's shoes feel
obstruction. Congested tissues have an abnorimal blue-red
 snugger after a long sedentary day; in the lungs, however,
color (cyarosis) that steims from the accumulation of deoxy-
edema fluid can fill alveoli, causing life-threatening
 genated hemoglobin in the affected area In long-standing
hypoxia.
chronic congestion, inadequate tissue perfusion and per-
The structural integrity of blood vessels is frequently
sistent hypoxia may lead to parenchyimal cell death and
secondary tissue fibrosis, and the elevated intravascular
cloting that prevents excessive bleeding after blood-vessel
pressures may cause edema or sometimes rupture capillar-
daimage. Inadequate hemostasis may result in hemorrhage.
ies, producing focal hemorrhages.
which can compromise regional tissue perfusion and, if
Imassive and rapid, may lead to hypotension, shock, and
death. Conversely, inappropriate clotting (throimbosis) or
MORPHOLOGY
 migration of clots (embolisin) can obstruct blood vessels,
Cut surfaces of hyperemic or congested tissues feel wet and 
potentially causing ischemic cell death (infarction). Indeed,
typically ooze blood. On microscopic examination, acute pul-
thromboeinbolism lies at the heart of three imajor causes of
morbidity and death in developed countries: myocardial
capillaries and variable degrees of alveolar septal edema and
 infarction, pulmonary enbolisim (PE), and cerebrovascular 
intraalveolar hemorrhage. In chronic pulmonary congestion,
accident (stroke).
the septa become thickened and fibrotic, and the alveolar spaces
With this as a preface, we begin our discussion of
contain numerous macrophages laden with hemosiderin ("heart
hemodynamic disorders with conditions that increase
failure cells") derived from phagocytosed red cells. In acute
tissue blood volumes.
97
http://ebooksmedicine.net
86
CHAPTER4
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
edeima marked by profound swelling of subcutaneous
tissues and accumulation of fluid in body cavities.
Table 4.1 lists the major causes of edema. The mecha-
nisims of inflaimmatory edema are largely related to
increased vascular perimeability and are discussed
in
Chapter 3; the noninflammatory causes are described in
the following discussion.
Fluid movement between the vascular and interstitial
spaces is governed mainly by two opposing forces- the
vascular hydrostatic pressure and the colloid osmotic pres-
sure produced by plasna proteins. Norimally, the outflow
of fluid produced by hydrostatic pressure at the arteriolar
end of the microcirculation is nearly balanced by inflow at
the venular end owing to slightly elevated osinotic pres-
sure; hence there is only a small net outflow of fluid into
the interstitial space, which is drained by lymphatic vessels.
Either increased hydrostatic pressure or diminished colloid
 osimotic pressure causes increased moveinent of water into
the interstitium (Fig. 4.2). This in turn increases the tissue's
hydrostatic pressure, and eventually a new equilibrium is
achieved. Excess edeima fluid is removed by lymphatic
drainage and is returned to the bloodstreaim by way of the
thoracic duct (Fig. 4.2).
The edeina fluid that accumulates in the setting of
increased hydrostatic pressure or reduced intravascular
Fig. 4.l Liver with chronic passive congestion and hermorrhagic necrosis.
Table 4.l Causes of Edema
(A) In this autopsy specirmen, central areas are red and slightly depressed 
compared with the surrounding tan viable parenchyma, creating “nutmeg
Increased Hydrostatic Pressure
liver" (so called because it resembles the cut surface of a nutmeg). (B)
Impaired Venous Return
Microscopic preparation shows centrilobular hepatic necrosis with hermor-
Congestive heart failure
rhage and scattered inflarmmatory cells. (Courtesy of Dr. jomes Crowford.)
 Constrictive pericarditis
Ascites (liver cirrhosis)
 Venous obstruction or compression 
hepatic congestion, the central vein and sinusoids are dis-
Thrombosis
tended with blood, and there may even be necrosis of centrally
External pressure (e.g., mass)
located hepatocytes. The periportal hepatocytes, better oxygen-
ated because of their proximity to hepatic arterioles, experience 
Arteriolar Dilation
less severe hypoxia and may develop only reversible fatty change.
In chronic passive congestion of the liver, the central 
Heat
 Neurohumoral dysregulation
regions of the hepatic lobules, viewed on gross examination, are
red-brown and slightly depressed (owing to cell loss) and are
accentuated against the surrounding zones of uncongested tan,
 Protein-losing glomerulopathies (nephrotic syndrome)
sometimes fatty, liver (nutmeg liver) (Fig. 4.IA). Microscopic
Liver cirrhosis (ascites)
Malnutrition
findings include centrilobular hepatocyte necrosis, hemorrhage,
Protein-losing gastroenteropathy
and hemosiderin-laden macrophages (Fig. 4.IB).
Lymphatic Obstruction
Inflammatory
Neoplastic
EDEMA
Postsurgical
Postirradiation
Approxinately 60% of lean body weight is water, two-
 Sodium Retention
thirds of which is intracellular. Most of the remaining
Excessive salt intake with renal insufficiency
water is found in extracellular compartiments in the form
 Increased tubular reabsorption of sodium 
of interstitial fluid; only 5% of the body's water is in blood
 Renal hypoperfusion 
 Increased renin-angiotensin-aldosterone secretion
plasima. As noted earlier, edeina is an accumulation of
interstitial fluid within tissues. Extravascular fluid can also
Inflammation
collect in body cavities and such accumulations are often
 Acute inflammation 
referred to collectively as effusions. Examples include effu-
 Chronic inflammation
sions in the pleural cavity (hydrothorax), the pericardial
 Angiogenesis
cavity ((rydropericardium), or the peritoneal cavity (hydro-
Data from Leaf A. Cotran RS: Renal pathophysiology, ed 3,NewYork, I985,Oxford
peritoneum, or ascites). Anasarca is severe, generalized
University Press, p I46.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Edema.
99
LYMPHATICS
To thoracic duct and eventually
antagonists), this downward spiral continues. Because sec-
to left subclavian vein 
 ondary hyperaldosteronisim is a comnon feature of gen-
eralized edeima, salt restriction, diuretics, and aldosterone
antagonists also are of value in the management of general-
ized edema resulting from non-cardiac causes.
 Increa sed interstitial
Hydrostatic pressure
fluid pressure
Reduced Plasma Osmotic Pressure
Reduction of plasma albumin concentrations leads to
decreased colloid osmotic pressure of the blood and loss
of fluid from the circulation. Under normal circumstances,
albumin accounts for alimost half of the total plasina
 protein. Therefore, conditions in which albumin is either
Plasma colloid
lost from the circulation or synthesized in inadequate
osmotic pressure
amounts are comnon causes of reduced plasina osinotic
pressure. Nephrotic syndrome is the most inportant cause of
albumin loss from the blood. In diseases that are character-
Arterial end
CAPILLARY BED
Venous end
ized by nephrotic syndrome (Chapter 14), the glomerular
Fig. 4.2 Factors influencing fluid moverment across capillary walls. Capillary
capillaries become leaky, leading to the loss of albuimin
  i  o a  e   e m
(and other plasma proteins) in the urine and the develop-
movement of fluid into the interstitium. However, increased hydrostatic
ment of generalized edeima. Reduced albumin synthesis
 pressure or diminished plasma osmotic pressure leads to extravascular fluid
Occurs in the setting of severe liver disease (e.g-, cirrhosis)
accumulation (edema). Tissue lymphatics drain much of the excess fluid back 
(Chapter 16) and protein malnutrition (Chapter 8). Regard-
to the circulation by way of the thoracic duct; however, if the capacity for
less of cause, low albumin levels lead in a stepwise fashion
ymphatic drainage is exceeded, tissue edema results.
to edema, reduced intravascular volume, renal hypo-
 perfusion, and secondary hyperaldosteronism. Unfortu-
colloid typically is a protein-poor transudate; by contrast,
nately, increased salt and water retention by the kidney not
because of increased vascular permeability, inflammatory
only fails to correct the plasima volume deficit but also
as y e ym aenxa yuoid e st p eaa
exacerbates the edeima, because the primary defect- low
gravity. The usual cutoffs for specific gravity (<l012 for
serum protein — persists.
transudates and >l020 for exudates) illustrate the point
but are not clinically useful. We will now discuss the
Lymphatic Obstruction
various causes of edema.
Edema may result from lymphatic obstruction that com-
Increased Hydrostatic Pressure
promises resorption of fluid from interstitial spaces.
Impaired lymphatic drainage and consequent lymph-
Increases in hydrostatic pressure are mainly caused by
edema usually results from a localized obstruction caused
disorders that impair venous return. Local increases in
by an inflammatory or neoplastic condition. For example,
intravascular pressure caused, for example, by deep
the parasitic infection filariasis can cause massive edema
venous thrombosis in the lower extreimity can cause edema
of the lower extreimity and external genitalia (so-called
restricted to the distal portion of the affected leg. General-
ized increases in venous pressure, with resultant systeimic
edema, occur most comunonly in congestive heart failure
HEART FAILURE
MAlnuTRItIoN,
(Chapter 11). Fig. 4.3 illustrates the interlocking mecha-
+HEPaTic SYNTHesiS,
nisms that underlie generalized edema resulting from
NEPHROTIC SYNDROME
cardiac, renal, and hepatic failure. Several factors increase
venous hydrostatic pressure in patients with congestive
←Capillary
↓ Renal blood flow
heart failure (Fig. 4.3). The reduced cardiac output leads to
hydrostatic
↓ Plasma albumin
systemic venous congestion and resultant increase in capil-
pressure
Activation of the
lary hydrostatic pressure. At the saime time reduction in
 renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
cardiac output results in hypoperfusion of the kidneys, trig-
system
gering the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis and inducing
Retention of 
RENAL
isim). In patients with normal heart function, this adapta-
Na+ and H2O
FAILURE
tion increases cardiac filling and cardiac output, thereby
improving renal perfusion. However, the failing heart often
Blood volume
 Plasma osmotic
cannot increase its cardiac output in response to the com-
pressure
pensatory increases in blood volume. Instead, a vicious
cycle of fluid retention, increased venous hydrostatic pres-
EDEMA
sures, and worsening edeima ensues. Unless cardiac output
is restored or renal water retention is reduced (e.g., by
Fig. 4.3 Pathways leading to systermic ederma resulting from heart failure,
salt restriction or treatment with diuretics or aldosterone
renal failure, or reduced plasma osmotic pressure.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
100
CHAPTER4I
 Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
pue seydui deunsu Suonpond Aq (sisenueydana,
normal ventilatory function; besides impeding oxygen dif-
lyimph node fibrosis. Infiltration and obstruction of super-
fusion, alveolar edeima fluid also creates a favorable envi-
ficial lymphatics by breast cancer may cause edeima of the
ronment for infections. Brain edema is life threatening; if
 overlying skin; the characteristic finely pitted appearance
the swelling is severe, the brain can herniate (extrude)
 of the skin of the affected breast is called peau d'orange
through the foramen magnum. With increased intracranial 
(orange peel). Lymphedema also may occur as a complica-
tion of therapy. One relatively coimmon setting for this
clinical entity is in woimen with breast cancer who undergo
SUMMARY
axillary lymph node resection and/or irradiation, both of
which can disrupt and obstruct lymphatic drainage, result-
EDEMA
ing in severe lymphedema of the arim.
· Edema results from the movement of fluid from the vascula-
ture into the interstitial spaces; the fluid may be protein poor
Sodium and Water Retention
(transudate) or protein rich (exudate).
+ Edema may be caused by:
Excessive retention of salt (and its obligate associated
+ Intreased hydrostatic pressure (e.g., heart failure)
water) can lead to edema by increasing hydrostatic pres-
+ Increased vascular permeability (e.g., inflammation)
sure (because of expansion of the intravascular volume)
+ Decreased colloid osmotic pressure resulting from reduced
and reducing plasima osmotic pressure. Excessive salt and
plasma albumin 
water retention are seen in a wide variety of diseases that
· Decreased synthesis (e.g., liver disease, protein
comproimise renal function, including poststreptococcal
malnutrition)
glomerulonephritis and acute renal failure (Chapter 14).
+ Increased loss (e.g., nephrotic syndrome)
+ Lymphatic obstruction (e.g., inflammation or neoplasia)
* Sodium retention (e.g, renal falure)
MORPHOLOGY
 Edema is easily recognized on gross inspection; microscopic exam-
ination shows dearing and separation of the extracellular matrix
pressure, the brain steim vascular supply can be coim-
(ECM) elements.Although any tissue can be involved, edema most 
pressed, leading to death due to injury to the medullary
commonly is encountered in subcutaneous tissues, lungs, and brain.
centers controlling respiration and other vital functions
Subcutaneous edema can be diffuse but usually accumu-
(Chapter 23).
lates preferentially in parts of the body positioned the greatest
distance below the heart, where hydrostatic pressures are
highest.Thus, edema typically is most pronounced in the legs with
HEMORRHAGE
standing and the sacrum with recumbency, a relationship termed
 dependent edema. Finger pressure over edematous subcuta-
Hemorrhage, defined as the extravasation of blood from
neous tissue displaces the interstitial fluid, leaving a finger-shaped 
vessels, is most often the result of damage to blood
depression; this appearance is called pitting edema. Edema
vessels or defective clot formation. As described earlier,
resulting from renal dysfunction or nephrotic syndrome
capillary bleeding can occur in chronically congested
often manifests first in loose connective tissues (e.g., the eyelids,
tissues. Trauma, atherosclerosis, or inflammatory or neo-
causing periorbital edema). With pulmonary edema, the lungs
plastic erosion of a vessel wall also may lead to heimor-
 often are two to three times their normal weight, and sectioning
 rhage, which inay be extensive if the affected vessel is a
shows frothy, sometimes blood-tinged fluid consisting of a
large vein or artery.
mixture of air, edema fluid, and extravasated red cells. Brain
The risk of hemorrhage (often after a seemingly insignifi-
edema (Chapter 23) can be localized (e.g., because of abscess
cant injury) is increased in a wide variety of clinical disor-
or tumor) or generalized, depending on the nature and extent
ders collectively called hemorrhagic diatheses. These have
diverse causes, including inherited or acquired defects in
sulci are narrowed as the gyri swell and become flattened against
vessel walls, platelets, or coagulation factors, all of which
the skull.
must function properly to ensure homeostasis. These are
 discussed in the next section. Here we focus on clinical fea-
 tures of hemorrhages, regardless of the cause.
-radde puanap Aq paisauu aq Aeu aeuou
Clinical Features
 ances and clinical consequences.
The effects of edema vary, ranging from merely annoying
 Hemorrhage may be external or accumulate within a
to rapidly fatal. Subcutaneous edema is important to rec-
tissue as a hematoma, which ranges in significance from
ognize primarily because it signals potential underlying
trivial (e.g., a bruise) to fatal (e.g., a massive retroperi-
cardiac or renal disease; however, when significant, it also
toneal heinatoima resulting from rupture of a dissecting
can impair wound healing and the clearance of infections.
Pulmonary edema is a common clinical problem. It is seen
cavities are described variously according to location
most frequently in the setting of left ventricular failure, but
hemothorax,hemopericardium,hemoperitoneum,orhemar-
also may occur in renal failure, acute respiratory distress
throsis(injoints). Extensive hemorrhagescan occasionally
syndrome (Chapter 1l), and inflammatory and infectious
result in jaundice from the massive breakdown of red
disorders of the lung. It can cause death by interfering with
cells and henoglobin.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hemostasis and Thrombosis
01
frequently culminates in iron deficiency aneimia as a conse-
quence of a loss of iron in heimoglobin. By contrast, iron is
efficiently recycled from phagocytosed red cells, so internal
bleeding (e.g., a hematoma) does not lead to iron deficiency.
HEMOSTASISAND THROMBOSIS
 Norimal heimostasis comprises a series of regulated pro-
cesses that culiminate in the formation of a blood clot that
linits bleeding froim an injured vessel. The pathologic
counterpart of hemostasis is thrombosis, the formation of
blood clot (thrombus) within non-traumatized, intact
vessels. This discussion begins with norimal hemostasis
and its regulation, to be followed by causes and conse-
quences of thrombosis.
Normal Hemostasis
Hemostasis is a precisely orchestrated process involving
platelets, clotting factors, and endothelium that occurs at
the site of vascular injury and culminates in the forma-
tion of a blood clot, which serves to prevent or limit the
extent of bleeding. The general sequence of events leading
 to hemostasis at a site of vascular injury is shown in Fig. 4.5.
Arteriolar vasoconstriction occurs immediately and mark-
edly reduces blood flow to the injured area (Fig. 4.5A). It
is nediated by reflex neurogenic mechanisims and aug-
B
mented by the local secretion of factors such as endothe-
lin, a potent endothelium-derived vasoconstrictor. This
effect is transient, however, and bleeding would resume
Fig. 4.4 (A) Punctate petechial hemorrhages of the colonic mucosa, a con-
 sequence of thrormbocytopenia. (B) Fatal intracerebral hemorrhage.
if not for activation of platelets and coagulation factors.
Primary hemostasis: the formation of the platelet plug.Dis-
ruption of the endothelium exposes subendothelial von
 Petechiae are minute (l to 2 mn in diameter) hemor-
Willebrand factor (vWF) and collagen, which proimote
rhages into skin, mucous meimbranes, or serosal sur-
platelet adherence and activation. Activation of platelets
faces (Fig. 4.4A); causes include low platelet counts
results in a dramatic shape change (from simall rounded
(thrombocytopenia), defective platelet function, and
discs to flat plates with spiky protrusions that markedly
loss of vascular wall support, as in vitamin C deficiency
increased surface area), as well as the release of secre-
(Chapter 8).
tory granules. Within minutes the secreted products
 Purpura are slighty larger (3 to 5 mn) heimorrhages.
recruit additional platelets, which undergo aggregation
Purpura can result from the same disorders that cause
to form a primary hemostatic plug (Fig. 4.5B).
petechiae, as well as trauma, vascular inflaimumation
Secondary hemostasis: deposition of fibrin.Vascular injury
(vasculitis), and increased vascular fragility.
exposes tissue factor at the site of injury. Tissue factor is
Ecchymoses are larger (1 to 2 cim) subcutaneous hemato-
 a imembrane-bound procoagulant glycoprotein that is
mas (colloquially called bruises). Extravasated red cells
normally expressed by subendothelial cells in the vessel
are phagocytosed and degraded by macrophages; the
wall, such as simooth imuscle cells and fibroblasts. Tissue
characteristic color changes of a bruise result from the
factor binds and activates factor VlI (see later), setting in
enzymatic conversion of heimoglobin (red-blue color) to
motion a cascade of reactions that culiminates in throm-
bilirubin (blue-green color) and eventually hemosiderin
bin generation. Thrombin cleaves circulating fibrinogen
(golden-brown).
into insoluble fibrin, creating a fibrin meshwork, and
also is a potent activator of platelets, leading to addi-
 The clinical significance of any particular henorrhage
tional platelet aggregation at the site of injury. This
depends on the volume of blood that is lost and the rate of
sequence, referred to as secondary hemostasis, consoli-
bleeding. Rapid loss of up to 20% of the blood volume, or
dates the initial platelet plug (Fig. 4.5C)
slow losses of even larger aimounts, may have little impact
 Clot stabilization and resorption. Polymerized fibrin and
in healthy adults; greater losses, however, can cause hem-
platelet aggregates undergo contraction to form a solid,
orrhagic (hypovoleimic) shock (discussed later). The site of
hemorrhage also is important; bleeding that would be trivial
stage, counterregulatory mechanisims (e.g., tissue plas-
in the subcutaneous tissues can cause death if located in
minogen activator, t-PA made by endothelial cells) are setinto
the brain (Fig. 4.4B). Finally, chronic or recurrent external
Imotion that limit clotting to the site of injury (Fig. 4.5D)
Hlood loss (e.g., due to peptic ulcer or menstrual bleeding)
 and eventually lead to clot resorption and tissue repair.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
102
CHAPTER4
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
A.VASOCONSTRICTION
Fig. 4.5 Normal hermostasis. (A) After vascular injury, local neurohumoral
factors induce a transient vasoconstriction. (B) Patelets bind via glycoprotein
Endothelium
 Basement membrane Arteriole smooth muscle
Ib (Gplb) receptors to von Willebrand factor (VwF) on exposed ECM and
are activated, undergoing a shape change and granule release.Released ADP
platelet Gpllb-lla receptor binding to fibrinogen, and form the prirmory
hemostatic plug. (C) Local activation of the coagulation cascade (involving
 Site of injury
tissue factor and platelet phospholipids) results in fibrin polymerization,
"cementing" the platelets into a definitive secondory hemostatic plug. (D)
(t-PA, a fibrinolytic product) and thrombomodulin, confine the hemostatic
process to the site of injury.
 Endothelin release
Reflex
ECM (collagen)
causes vasoconstriction
 vasoconstriction
 It should be emphasized that endothelial cells are
central regulators of hemostasis; the balance between the
B. PLATELET ACTIVATION AND AGGREGATION
anti-thrombic  and  prothrombotic activities of  endo-
thelium determines whether thrombus formation, propa-
gation, or dissolution occurs. Normal endothelial cells
express a variety of anticoagulant factors that inhibit platelet
② Shape change
4 Recruitment
aggregation and coagulation and promote fibrinolysis;
 Granule release
after injury or activation, however, this balance shifts, and
① Platelet adhesion 
(ADP, TXA2)
endothelial cells acquire numerous procoagulant activities
Aggregation
(hemostatic
(activation of platelets and clotting factor, described above,
vWVF
 plug)
see also Fig. 4.1l). Besides trauma, endothelium can be
activated by microbial pathogens, hemodynamic forces,
 and a number of pro-inflaimnatory mediators. We will
return to the pro-coagulant and anti-coagulant roles of
Endothelium
 Basement
Collagen
endothelium after a detailed discussion of the role of plate-
membrane
lets and coagulation factors in hemostasis since endothe-
lium modulates the functions of platelets and can trigger
C. ACTIVATION OF CLOTTING FACTORS AND FORMATION
coagulation.
OF FIBRIN
The following sections describe roles of platelets, coagu-
lation factors and endotheliun in heimostasis in greater
detail, following the schene illustrated in Fig. 4.5.
② Phospholipid
③ Thrombin activation
Platelets
complex expression
4 Fibrinl
 Platelets play a critical role in hemostasis by forming the
polymerization
①Tissue factor
 primary plug that initially seals vascular defects and by
Tissue factor
providing a surface that binds and concentrates activated
1
coagulation factors. Platelets are disc-shaped anucleate
cell fragiments that are shed from megakaryocytes in the
bone imarrow into the bloodstreain. Their function depends
Fibrin
on several glycoprotein receptors, a contractile cytoskele-
ton, and two types of cytoplasimic granules. α-Granules
have the adhesion imolecule P-selectin on their meimbranes
D. CLOT RESORPTION
(Chapter 3) and contain proteins involved in coagulation,
such as fibrinogen, coagulation factor V, and vWF, as well
as protein factors that imay be involved in wound healing.
such as fibronectin, platelet factor 4 (a heparin-binding
Expression of:
Trapped neutrophil
chenokine), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and
+t-PA (fibrinolysis)
Trapped red
+thrombomodulin 
blood cells
(blocks coagulation
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine triphosphate,
ca sca de)
Polymerized
ionized calcium, serotonin, and epinephrine.
fibrin
After a traumatic vascular injury, platelets encounter
constituents of the subendothelial connective tissue, such
as vWF and collagen. On contact with these proteins, plate-
lets undergo a sequence of reactions that culminate in the
forimation of a platelet plug (Fig. 4.5B).
 Pla telet adhesion is mediated largely via interactions with
vWF, which acts as a bridge between the platelet surface
receptor glycoprotein Ib (Gplb) and exposed collagen
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hemostasis and Thrombosis
103
Deficiency:
 Platelet aggregatior follows their activation. The con-
Bernard-Soulier
forimational change in glycoprotein IIb/Illa that occurs
 syndrome
with platelet activation allows binding of fibrinogen, a
Deficiency:
Gplb
between adjacent platelets, leading to their aggregation.
Glanzmann
Platelet
Predictably, inherited deficiency of GpIIb-IIla results in
thrombasthenia
a bleeding disorder called Glanzmann thrombasthenia.
The initial wave of aggregation is reversible, but concur-
Gpillb-Illa
Fibrinogen
rent activation of throimbin stabilizes the platelet plug
complex
by causing further platelet activation and aggregation,
Gplb
and by promoting irreversible platelet contraction. Plate-
Endothelium
let contraction is dependent on the cytoskeleton and
ADP induces
 consolidates the aggregated platelets. In parallel, throm-
conformational
bin also converts fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin, cement-
change
von Willebrand
ing the platelets in place and creating the definitive
factor
secondary hemostatic piug. Entrapped red cells and leuko-
cytes are also found in heimostatic plugs, in part due to
Deficiency:
 adherence of leukocytes to P-selectin expressed on acti-
von Wwillebrand
Subendothelium
disease
vated platelets.
Fig. 4.6 Platelet adhesion and aggregation. VWF functions as an adhesion 
SUMMARY
let receptor. Platelet aggregation is accomplished by fibrinogen binding to
platelet Gpllb-lla receptors on different platelets. Congenital deficiencies in 
 PLATELET ADHESIOn, ACTIvATION,
the various receptors or bridging molecules lead to the diseases indicated
AND AGGREGATION
in the colored boxes. ADP, Adenosine diphosphate.
+ Endothelial injury exposes the underlying basement membrane
ECM; platelets adhere to the ECM primarily through the
binding of platelet Gplb receptors to VWF.
(Fig. 4.6). Notably, genetic deficiencies of vWF (von
+ Adhesion leads to platelet activation, an event associated with
Willebrand disease, Chapter 14) or GpIb (Bernard-
secretion of platelet granule contents, including calcium (a
Soulier syndrome) result in bleeding disorders, attesting
cofactor for several coagulation proteins) and ADP (a mediator
to the importance of these factors.
of further platelet activation); dramatic changes in shape
Platelets rapidly change shape following adhesion, being
and membrane composition; and  activation of Gpllb/llla
converted from simooth discs to spiky "sea urchins"
receptors.
with greatly increased surface area. This change is
+ The Gpllb/lla receptors on activated platelets form bridging
accompanied by alterations in glycoprotein Hb/la that
 crossinks with fibrinogen, leading to platelet aggregation.
a aq pue (ra aas) uasouy rog aue shl aseai
+ Concomitant activation of thrombin promotes fibrin deposi-
translocation of regatively charged phospholipits (particu-
tion, cementing the platelet plug in place.
larly phosphatidylserine) to the platelet surface. These
phospholipids bind calcium and serve as nucleation
sites for the asseimbly of coagulation factor complexes.
Coagulation Cascade
Secretion (release reaction) of granule contents occurs along
The coagulation cascade is a series of amplifying enzy-
with changes in shape; these two events are often
 matic reactions that lead to the deposition of an insoluble
referred to together as platelet activation. Platelet activa-
fibrin clot. As discussed later, the dependency of clot for-
 tion is triggered by a number of factors, including he
 mation on various factors differs in the laboratory test tube
coagulation factor throinbin and ADP. Throimbin acti-
and in blood vessels in vivo (Fig. 4.7). However, clotting in
vates platelets through a special type of G-protein-
vitro and in vivo both follow the saine general principles,
coupled receptor referred to as a protease-activated
as follows.
        
 The cascade of reactions in the pathway can be likened
cleavage carried out by thrombin. ADP is a component
 passd are sog uo ym u ,a, e o
of dense-body granules; thus, platelet activation and
 one partner to the next (Fig. 4.8). Each reaction step involves
ADP release begets additional rounds of platelet activa-
an enzyime (an activated coagulation factor), a substrate (an
tion, a phenomenon referred to as recruitment. Activated
 inactive proenzyme forim of a coagulation factor), and a
platelets also produce the prostaglandin thromboxane A2
cofactor (a reaction accelerator). These coimponents are
asseimbled on a negatively charged phospholipid surface,
inhibits platelet aggregation and produces a mild bleed-
which is provided by activated platelets. Asseimbly of reac-
d e x  a r 
tion complexes also depends on calcium, which binds to
enzyme that is required for TXA2 synthesis. Although
Y-carboxylated glutamic acid residues that are present in
the phenomenon is less well characterized, it is also
factors II, VIl, IX, and X. The enzymatic reactions that
suspected that growth factors released from platelets
produce Y-carboxylated glutamic acid use vitamin K as a
contribute to the repair of the vessel wall following
cofactor and are antagonized by drugs such as Coumadin,
injury.
a widely used anti-coagulant.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
104
CHAPTER4
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
CLOTTING IN THE LABORATORY
CLOTTING IN VIvO
 Intrinsic pathway
Vascular damage
 Negatively charged surface
Exposure of tissue factor
(e.g., glass beads)
TF
Extrinsic pathway
TF
X
Xla
Tissue factor
TF
Vlla
3
VIlla
TF
Vlla
IXa
a
VIlla
va
Xa
Prothrombin
Thrombin 
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrin
↑
Fibrinogen
Fibrinogen-
Fibrin
 clot
clot
B
Fig. 4.7 The coagulation cascade in the laboratory and in vivo. (A) Clotting is initiated in the aboratory by adding phospholipids, calcium, and either a
negative-charged substance such as glass beads (intrinsic pathway) or a source of tissue factor (extrinsic pathway). (B) In vivo,tissue factor is the major initia-
tor of coagulation, which is amplified by feedback loops involving thrombin (dotted lines). The red polypeptides are inactive factors,the dark green polypeptides 
are active factors, whereas the ight green polypeptides correspond to cofactors.
 Based on assays performed in clinical laboratories, the
The partial thromboplastin time (PTT) assay screens the
 coagulation cascade has traditionally been divided into the
function of the proteins in the intrinsic pathway (factors
extrinsic and intrinsic pathways (Fig. 4.7A).
XII, XI, IX, VIII, X, V, II, and fibrinogen). In this assay,
The prothrombin time (PT) assay assesses the function of
clotting of plasima is initiated by the addition of negative-
the proteins in the extrinsic pathway (factors VII, X, V,
charged particles (e.g., ground glass) that activate factor
II (prothrombin), and fibrinogen). In brief, tissue factor,
XII (Hageinan factor) together with phospholipids
phospholipids, and calcium are added to plasima and
and calcium, and the time to fibrin clot forimation is
the time for a fibrin clot to form is recorded.
recorded.
 Active coagulation
factor (enzyme)
Phospholipid
Inactive coagulation
factor (substrate)
surface
Tissue factor
Activated factor X (Xa)
Cofactor Va
Fig. 4.8 Sequential conversion of factor X to factor Xa by way of the extrinsic pathway, followed by conversion of factor ll (prothrombin) to factor lla (throm-
bin). The initial reaction complex consists of a protease (factor Vlla), a substrate (factor X), and a reaction accelerator (tissue factor) assembled on a platelet
phospholipid surface. Calcium ions hold the assembled components together and are essential for the reaction.Activated factor Xa then becomes the protease
component of the next complex in the cascade, converting prothrombin to thrombin (factor lla) in the presence of a different reaction accelerator, factor Va.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hemostasis and Thrombosis
105
Although the PT and PTT assays are of great utility in
evaluating coagulation factor function in patients, they do
not recapitulate the events that lead to coagulation in vivo.
 Platelet 
NO +
This point is most clearly made by considering the clinical
PGl2 +
Endothelium
aggregation
effects of deficiencies of various coagulation factors. Defi-
 activation
ECM
tPA 
ciencies of factors V, VII, VIII, IX, and X are associated with
Lymphocyte
moderate to severe bleeding disorders, and prothrombin
TXA2
 activation
deficiency is likely incompatible with life. In contrast,
Fibrin
Thrombin
and individuals with factor XII deficiency do not bleed and
in fact may be susceptible to throimbosis. The paradoxical
 Neutrophil
Monocyte
effect of factor XII deficiency may be explained by involve-
adhesion
 activation
PDGF
ment of factor Xll in the fibrinolysis pathway (discussed
later); although there is also some evidence from experi-
mental models suggesting that factor Xll may proimote
thrombosis under certain circumstances, the relevance of
PDGF
these observations to human thrombotic disease reimains
to be determined.
Smooth
Based on the effects of various factor deficiencies in
muscle
humans, it is believed that, in vivo, factor Vlla/tissue
cell
factor complex is the most important activator of factor IX
Fig. 4.9 Role of thrombin in hemostasis and cellular activation.Thrombin
 and that factor IXa/ factor VIlla coimplex is the imost impor-
 generates fibrin by cleaving fibrinogen,activates factor Xll (which is respon-
tant activator of factor X (Fig. 4.7B). The mild bleeding
sible for crosslinking fibrin into an insoluble clot), and also activates several 
other coagulation factors, thereby amplifying the coagulation cascade (Fig.
tendency seen in patients with factor XI deficiency is likely
4.7). Through protease-activated receptors (PARs), thrombin activates (l)
explained by the ability of thrombin to activate factor XI
platelet agregation andTxAz secretion; (2) endothelium, which respondsby
(as well as factors V and VIII), a feedback mechanisim that
 generating leukocyte adhesion molecules and a variety of fibrinolytic (t-PA),
amplifies the coagulation cascade.
vasoactive (NO, PGl2), or cytokine (PDGF) mediators; and (3) leukocytes,
Anong the coagulation factors, thrombin is the most
increasing their adhesion to activated endothelium. ECM, Extracellular
important, because its various enzyimatic activities control
matrix; NO, nitric oxide; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PGl, prosta-
diverse aspects of hemostasis and link clotting to inflam-
glandin l (prostacyclin); TXA2, thromboxane A2; t-PA, tissue-type plasmino-
gen activator. ee Fig.4.I for anticoagulant activities mediated by thrombin
mation and repair. Among thrombin's most important
via thrombomodulin. (Courtesy of Shaun Coughlin, MD, PhD, Cardiovascular
activities are the following:
Research Institute, University of Califormia ot Son Francisco, San Francisco,
Conversion of fibrinogen into crosslinked fibrin. Thrombin
Calfomia.)
directly converts soluble fibrinogen into fibrin mono-
mers that polymerize into an insoluble fibril, and also
ainplifies the coagulation process, not only by activating
activated by contact with subendothelial matrix at sites
factor Xl, but also by activating two critical cofactors:
of vascular injury. However, the most important counter-
factors V and VIll. It also stabilizes the secondary heimo-
regulatory mechanisimns involve factors that are expressed
static plug by activating factor Xll, which covalently
by intact endotheliun adjacent to the site of injury
crosslinks fibrin.
(described later)
·Platelet activation. Thrombin is a potent inducer of platelet
Activation of the coagulation cascade also sets into
activation and aggregation through its ability to activate
motion a fbrinolytic cascade that limits the size of the clot
PARs, thereby linking platelet function to coagulation.
 and contributes to its later dissolution (Fig. 4.10). Fibrino-
Proinflammatory effects. PARs also are expressed on
lysis is largely accomplished through the enzymatic activ-
inflaimunatory celis, endothelium, and other cell types
ity of plasmin, which breaks down fibrin and interferes with
(Fig. 4.9), and activation of these receptors by throimbin
its polymerization. An elevated level of breakdown prod-
is believed to inediate proinflamnatory effects that con-
tribute to tissue repair and angiogenesis.
notably fibrin-derived D-dimers, are a useful clinical
Anti-coagulant effects. Remarkably, through mechanisms
 markers of several throimbotic states (described later).
 described later, on encountering norimal endothelium,
 Plasmin is generated by enzyimatic catabolisim of the inac-
thrombin changes from a procoagulant to an anti-
roy e Aq raa 'uaousd rosinand Suenni aan
coagulant; this reversal in function prevents clots from
XI-dependent pathway (possibly explaining the associa-
extending beyond the site of the vascular injury.
-sd Aq ro (sisor pue uaap x roe jo uo
minogen activators. The most important plasiminogen
Factors That Limit Coagulation. Once initiated, coag-
activator is t-PA; it is synthesized principally by endothe-
ulation must be restricted to the site of vascular injury
lium and is most active when bound to fibrin. This charac-
to prevent deleterious consequences. One limiting factor
teristic makes t-PA a useful therapeutic agent, since its
is simple dilution; blood flowing past the site of injury
fibrinolytic activity is largely confined to sites of recent
washes out activated coagulation factors, which
are
thrombosis. Once activated, plasinin is in turn tightly con-
rapidly removed by the liver. A second is the requirement
trolled by counterregulatory factors such as Qz-plasimin
for negatively charged phospholipids, which, as men-
sh iden pue spurq in uaond eusid e 'roa
tioned, are mainly provided by platelets that have been
free plasimin.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
106
CHAPTER4
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
α2-Anti-plasmin
α2-Anti-plasmin/plasmin complexes
Free plasmin
Plasminogen activator
inhibitors (PAl)
Fibrin clot
X
 Fibrin degradation products
 Tissue plasminogen 
Thrombin
activator (tPA)
 and urokinase
Plasminogen    Platelets 
Plasmin
Endothelium
Fig. 4.10 The fibrinolytic system, illustrating various plasminogen activators and inhibitors (see text).
·Platelet inhibitory effects. An obvious effect of intact endo-
SUMMARY
thelium is to serve as a barrier that shields platelets froin
subendothelial vWF and collagen. However, norinal
COAGULATION FACTORS
endothelium also releases a number of factors that
+ Coagulation occurs via the sequential enzymatic conversion of
a cascade of circulating and locally synthesized proteins.
most inportant are prostacyclin (PGI), nitric oxide (NO),
+ Tissue factor elaborated at sites of injury is the most impor.
and acdenosine diphosphatase; the latter degrades ADP,
tant initiator of the coagulation cascade in vivo.
already discussed as a potent activator of platelet aggre-
+ At the final stage of coagulation, thrombin converts fibrinogen 
gation. Finally, endothelial cells bind and alter the activ.
into insoluble fibrin that contributes to formation of the defini-
ity of thrombin, which is one of the most potent
tive hemostatic plug.
activators of platelets.
· Coagulation normally is restricted  to sites of vascular
● Anticoagulant effects. Norimal endothelium shields coag-
injury by:
ulation factors from tissue factor in vessel walls and
+ limiting enzymatic activation to phospholipid surfaces pro-
expresses multiple factors that actively oppose coag-
vided by activated platelets or endothelium,
ulation, most notably t
 thrombomodulin, endothelial
 circulating inhibitors of coagulation factors, such as anti-
protein C receptor, heparin-like molecules, and tissue
thrombin Il, whose activity is augmented by heparin-like
factor pathway inhibitor. Thrombomodulin and endothe-
molecules expressed on endothelial cells
lial protein C receptor bind thrombin and protein C,
 expression of thrombomodulin on normal endothelial cells,
respectively, in a coimplex on the endothelial cell surface.
which bind thrombin and convert it into an anti-coagulant,
When bound in this complex, thrombin loses its ability
+ activation of fibrinolytic pathways (e.g., by association of 
to activate coagulation factors and platelets, and instead
tissue plasminogen activator with fbrin).
cleaves and activates protein C, a vitamin K-dependent
 protease that requires a cofactor, protein S. Activated
protein C/protein S complex is a potent inhibitor of
coagulation factors Va and VIHIa. Heparin-like molecules
Endothelium
on the surface of endothelium bind and activate anti-
The balance between the anticoagulant and procoagulant
thrombin IIl, which then inhibits thrombin and factors
activities of endothelium often determines whether clot
IXa, Xa, XIa, and XIla. The clinical utility of heparin and
formation, propagation, or dissolution occurs (Fig. 4.11).
related drugs is based on their ability to stimulate anti-
Normal endothelial cells express a multitude of factors that
thrombin Iil activity. Tissue factor pathway inhibitor
 inhibit the procoagulant activities of platelets and coagula-
(TFPI), like protein C, requires protein S as a cofactor
tion factors and that augment fibrinolysis. These factors act
and, as the name implies, binds and inhibits tissue
in concert to prevent thrombosis and to limit clotting to
factor/factor Vlla coimplexes.
sites of vascular damage. However, if injured or exposed
· Fibrinolytic effects. Norimal endothelial cells synthesize
to proinflaimmatory factors, endothelial cells lose many of
t-PA, already discussed, as a key component of the fibri-
their antithrombotic properties. Here, we complete the dis-
nolytic pathway.
cussion of hemostasis by focusing on the antithrombotic
activities of norimal endothelium; we return to the “dark
Thrombosis
side”
ofé
endothelial
cells later when discussing
thrombosis.
The primary abnormalities that lead to intravascular
The antithrombotic properties of endothelium can be
thrombosis are (1) endothelial injury, (2) stasis or turbu-
divided into activities directed at platelets, coagulation
lent blood flow, and (3) hypercoagulability of the blood
factors, and fibrinolysis.
(the so-called "Virchow triad") (Fig. 4.12). Thrombosis is
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hemostasis and Thrombosis
107
INHIBIT
Heparin-like
Tissue factor
Thrombomodulin 
Thrombin
THROMBOSIS
molecule
pathway inhibitor
receptor
Endothelial effects
UUn
t-PA
PGl2, NO, and
Anti-thrombin
Thrombin
 adenosine
三
diphosphatase
Inactivates tissue
 factor-Vlla complexes 
Thrombin
Inhibits platelet
Protein C 
> Active protein C
 Inactivates thrombin.
 aggregation 
(also factors IXa and Xa)
(requires protein S)
Activates
Inactivates factors Va and Vllla
fibrinolysis
FAVOR
THROMBOSIS
Extrinsic
 coagulation
 Platelet adhesion (held 
sequence
 together by fibrinogen)
Exposure of
 membrane-bound 
tissue factor
Collagen
Fig. 4.1l Anti-coagulant properties of normal endothelium (top) and procoagulant properties of injured or activated endothelium (bottom). NO, Nitric oxide;
 PGl, prostaglandin I2 (prostacyclin); tPA, tissue plasminogen activator; VWf, von Willebrand factor. Thrombin receptors are also called protease-activated
receptors (PARs).
 one of the scourges of modern man, because it underlies
ENDOTHELIAL INJURY
the most serious and comnon forims of cardiovascular
disease. Here, the focus is on its causes and consequences;
its role in cardiovascular disorders is discussed in detail in
Chapters 10 and 11.
Endotheliat Injury
THROMBOSIS
  d    
inevitably underlies throimbus formation in the heart
and the arterial circulation, where the high rates of blood
flow impede clot formation. Notably, cardiac and arterial
ABNORMAL
 paq si l pe 'siaid un  Aia ae sio
BLOOD FLOW
HYPERCOAGULABILITY
uisite for thrombus forimation under high shear stress,
such as exists in arteries. This insight provides part of
Fig. 4.12 Virchow's triad in thrombosis. Endothelial integrity is the most
 the reasoning behind the use of aspirin and other platelet
irmportant factor.Abnormalities of procoagulants or anti-coagulants can tip
 inhibitors in coronary artery disease and acute myocardial
the balance in favor of thrombosis.Abnormal blood flow (stasis or turbu-
infarction.
lence) can lead to hypercoagulability directly and also indirectly through 
 Obviously, severe endothelial injury may trigger throim-
endothelial dysfunction.
 bosis by exposing VWF and tissue factor. However, inflam-
mation and other noxious stimuli also promote thrombosis
http://ebooksmedicine.net
108
CHAPTER4H
 Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
by shifting the pattern of gene expression in endothelium
dilation. In conjunction with atrial fibrillation, a dilated
log uoneon ard e si pue sises sanpond osle uninn
referred to as endothelial activation or cdysfunction and can be
the development of thrombi. Hyperviscosity syndromes
 produced by diverse exposures, including physical injury,
(such as polycytheinia vera, Chapter 12) increase resis-
infectious agents, abnorimal blood flow, inflammatory
tance to flow and cause simall vessel stasis; the deforimed
mediators, metabolic abnormalities, such as hypercholes-
red cells in sickle cell aneimia (Chapter 12) cause vascu-
terolemia or homocystineimia, and toxins absorbed from
lar occlusions, and the resultant stasis also predisposes to
cigarette sinoke. Endothelial activation is believed to have
thrombosis.
 an important role in triggering arterial thrombotic events.
The role of endothelial cell activation and dysfunction
Hypercoagulability
in arterial thrombosis is also discussed in Chapters 10 and
Hypercoagulability refers to an abnormally high ten-
11. Here it suffices to mention several of the major pro-
dency of the blood to clot, and is typically caused by
thrombotic alterations:
alterations in coagulation factors. It contributes infre-
Procoagulant changes. Endothelial cells activated by cyto-
quently to arterial or intracardiac throimbosis but is an
kines downregulate the expression of thrombomodulin,
important underlying risk factor for venous thrombosis.
already described as a key modulator of thrombin activ-
The alterations of the coagulation pathways that predis-
ity. This may result in sustained activation of throm-
pose affected persons to throimbosis can be divided into
bin, which can in turn stimulate platelets and augment
primary (genetic) and secondary (acquired) disorders
inflaimumation through PARs expressed on platelets
(Table 4.2).
and inflammatory cells. In addition, inflaimed endothe-
o o si Aa () 
lium also downregulates the expression of other anti-
caused by mutations in the factor V and prothrombin
coagulants, such as protein C and tissue factor protein
genes:
 inhibitor, changes that further promote a procoagulant
Approximately 2% to 15% of whites carry a specific
 state.
factor V mutation (called the Leiden mutation, after the
·Anti-fibrinolytic effects. Activated endothelial cells secrete
 Dutch city where it was first described). Ainong those
Plasiminogen activator inhibitors (PAI), which limit
with recurrent deep venous thrombosis (DVT), the fre-
fibrinolysis and downregulate the expression of t-PA,
quency of this mutation approaches 60%. The mutation
alterations that also favor the development of thrombi.
alters an aimino acid residue in factor V and renders it
Abnormal Blood Flow
Turbulence (chaotic blood flow) contributes to arterial
 and cardiac thrombosis by causing endothelial injury or
Table 4.2 Hypercoagulable States
Primary (Genetic)
dysfunction, as well as by forming countercurrents and
local pockets of stasis. Stasis is a major factor in the devel-
Common (>1% of the Population)
opment of venous thrombi. Under conditions of norimal
 Factor V mutation (Gl69lA mutation; factor V Leiden)
laminar blood flow, platelets (and other blood cells) are
 Prothrombin mutation (G20210A variant)
found mainly in the center of the vessel lumen, separated
froim the endothelium by a slower-inoving layer of plasima.
Rore
By contrast, stasis and turbulence have the following del-
Anti-thrombi Il deficiency
eterious effects:
Protein C deficiency
· Both promote endothelial cell activation and enhanced
Protein S deficiency
procoagulant activity, in part through flow-induced
Yery Rare
changes in endothelial gene expression.
 Fibrinolysis defects
 Stasis allows platelets and leukocytes to come into
Homozygous homocystinuria (deficiency of cystathione β-synthetase)
contact with
the endotheliuin when the flow is
Secondary (Acquired)
 sluggish.
Stasis also slows the washout of activated clotting
High Risk for Thrombosis
factors and inpedes the inflow of clotting factor
 Prolonged bed rest or immobilization
inhibitors.
 Myocardial infarction
Atrial fibrillation
Tissue injury (surgery,fracture, bun)
Turbulent and static blood flow contributes to throim-
Cancer
 bosis in a number of clinical settings. Ulcerated athero-
 Prosthetic cardiac valves
sclerotic plaques not only expose subendothelial ECM
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
but also cause turbulence. Abnorimal aortic and arterial
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
dilations called aneurysims create local stasis and conse-
 Anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome
quently are fertile sites for thrombosis (Chapter 9). Acute
Lower Risk for Thrombosis
myocardial infarction results in focally noncontractile
Car diomyopathy
myocardium. Ventricular remodeling after more remote
 Nephrotic syndrome
infarction can lead to aneurysin forimation. In both cases,
(edasod pue Aueuaaid) saners susosanadk 
cardiac mural thrombi are more easily forimed because of
 Oral contraceptive use
the local blood stasis (Chapter 1l). Mitral valve stenosis
Sickle cell anemia
(e.g, after rheumatic heart disease) results in left atrial
 Smoking
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hemostasis and Thrombosis
109
resistant to proteolysis by protein C. Thus, an impor-
mechanisim is unclear, it appears that these antibodies
tant anti-thrombotic counterregulatory mechanisim is
ad uo jasad sxadus rs pu ose A
lost. Heterozygotes carry a fivefold increased risk for
and endothelial surfaces, resulting in platelet activa-
venous throimbosis, with hoinozygotes having a 50-fold
tion, aggregation, and consumption (hence throimbocy-
increased risk.
topenia), as well as causing endothelial cell injury. The
·A single-nucleotide substitution (G to A) in the
overall result is a prothrombotic state, even in the face of
3'-untranslated region of the prothrombin gene is a
heparin administration and low platelet counts. Newer
fairly common allele (found in 1%-2% of the general
low-molecular-weight fractionated heparin preparations
 population). This variant results in increased prothrom-
induce autoantibodies less frequently but can still cause
bin transcription and is associated with a nearly three-
thrombosis if antibodies have alreaty formed.
fold increased risk for venous thromboses.
Antiphospholipidantibodysyndrome.T
This syndrome
 Elevated levels of homocysteire contribute to arterial and
(previously called the lupus anti-coagulant syndroime)
venous throimbosis, as well as to the development of
has protean clinical manifestations, including recurrent
atherosclerosis (Chapter 10). The prothrombotic effects
throimboses, repeated miscarriages, cardiac valve veg-
of homocysteine may be due to thioester linkages
etations, and throimbocytopenia. Depending on the vas-
forimed between homocysteine metabolites and a variety
cular bed involved, the clinical presentations can include
of proteins, including fibrinogen. Marked elevations of
pulmonary einbolism (following lower extreimity venous
hoimocysteine may be caused by an inherited deficiency
thrombosis), pulmonary hypertension (from recurrent
of cystathione β-synthetase.
subclinical pulmonary emboli), stroke, bowel infarction,
· Less comnon primary hypercoagulable states include
or renovascular hypertension. Fetal loss does not appear
inherited deficiencies of anti-coagulants such as anti-
to be explained by thrombosis, but rather seeims to stem
thrombin Il, protein C, or protein S; affected patients
from antibody-mediated interference with the growth
typically present with venous thrombosis and recurrent
and differentiation of trophoblasts, leading to a failure of
thromboeinbolism in adolescence or in early adult life.
placentation. Anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome is
also a cause of renal microangiopathy, resulting in renal
Although the risk of thrombosis is only mildly increased
failure associated with multiple capillary and arterial
-ond a pue uapiat A roey jo sas snoszoaay u
thromboses (Chapter 14).
thrombin gene variant, these genetic factors carry added
The name anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome
significance for two reasons. First, both abnorimal alleles
came from the detection in patients of circulating anti-
are sufficiently frequent that homozygous and compound
bodies that bind to phospholipids. But this name is
-iu asa pue uouosun jou are suosiad snozonai
misleading, as it is believed that the most important
viduals are at much higher risk for thrombosis. More
a go bupug ynor paieipau are sioaa sooed
inportantly, heterozygous individuals are at higher risk
antibodies to epitopes on proteins that are soinehow
for venous throimbosis in the setting of other acquired risk
induced or “unveiled" by phospholipids. Suspected
factors, such as pregnancy, prolonged bed rest, and lengthy
antibody targets include Bz-glycoprotein I, a plasima
airplane flights. Consequently, inherited causes of hyper-
protein that associates with the surfaces of endothe-
coagulability should be considered in young patients (<50
lial cells and trophoblasts, and prothrombin. In vivo,
years of age), even when other acquired risk factors are
it is suspected that these antibodies bind to these and
present.
Secondary  (acquired) hypercoagulability is seen in
ulable state through uncertain mechanisims. However,
Imany settings (Table 4.2). In some situations (e.g, cardiac
in vitro, the antibodies interfere with phospholipids
failure or trauma), stasis or vascular injury may be the most
and thus inhibit coagulation (hence the name lupus
inportant factor. The hypercoagulability associated with
anticoagulant, also a misnomer). The antibodies also
oral contraceptive use and the hyperestrogenic state of
frequently provide a false-positive serologic test for
Jo sisaus sneda paseaui oi paielan aq eu Asuuand
syphilis because the antigen in the standard assay for
coagulation factors and reduced synthesis of anti-thrombin
syphilis is embedded in cardiolipin.
II. In disseiminated cancers, release of procoagulant tumor
Anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome has primary
products (e.g, mucin from adenocarcinoma) predisposes
and secondary forims. Individuals with a well-defined
to throimbosis. The hypercoagulability seen with advanc-
autoimnune disease, such as systemic lupus erytheima-
ing age has been attributed to increased platelet aggrega-
tosus(Chapter 5), are designated as havingsecondary anti-
tion and reduced release of PGI2 from endothelium.
phospholipid syndrome (hence the earlier term lupus antico-
Simoking and obesity proimote hypercoagulability by
agulant syndrome)Inprimary anti-phosphotipicd syncrome,
unknown mechanisms.
patients exhibit only the manifestations of a hyperco-
Among the acquired thrombophilic states, two are par-
agulable state and lack evidence of other autoimmune
disorders; occasionally, it appears following exposure
mention:
to certain drugs or infections. Therapy involves anti-
·Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) syndrome. This
coagulation and immunosuppression. Although anti-
syndrome occurs in up to 5% of patients treated with
phospholipid antibodies are clearly associated with
unfractionated heparin (for therapeutic anti-coagulation).
thrombotic diatheses, they have also been identified in
It is marked by the development of autoantibodies that
5% to 15% of apparently norimal individuals, implying
bind complexes of heparin and platelet meimbrane
that they are necessary but not sufficient to cause the
protein (platelet factor-4) (Chapter 12). Although the
full-blown syndrome.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
110
CHAPTER 4
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
MORPHOLOGY
Thrombi can develop anywhere in the cardiovascular system.
Arterial or cardiac thrombi typically arise at sites of endothelial
injury or turbulence; venous thrombi characteristically occur at
sites of stasis. Thrombi are focally attached to the underlying
vascular surface and tend to propagate toward the heart; thus,
arterial thrombi grow in a retrograde direction from the point
of attachment, whereas venous thrombi extend in the direction 
 of blood flow. The propagating portion of a thrombus tends to
be poorly attached and therefore prone to fragmentation and
migration through the blood as an embolus.
Thrombi can have grossly (and microscopically) apparent
laminations called lines of Zahn; these represent pale platelet
and fibrin layers alternating with darker red cell-rich layers. Such 
lines are significant in that they are only found in thrombi that
form in flowing blood; their presence can therefore usually dis-
tinguish antemortem thrombosis from the bland nonlaminated 
clots that form in the postmortem state. Although thrombi
formed in the "low-flow" venous system superficially resemble
postmortem clots, careful evaluation generally shows il-defined
laminations.
Thrombi occurring in heart chambers or in the aortic lumen
are designated as mural thrombi. Abnormal myocardial con-
traction (arrhythmias, dilated cardiomyopathy, or myocardial
infarction) or endomyocardial injury (myocarditis, catheter
trauma) promote cardiac mural thrombi (Fig. 4.13A), whereas
ulcerated  atherosclerotic  plaques  and   aneurysmal  dilation 
 promote aortic thrombosis (Fig. 4. 13B).
Arterial thrombi are frequently occlusive. They are typically
Fig. 4.13 Mural thrombi. (A) Thrombus in the left and right ventricular
rich in platelets, as the processes underlying their development
apices, overlying white fibrous scar. (B) Laminated thrombus in a dilated
abdominal aortic aneurysm. Numerous friable mural thrombi are also super-
(e.g, endothelial injury) lead to platelet activation. Although
imposed on advanced atherosclerotic lesions of the more proximal aorta
usually superimposed on a ruptured atherosclerotic plaque, other
(eft side of photograph).
vascular injuries (vasculitis, trauma) can also be underlying causes.
Venous thrombi (phlebothrombosis) are almost invariably
occlusive; they frequently propagate some distance toward the
heart,forming a long cast within the vessel lumen that is prone
Fate of the Thrombus
to give rise to emboli. Because these thrombi form in the slug-
If a patient survives an initial thrombotic event, during the
gish venous circulation, they tend to contain more enmeshed red
ensuing days to weeks the thrombus evolves through some
cells, leading to the moniker red, or stasis, thrombi. The veins 
combination of the following four processes:
of the lower extremities are most commonly affected (90% of 
●Propagation. The thrombus enlarges through the accre-
venous thromboses); however, venous thrombi also can occur
tion of additional platelets and fibrin, increasing the
in the upper extremities, periprostatic plexus, or ovarian and 
 odds of vascular occlusion or eimbolization.
· Embolization. Part or all of the thrombus is dislodged
found in the dural sinuses, portal vein, or hepatic vein.
and transported elsewhere in the vasculature.
At autopsy, postmortem clots can sometimes be mistaken
 Dissolutior. If a thrombus is newly formed, activation of
for venous thrombi. However, the former are gelatinous and
fibrinolytic factors imay lead to its rapid shrinkage and
because of red cell settling they have a dark red dependent
complete dissolution. With older throinbi, extensive
 portion and a yellow "chicken fat" upper portion; they also are
fibrin polymerization renders the thrombus substantially
usually not attached to the underlying vessel wall By contrast,
more resistant to plasmin-induced proteolysis, and lysis
red thrombi typically are firm, focally attached to vessel walls,
is ineffectual. This acquisition of resistance to lysis has
and they contain gray strands of deposited fibrin.
dinical significance, as therapeutic adiministration of
Thrombi on heart valves are called vegetations. Bacterial
fibrinolytic agents (e.g., t-PA in the setting of acute coro-
 or fungal bloodborne infections can cause valve damage, leading
nary throimbosis) generally is not effective unless adimin-
to the development of large thrombotic masses (infective
istered within a few hours of thrombus formation.
endocarditis) (Chapter II). Sterile vegetations also can develop
· Organization and recanalization. Older thrombi become
on noninfected valves in hypercoagulable states-the lesions of 
organized by the ingrowth of endothelial cells, simooth
so-called "nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis" (Chapter
 muscle cells, and fibroblasts (Fig. 4.14). In time, capillary
I I). Less commonly,sterile, verrucous endocarditis (Libman-
channels are formed that- to a limited extent- create
Sacks endocarditis) can occur in the setting of systemic lupus
conduits along the length of the throimbus, thereby rees-
erythematosus (Chapter 5).
tablishing the continuity of the original lumen. Further
 recanalization can sometimes convert a throimbus into a
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hemostasis and Thrombosis
heart failure, bed rest, and imnobilization; the latter two
factors reduce the milking action of leg imuscles and thus
slow venous return. Trauma, surgery, and burns not only
immobilize a patient but also are associated with vascular
 injury, procoagulant release, increased hepatic synthesis of
coagulation factors, and reduced t-PA production. Many
factors contribute to the throimbotic diathesis of pregnancy;
in addition to the potential for aimniotic fluid infusion into
the circulation at the time of delivery, pressure produced
by the enlarging fetus and uterus can produce stasis in the
veins of the legs, and late pregnancy and the postpartum
period are associated with hypercoagulability. Tumor-
 associated procoagulant release is largely responsible for
 the increased risk of thromboeimbolic phenomena seen in
disseiminated cancers. These are soinetimes referred to as
migratory thrombophlebitis, because of the tendency to
Fig. 4.l4 An organized thrombus. Low-power view of a thrombosed
artery stained for elastic tissue.The original lumen is delineated by the inter-
involve several different venous beds transiently, or as
nal elastic lamina (arrows) and is completely filled with organized thrombus.
Trousseau syndrome, for the physician who both described
the disorder and suffered froim it. Regardless of the specific
clinical seting, the risk of DVT is increased in persons
vascularized mass of connective tissue that is eventually
older than 50 years.
incorporated into the wall of the renodeled vessel.
Occasionally, instead of organizing, the center of a
Arterial and Cardiac Thrombosis
thrombus undergoes enzymatic digestion, presumably
Atherosclerosis is a major cause of arterial throimboses
because of the release of lysosoimal enzyimes froim
because it is associated with the loss of endothelial integ-
entrapped leukocytes. If bacterial seeding occurs, the
rity and with abnormal blood flow (Fig. 4.13B). Myocardial
contents of degraded thrombi serve as an ideal culture
infarction can predispose to cardiac mural throimbi by
medium, and the resulting infection may weaken the
causing dyskinetic myocardial contraction and endocar-
vessel wall, leading to the formation of a mycotic aneu-
dial injury (Fig. 4.13A), and rheumatic heart disease may
rysm (Chapter 10).
engender atrial mural thrombi by causing atrial dilation
and fibrillation. Both cardiac and aortic mural thrombi are
Clinical Features
prone to embolization. Although any tissue can be affected,
Thrombi are significant because they cause obstruction of
the brain, kidneys, and spleen are particularly likely targets
arteries and veins and may give rise to eimboli. The effect
because of their rich blood supply.
thatis of the greatest clinical importance depends on the site
of thrombosis. Thus, although venous thrombi can cause
SUMMARY
 congestion and edeima in vascular beds distal to an obstruc-
THROMBOSIS
tion, they are most worrisome because of their potential to
embolize to thelungs and cause death. Conversely, whereas
· Thrombus development is usually related to one or more
arterial thrombi can eimbolize and cause tissue infarction,
components ofVirchow's triad:
their tendency to obstruct vessels (e.g., in coronary and
endothelial injury (e.g., by toxins, hypertension, inflammation,
cerebral vessels) is considerably more important.
or metabolic products)
+：
abnormal blood flow, stasis, or turbulence (e.g, resulting
Venous Thrombosis (Phlebothrombosis)
from aneurysms, atherosclerotic plaque)
Most venous throimbi occur in the superficial or the deep
+ hypercoagulability: either primary (e.g., factor V Leiden,
veins of the leg. Superficial venous throimbi usually arise
increased prothrombin synthesis, anti-thrombin Ill deficiency)
in the saphenous system, particularly in the setting of vari-
or secondary (e.g., bed rest, tissue damage, malignancy)
cosities; these rarely eimbolize but they can be painful and
· Thrombi may propagate, resolve, become organized, or
embolize.
venous outflow, predisposing the overlying skin to the
+ Thrombosis causes tissue injury by local vascular occlusion or
developiment of infections and varicose ulcers. Deep
by distal embolization.
venous throimboses (DVTs) in the larger leg veins at or
above the knee joint (e.g- popliteal, femoral, and iliac
veins) are more serious because they are prone to eimbolize.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DlC)
Although such DVTs may cause local pain and edeima,
collateral channels often circumvent the venous obstruc-
DIC is widespread thrombosis within the microcirculation
tion. Consequently, DVTs are entirely asyimptoimatic in
that may be of sudden or insidious onset. It may be seen in
approximately 50% of patients and are recognized only
 disorders ranging from obstetric complications to advanced
Imalignancy. To coimplicate matters, the widespread micro-
Lower-extremity DVTs are associated with stasis and
vascular thrombosis consumes platelets and coagulation
hypercoagulable states, as described earlier (Table 4.2).
Thus, coimumon predisposing factors include congestive
and at the saine time, fibrinolytic mechanisins are activated.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
112
CHAPTER4I
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
 The net result is that excessive clotting and bleeding may
co-exist in the same patient. It is discussed in greater detail
along with other bleeding diatheses in Chapter 12.
EMBOLISM
An embolus is a detached intravascular solid, liquid, or
 gaseous mass that is carried by the blood from its point
of origin to a distant site, where it often causes tissue
dysfunction or infarction. The vast majority of einboli
derive from a dislodged thrombus - hence the term throm-
boembolism. Less comnonly, eimboli are coimposed of fat
droplets, bubbles of air or nitrogen, atherosclerotic debris
(cholesterol emboli), tumor fragments, bits of bone marrow,
or aimniotic fluid. Inevitably, emboli lodge in vessels too
Fig. 4.15 Embolus derived from a lower-extremity deep venous thrombus
simall to permit further passage, resulting in partial or com-
lodged in a pulmonary artery branch.
plete vascular occlusion; depending on the site of origin,
eimboli can arrest anywhere in the vascular tree. The
area also receives blood through an intact bronchial cir-
 primary consequence of systemic embolization is ischeimic
culation (dual circulation). However, a similar embolus
necrosis (infarction) of downstreaim tissues, whereas einbo-
in the setting of left-sided cardiac failure (and dimin-
lization in the pulmonary circulation leads to hypoxia,
ished bronchial artery perfusion) can lead to a pulmo-
hypotension, and right-sided heart failure.
nary infarct.
● Eimbolisin to simall end-arteriolar pulmonary branches
Pulmonary Thromboembolism
usually causes infarction.
 Multiple emboli occurring through time can cause pul-
Pulmonary emboli originate from deep venous throm-
boses and are responsible for the most common form
pulmonale).
 of thromboembolic disease. The incidence of pulmonary
embolisim (PE) is 2 to 4 per 1000 hospitalized patients.
Systemic Thromboembolism
Although the rate of fatal PE has declined considerably
since the early 1990s, PE still causes about 100,000 deaths
Most systemic emboli (80%) arise from intracardiac mural
per year in the United States. In inore than 95% of cases,
thrombi; two-thirds of these are associated with left ven-
venous emboli originate from thrombi within deep leg
tricular infarcts and another 25% with dilated left atria (e.g-
veins proximal to the popliteal fossa; embolization from
secondary to mitral valve disease). The reimainder originate
lower leg thrombi is uncommon.
froim aortic aneurysims, throinbi overlying ulcerated ath-
 Fraginented thrombi froim DVTs are carried through
erosclerotic plaques, fragimented valvular vegetations
progressively larger channels and usually pass through the
(Chapter 1l), or the venous system (paradoxical emboli);
right side of the heart before arresting in the pulinonary
10% to 15% of systeimic einboli are of unknown origin.
vasculature. Depending on size, a PE can occlude the main
By contrast with venous einboli, which lodge primarily
pulmnonary artery, lodge at the bifurcation of the right and
 in the lung, arterial emboli can travel virtually anywhere;
left pulmonary arteries (saddle embolus), or pass into the
their final resting place understandably depends on their
simaller, branching arterioles (Fig. 4.15). Frequently, mul-
 point of origin and the relative flow rates of blood to the
tiple emboli occur, either sequentially or as a shower of
downstream tissues. Coimmon arteriolar einbolization sites
simaller emboli from a single large throimbus; a patient who
include the lower extreimities (75%) and central nervous
has had one pulmonary eimbolus is at increased risk for
systeim (10%); intestines, kidneys, and spleen are less
having more. Rarely, an embolus passes through an atrial 
comumon targets. The consequences of einbolization depend
or ventricular defect and enters the systeimic circulation
 on the caliber of the occluded vessel, the collateral supply,
(paradoxical einbolisim). A imore complete discussion of PE
 and the affected tissue's vulnerability to anoxia; arterial
is found in Chapter 13; the major clinical and pathologic
eimboli often lodge in end arteries and cause infarction.
features are the following:
● Most pulmonary emboli (60%-80%) are simall and clini-
Fat Embolism
cally silent. With time, they undergo organization and
becoime incorporated into the vascular wall; in soime
 Soft tissue crush injury or rupture of marrow vascular
cases, organization of throimboeimboli leaves behind
sinusoids (eg, due to a long bone fracture) release micro-
bridging fibrous webs.
scopic fat globules into the circulation. Fat and imarrow
 At the other end of the spectrum, a large embolus that
eimboli are common incidental findings after vigorous car-
blocks a imajor pulimonary arterycan cause sudden death.
diopulimonary resuscitation but probably are of litle clini-
 Embolic obstruction of mediuin-sized arteries and sub-
cal
significance. Similarly, although fat and marrow
sequent rupture of downstream capillaries rendered
embolisim occurs in some 90% of individuals with severe
anoxic can cause pulimonary heimorrhage. Such eimboli
- Ae mus on  ss (tt ) s la
do not usually cause pulmonary infarction because the
cal findings. However, a minority of patients develop a
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Embolism
113
demonstration of fat microglobules (i.e., in the absence of
accompanying  Imarrow  eleiments)  requires  specialized
techniques (frozen sections and fat stains).
Amniotic Fluid Embolism
Amniotic fluid embolism is an uncommon, grave compli-
cation of labor and the immediate postpartum period
occurring in 1 in 40,000 deliveries. The mortality rate
approaches 80%, making it the most comnon cause of
maternal death in the developed world and the fifth most 
comnon cause of maternal death in the United States,
accounting for 10% of maternal deaths in this country; 85%
 of survivors suffer soime form of perimanent neurologic
deficit. Onset is characterized by sudden severe dyspnea,
cyanosis, and hypotensive shock, followed by seizures and
coma. If the patient survives the initial crisis, pulmonary
a jy noqe u) ym suoe sdonaaap Aiesid euapa
patients) disseiminated intravascular coagulation second-
ary to release of throimbogenic substances from amniotic
fluid. Indeed it is thought that morbidity and mortality in
such cases results not from mechanical obstruction of pul-
monary vessels but from biochemical activation of the
coagulation system and the innate imunune system caused
by substances in the amniotic fluid.
The underlying cause is the entry of amniotic fluid (and
its contents) into the maternal circulation via tears in the
placental meimbranes and/or uterine vein rupture. Histo-
logic analysis shows squamous cells shed from fetal skin,
lanugo hair, fat from vernix caseosa, and mucin derived
from the fetal respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts in the
maternal pulmonary microcirculation (Fig. 4.16B). Other
Fig. 4.I6 Unusual types of emboli. (A) Bone marrow embolus. The embolus 
findings include marked pulmonary edeina, diffuse alveo-
is composed of hematopoietic marrow and marrow fat cells (clear spoces)
 lar damage (Chapter 13), and systeimic fibrin thrombi gen-
attached to a thrombus. (B) Amniotic fluid emboli. Two srmall pulmonary
erated by disseiminated intravascular coagulation.
arterioles are packed with laminated swirls of fetal squarmous cells. The sur-
rounding lung is edematous and congested. (Courtesy of Dr. Beth Schwartz,
Air Embolism
Baltimore, MD.)
Gas bubbles within the circulation can coalesce and
syimptomatic fat embolisim syndrome characterized by pul-
obstruct vascular flow and cause distal ischemic injury.
  n  
Thus, a small volume of air trapped in a coronary artery
thrombocytopenia, and a diffuse petechial rash that is fatal
during bypass surgery or introduced into the cerebral arte-
 in 10% of cases. Clinical signs and symptoms appear 1 to
 u u pad asu q uo 
3 days after injury as the sudden onset of tachypnea,
" sitting position" can occlude flow, with direconsequences.
 dyspnea, tachycardia, irritability, and restlessness, which
Simall venous gas emboli generally have no deleterious
can progress rapidly to delirium or coma. Thrombocytope-
effects, but sufficient air can enter the pulmonary circula-
nia is attributed to platelet adhesion to fat globules and
tion inadvertently during obstetric or laproscopic proce-
subsequent aggregation or splenic sequestration; anemia
dures or as a consequence of a chest wall injury to cause
can result from similar red cell aggregation and/or hemo-
hypoxia, and very large venous eimboli may arrest in the
lysis. A diffuse petechial rash (seen in 20%-50% of cases)
heart and cause death.
is related to rapid onset of thrombocytopenia and can be a
A particular form of gas embolism called decompression
useful diagnostic feature.
sickness is caused by sudden changes in atimospheric pres-
The pathogenesis of fat emboli syndrome involves both
sure. Scuba divers, underwater construction workers, and
mechanical obstruction and biocheimical injury. Fat micro-
persons in unpressurized aircraft who undergo rapid ascent
emboli occlude pulmonary and cerebral microvasculature,
a) asd y ie paeaq s re u  ie ae
both directly and by triggering platelet aggregation. This
during a deep sea dive), increased amounts of gas (particu-
deleterious effect is exacerbated by fatty acid release from
larly nitrogen) becoime dissolved in the blood and tissues.
lipid globules, which causes local toxic endothelial injury.
 If the diver then ascends (depressurizes) too rapidly, the
Platelet activation and granulocyte recruitiment (with free
nitrogen expands in the tissues and bubbles out of solution
radical, protease, and eicosanoid release) (Chapter 3) coim-
in the blood to form gas einboli, which cause tissue ische-
 plete the vascular assault. Because lipids are dissolved by
mia. Rapid forimation of gas bubbles within skeletal muscles
the solvents used during tissue processing, microscopic
 and supporting tissues in and about joints is responsible for
http://ebooksmedicine.net
4
CHAPTER4H
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
the painful condition called the bends (so named in the
1880s because the afflicted person arches the back in a
INFARCTION
manner reminiscent of a then-popular women's fashion
 pose called the Grecian bend). Gas bubbles in the pulimo-
An infarct is an area of ischemic necrosis caused by occlu-
nary vasculature cause edeima, hemorrhages, and focal atel-
sion of the vascular supply to the affected tissue. Infarc-
ectasis or emphyseima, leading to respiratory distress, the
 tion primarily affecting the heart and the brain is a common
so-called "chokes". Bubbles in the central nervous systeim
and extremely important cause of clinical illness. Roughly
can cause mental impairment and even sudden onset of
40% of all deaths in the United States are a consequence of
 coima. A more chronic forim of decompression sickness is
cardiovascular disease, with most of these deaths stein-
called caisson disease (named for pressurized underwater
 ming from imyocardial or cerebral infarction. Pulmonary
vessels used during bridge construction), in which recur-
infarction is a comnon clinical complication, bowel infarc-
 rent or persistent gas emboli in the bones lead to imultifocal
tion often is fatal, and ischeimic necrosis of distal extreimi-
ischeimic necrosis; the heads of the femurs, tibiae, and
ties (gangrene) causes substantial morbidity in the diabetic
humeri are most commonly affected.
population.
Placing affected persons in a high-pressure chaimber, to
Arterial thrombosis or arterial embolism underlies the
force the gas back into solution, treats acute decoimpression
vast imajority of infarctions. Less coimunon causes of arterial
sickness. Subsequent slow decompression permits gradual
obstruction include vasospasm, expansion of an atheroma
gas resorption and exhalation so that obstructive bubbles
secondary to intraplaque heimorrhage, and extrinsic com-
do not re-form.
pression of a vessel, such as by tumor, a dissecting aortic
 aneurysim, or edema within a confined space (e.g., in ante-
SUMMARY
rior tibial compartnent syndrome). Other uncomumon
causes of tissue infarction include vessel twisting (e.g., in
EMBOLISM 
testicular torsion or bowel volvulus), traumatic vascular
· An embolus is a solid, liquid, or gaseous mass carried by the
rupture, and entrapiment in a hernia sac. Although venous
 blood to a site distant from its origin; most are dislodged
throimbosis can cause infarction, the more coimunon
thrombi.
+ Pulmonary emboli derive primarily from lower-extremity deep
rapidly open to provide sufficient outflow to restore the
vein thrombi. Their effects depend mainly on the size of the
arterial inflow. Infarcts caused by venous thrombosis thus
embolus and the location in which it lodges. Consequences
n juanaa aus e ym suio u Auo rsoo Ansn
may include right-sided heart failure, pulmonary hemorrhage,
(e.g-, testis or ovary).
 pulmonary infarction, or sudden death.
+ Systemic emboli derive primarily from cardiac mural or valvu-
lar thrombi, aortic aneurysms, or atherosclerotic plaques;
whether an embolus causes tissue infarction depends on the
MORPHOLOGY
site of embolization and the presence or absence of collateral
circulation.
 Infarcts are classified based on their color (reflecting the amount
+ Fat embolism can occur after crushing injuries to the bones;
of hemorrhage) and the presence or absence of microbial infec-
tion. Thus, infarcts may be either red (hemorrhagic) or white
damage. Amniotic fluid embolism may follow childbirth and
(anemic) and may be either septic or bland.
can give rise to fatal pulmonary and cerebral manifestations.
Red infarcts (Fig.4. 17A) occur (1) as a result of venous occlu-
Air embolism can occur upon rapid decompression, most
sions (such as in ovarian torsion); (2) in loose tissues (e.g., lung)
commonly in divers;it results from sudden bubbling of nitrogen
where blood can collect in infarcted zones; (3) in tissues with dual
dissolved in blood at higher pressures.
 circulations such as lung and small intestine, where partial, albeit 
Fig. 4.17 Red and white infarcts. (A) Hermorrhagic,
(ur pa) nheui Aeuownd padys-pam Ayno
(B) Sharply dermarcated pale infarct in the spleen (white
inforct).
B
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Shock
115
inadequate perfusion by collateral arterial supplies is typical; (4) in
Factors That Influence Infarct Development
previously congested tissues (as a consequence of sluggish venous
The effects of vascular occlusion range from inconse-
outflow); and (5) when flow is reestablished after infarction has
quential to tissue necrosis leading to organ dysfunction
and sometimes death. The range of outcomes is influenced
White infarcts occur with arterial occlusions in solid organs
by the following three variables:
with end-arterial circulations (e.g., heart, spleen, and kidney), and
 Anatomy of the vascular supply. The presence or absence
where tissue density limits the seepage of blood from adjoining
 of an alternative blood supply is the most important
patent vascular beds (Fig. 4.17B). Infarcts tend to be wedge-
 factor in determining whether occlusion of an individ-
shaped, with the occluded vessel at the apex and the organ
ual vessel causes damage. The dual supply of the lung
periphery forming the base (Fig. 4.17); when the base is a serosal
 s s l p d a a
surface, there is often an overlying fibrinous exudate. Lateral
obstruction of the pulmonary arterioles does not cause
margins may be irregular, reflecting flow from adjacent vessels.
lung infarction unless the bronchial circulation also is
The margins of acute infarcts typically are indistinct and slightly
comproimised. Similarly, the liver, which receives blood
hemorrhagic; with time, the edges become better defined by a
from the hepatic artery and the portal vein, and the
narrow rim of hyperemia attributable to inflammation.
 Infarcts resulting from arterial occlusions in organs without
hand and forearm, with its parallel radial and ulnar
arterial supply, are resistant to infarction. By contrast,
a dual circulation typicaly become progressively paler and more
the kidney and the spleen both have end-arterial circula-
sharply defined with time (Fig. 4.17B). By comparison, hemor-
tions, and arterial obstruction generally leads to infarc-
rhagic infarcts are the rule in the lung and other spongy organs
tion in these tissues.
(Fig. 4.17A). Extravasated red cells in hemorrhagic infarcts are
 Rate of occlusion. Slowly developing occlusions are less
phagocytosed by macrophages, and the heme iron is converted
likely to cause infarction because they allow time for the
to intracellular hemosiderin. Small amounts do not impart any
 developiment of collateral blood supplies. For example,
 appreciable color to the tissue, but extensive hemorrhages leave
a firm, brown residue.
 minimal blood flow, interconnect the three imajor coro-
In most tissues, the main histologic finding associated with
nary arteries. If one coronary artery is slowly occluded
infarcts is ischemic coagulative necrosis (Chapter 2). An
(e.g., by encroaching atherosclerotic plaque), flow in this
inflammatory response begins to develop along the margins of
collateral circulation may increase sufficiently to prevent
infarcts within a few hours and usually is well defined within I
infarction-even if the original artery becoimes coim-
to 2 days. Eventually, inflammation is followed by repair, beginning
pletely occluded.
in the preserved margins (Chapter 3). In some tissues, parenchy-
Tissue vulnerability to hypoxia. Neurons undergo irre-
mal regeneration can occur at the periphery of the infarct, where
versible damage when deprived of their blood supply
the underlying stromal architecture has been spared. Most
for only 3 to 4 minutes. Myocardial cells, although
infarcts, however, are ultimately replaced by scar (Fig. 4.18). The
hardier than neurons, still die after only 20 to 30 minutes
brain is an exception to these generalizations; ischemic tissue
of ischemia. By contrast, fibroblasts within myocardium
injury in the central nervous system results in liquefactive
remain viable after many hours of ischeimia.
necrosis (Chapter 2).
Septic infarctis occur when infected cardiac valve vegeta-
tions embolize, or when microbes seed necrotic tissue. In these 
SUMMARY
cases the infarct is converted into an abscess, with a correspond-
INFARCTION 
uoeziueao Aq gueay pue asuodsau Aoewweyui jaeae kiau!
and fibrosis (Chapter 3).
+ Infarcts are areas of ischemic necrosis most commonly caused
 by arterial occlusion (typically resulting from thrombosis or 
embolization); venous outflow obstruction is a less frequent
cause.
+ Infarcts caused by venous occlusion or occurring in spongy
occlusion in compact tissues typically are pale (white).
+ Whether or not vascular occlusion causes tissue infarction is
influenced by collateral blood supplies, the rate at which an 
obstruction develops, intrinsic tissue susceptibility to ischemic
 injury, and blood oxygenation.
SHOCK
Shock is a state in which diminished cardiac output or
 reduced effective circulating blood volume impairs tissue
mmhuromimloiolm
perfusion and leads to cellular hypoxia. At the outset, the
 cellular injury is reversible; however, prolonged shock even-
Fig. 4.18 Remote kidney infarct, now replaced by a arge fibrotic scar.
tually leads to irreversible tissue injury and is often fatal.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
116
CHAPTER4
Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
Table 4.3 Three Major Types of Shock
Type of Shock
Clinical Examples
Principal Pathogenic Mechanisms
Cardiogenic
 Myocardial infarction
Ventricular rupture
 Failure of myocardial pump resulting from intrinsic myocardial
Arrhythmia
Cardiac tamponade
darmage, extrinsic pressure, or obstruction to outflow
 Pulmonary embolism
Hypovolemic
Hemorrhage
Inadequate blood or plasma volume
Fluid loss (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, burns, trauma)
Septic
Overwhelming microbial infections 
Gram-negative sepsis
Peripheral vasodilation and pooling of blood; endothelial
Gram-positive septicemia 
activation/injury; leukocyte-induced darmage; disseminated 
Fungal sepsis 
intravascular coagulation; activation of cytokine cascades
Superantigens (e.g., toxic shock syndrome)
 Shock may complicate severe hemorrhage, extensive trauma
improveinents in care, the mortality remains at a stagger-
 or burns, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, and
ing 20% to 30%.
microbial sepsis. Its causes fall into three general categories
 Septic shock is most frequently triggered by grain-
(Table 4.3):
 positive bacterial infections, followed by gram-negative
Cardiogenic shock results from low cardiac output
bacteria and fungi. Hence, an older synonyim, "endotoxic
as a result of myocardial pump failure. It may be
shock," is no longer appropriate.
 The ability of diverse microorganisims to cause septic
arrhythimias, extrinsic compression (cardiac tampon-
shock is consistent with the idea that a variety of microbial
ade) (Chapter 12), or outflow obstruction (e.g. pulmo-
constituents can trigger the process. As mentioned in
nary eimbolisim).
Chapter 3, macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells, endo-
Hypovolemic shock results froim low cardiac output due
thelial cells, and soluble components of the innate imimune
to loss of blood or plasima volume (e.g., resulting from
 systen (e.g., coimpleiment) recognize and are activated by
hemorrhage or fluid loss from severe burns).
several substances derived froim microorganisms. After
Septic shock is triggered by microbial infections and is asoci-
activation, these cells and factors initiate a number of
inflammatory responses that interact in a coimplex, incom-
(SIRS). In addition to microbes, SIRS may be triggered
pletely understood fashion to produce septic shock and
by a variety of insults, including burns, trauma, and/or
multiorgan dysfunction (Fig. 4.19).
pancreatitis. The coimmon pathogenic mechanism is a
Factors believed to play major roles in the pathophysiol.
massive outpouring of inflammatory mediators from
ogy of septic shock include the following:
innate and adaptive imnune cells that produce arterial
·Inflammatory and counterinflammatory responses. In sepsis,
vasodilation, vascular leakage, and venous blood
various microbial cell wall constituents engage recep-
pooling. These cardiovascular abnorimalities result in
tors on cells of the innate imnune systen, triggering
tissue hypoperfusion, cellular hypoxia, and metabolic
 proinflaminatory responses. Likely initiators of inflam-
derangements that lead to organ dysfunction and, if
mation in sepsis are signaling pathways that lie down-
severe and persistent, organ failure and death. The
stream of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) (Chapter 5), which
pathogenesis of shock is discussed in detail below.
recognize a host of microbe-derived substances contain-
ing so-called "pathogen-associated molecular patterns"
Less comunonly, shock can result from a loss of vascular
(PAMPs), as well as G-protein-coupled receptors that
[ds e on Krepuosas ro eisasaue yim paneiosse auol
detect bacterial peptides, and C-type lectin receptors
cord injury (neurogenic shock). Anaphylactic shock results
such as Dectins. On activation, innate imnune cells
from systeimic vasodilation and increased vascular perme-
produce numerous cytokines, including TNF, IL-1, IFN-
ability that is triggered by an imnunoglobulin E-mediated
, IL-12, and IL-18, as well as other inflaimmatory media-
hypersensitivity reaction (Chapter 5).
tors such as high-mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1).
Markers of acute inflaimunation such as C-reactive
Pathogenesis of Septic Shock
 protein and procalcitonin are also elevated. The latter is
a clinically useful indicator of septic shock. Reactive
Septic shock is responsible for 2% of all hospital adimis-
-useisond se yns sroeipaur pidi pue saioads uasaxo
sions in the United States. Of these, 50% require treatment
dins and platelet-activating factor (PAF) are also elabo-
in intensive care units. The number of cases in the United
rated. These effector molecules induce endothelial cells
 States exceeds 750,000/year and the incidence is rising.
(and other cell types) to upregulate adhesion molecule
which is ironically due to improveiments in life support for
expression and further stimulate cytokine and cheino-
critically ill patients, as well as the growing ranks of immu-
kine production. The complement cascade is also activated
nocompromised hosts (because of chemotherapy, immu-
nosuppression, advanced age, or human imnunodeficiency
proteolytic activity of plasimin (Chapter 3), resulting in
virusinfection) and the increasing prevalence of multidrug-
the production of anaphylotoxins (C3a, C5a), cheimotac-
resistant organisims in the hospital setting. Despite
tic fragiments (C5a), and opsonins (C3b), all of which
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Shock
117
 Microbial products
(PAMPs)
 Neutrophil and monocyte 
activation
Complement
Factor Xll
Endothelial
 activation
 activation
C3a
c3
TNF, IL-1, HMGB1
 Direct and indirect 
 Cytokines and cytokine-like mediators
 Procoagulant 
Anti-fibrinolytic
IL-6, IL-8, NO, PAF,
 IL-10, apoptosis,
TF
reactive oxygen species,
↑ PAI-1
STNFR
etc.
↓ TFPl, thrombomodulin,
 Secondary anti-inflammatory
protein C
mediators
 MICROVASCULAR
VASODILATION
INCREASED PERMEABILITY
SYSTEMIC
IMMUNOSUPPRESSION
THROMBOSIS (DIC)
DECREASED PERFUSION 
EFFECTS
 Fever, diminished 
myocardial contractility.
TISSUE ISCHEMIA 
metabolic abnormalities
Adrenal insufficiency
MULTIORGAN FAILURE
Fig. 4.19 Major pathogenic pathways in septic shock. Microbial products activate endothelial cells and cellular and humoral elements of the innate immune
system, initiating a cascade of events that lead to end-stage multiorgan failure.Additional details are provided in the text. DiC, Disseminated intravascular
coagulation; HMGB1, high-mobility group box I protein; NO, nitric oxide; PAF, platelet-activating factor; PAl-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor-I; PAMP, pathogen-
associated molecular pattern; STNFR, soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor; Tf, tissue factor; TFPl, tissue factor pathway inhibitor.
contribute to the proinflammatory state. In addition,
edeima, which have deleterious effects on both nutrient
microbial components can activate coagulation directly
delivery and waste reimoval. One effect of inflaiminatory
through factor Xll and indirectly through altered endo-
cytokines is to loosen endothelial cell tight junctions,
theliai function (discussed later). The accoimpanying
making vessels leaky and resulting in the accumulation
widespread activation of thrombin may further augment
 of protein-rich edeina fluid throughout the body. This
inflammation by triggering protease activated receptors
alteration impedes tissue perfusion and may be exacer-
on inflammatory cells.
a m d a s on sie a p
The hyperinflaimmatory state, initiated by sepsis,
nous fluids. Activated endothelium also upregulates
triggers counterregulatory imnunosuppressive mecha-
production of nitric oxide (NO) and other vasoactive
nisims, which may involve both innate and adaptive
inflaimmatory mediators (e.g, C3a, C5a, and PAF),
immune cells. As a result, septic patients may oscillate
which may contribute to vascular simooth muscle relax-
ation and systeimic hypotension.
states during their clinical course. Proposed mecha-
Induction of a procoagulant state. The derangement in
nisms for the immune suppression include a shift from
coagulation is sufficient to produce the formidable com-
proinflammatory (T1) to anti-inflaimmatory (T2) cyto-
plication of tdisseminated intrawascular coagulation in up to
kines (Chapter 5), production of anti-inflamimatory
half of septic patients. Sepsis alters the expression of
mediators (e.g
 soluble TNF receptor, IL-1 receptor
many factors so as to favor coagulation. Proinflaimma-
antagonist, and IL-10), lyimphocyte apoptosis, the
tory cytokines increase tissue factor production by
immunosuppressive effects of apoptotic cells, and the
monocytes and possibly endothelial cells as well, and
induction of cellular anergy. In some patients the coun-
decrease the production of endothelial anti-coagulant
terregulatory mechanisms overshoot the inflamimatory
factors, such as tissue factor pathway inhibitor, throm-
bomodulin, and protein C (see Fig. 4.1l). They also
renders such patients susceptible to superinfections.
Endothelial activation and injury. The proinflammatory
tor inhibitor-1 expression (see Fig. 4.10). The vascular
state and endothelial cell activation associated with
leak and tissue edema decrease blood flow at the level
sepsis lead to widespread vascular leakage and tissue
of small vessels, producing stasis and diminishing the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
118
CHAPTER4I
 Hemodynamic Disorders, Thromboembolism, and Shock
washout of activated coagulation factors. Acting in
T-lymphocyte activators that induce the release of high
concert, these effects lead to systeinic activation of
levels of cytokines that result in a variety of clinical mani-
thrombin and the deposition of fibrin-rich thrombi in
festations, ranging from a diffuse rash to vasodilation,
simall vessels, often throughout the body, further com-
hypotension, shock, and death.
 promising tissue perfusion. In full-blown disseminated
intravascular coagulation, the consumption of coagula-
Stages of Shock
tion factors and platelets is so great that deficiencies of
these factors appear, leading to concomitant bleeding
Shock is a progressive disorder that leads to death if the
 and hemorrhage (Chapter 12).
underlying probleins are not corrected. The exact mecha-
 Metabolic abrormalities. Septic patients exhibit insulin
nisims of sepsis-related death are still unclear; aside from
resistance and hyperglyceimia. Cytokines such as TNF
increased lymphocyte and enterocyte apoptosis, cellular
 and IL-1, stress-induced horimones (such as glucagon,
 necrosis is minimal. Death typically follows the failure of
growth hormone, and glucocorticoids), and catechol-
multiple organs, which usually offer no morphological
amines all drive gluconeogenesis. At the same time,
clues to explain their dysfunction. For hypovolemic and
the proinflammatory cytokines suppress insulin release
cardiogenic shock, however, the pathways leading to a
while
simultaneously
  promoting  insulin  resistance
patient's demise arereasonably well understood. Unless the
in the liver and other tissues, likely by impairing the
insult is massive and rapidly lethal (e.g., exsanguination
surface expression of GLUT-4, a glucose transporter.
from a ruptured aortic aneurysim), shock tends to evolve
Hyperglycemia decreases neutrophil function - thereby
suppressing bactericidal activity — and causes increased
These stages have been documented most clearly in hypo-
adhesion  molecule  expression  on  endothelial  cells.
voleimic shock but are common to other forms as well:
Although sepsis is initially associated with an acute
xaan ym Sunp ais aaissaonduu jennu u .
surge in glucocorticoid production, this phase may
be followed by adrenal insufficiency and a functional
perfusion is maintained,
deficit of glucocorticoids. This may stem froim depres-
A progressive stage characterized by tissue hypo-
sion of the synthetic capacity of intact adrenal glands
perfusion and onset of worsening circulatory and meta-
or frank adrenal necrosis resulting from disseiminated
bolic derangement, including acidosis,
intravascular
disseinination(Waterhouse-Friderichsen
An irreversible stage in which cellular and tissue injury
syndrome) (Chapter 20). Finally, cellular hypoxia and
 is so severe that even if the hemodynaimic defects are
diminished oxidative phosphorylation lead to increased
 corrected, survival is not possible.
lactate production and lactic acidosis.
Organ dysfunction. Systemic hypotension, interstitial
 In the early nonprogressive phase of shock, various neu-
edema, and simall vessel thrombosis all decrease the
rohumoral mechanisms help maintain cardiac output and
delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the tissues that,
blood pressure. These mechanisims include baroreceptor
because of cellular hypoxia, fail to properly use those
reflexes, release of catecholamines and anti-diuretic
nutrients that are delivered. Mitochondrial damage
hormone, activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldersterone
resulting from oxidative stress impairs oxygen
 use.
axis, and generalized sympathetic stimulation. The net
High levels of cytokines and secondary imediators
effect is tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstriction, and renal
diminish myocardial contractility and cardiac output,
fluid conservation; cutaneous vasoconstriction causes the
and increased vascular perimeability and endothelial
characteristic "shocky" skin coolness and pallor (notably,
aus ssa fursau an ar on pe u n
 septic shock can initially cause cutaneous vasodilation, so
(Chapter 13). Ultimately, these factors may conspire to
the patient may present with warm, flushed skin). Coro-
cause the failure of multiple organs, particularly the
 nary and cerebral vessels are less sensitive to sympathetic
kidneys, liver, lungs, and heart, culminating in death.
signals and maintain relatively normal caliber, blood flow,
and oxygen delivery. Thus, blood is shunted away from
The severity and outcome of septic shock are likely
the skin to the vital organs such as the heart and the brain.
dependent on the extent and virulence of the infection; the
If the underlying causes are not corrected, shock passes
immune status of the host; the presence of other coimorbid
imperceptibly to the progressive phase, which as noted is
conditions; and the pattern and level of mediator produc-
characterized by widespread tissue hypoxia. In the setting
tion. The multiplicity of factors and the complexity of the
of persistent oxygen deficit, intracellular aerobic respira-
interactions that underlie sepsis explain why most attempts
tion is replaced by anaerobic glycolysis with excessive pro-
to intervene therapeutically with antagonists of specific
duction of lactic acid. The resultant metabolic lactic acidosis
mediators have not been effective and may even have had
lowers the tissue pH, which blunts the vasomotor response;
deleterious effects in some cases. The standard of care
arterioles dilate, and blood begins to pool in the microcir-
 reinains antibiotics to treat the underlying infection and
culation. Peripheral pooling not only worsens the cardiac
intravenous fluids, pressors, and suppleimental oxygen to
 output but also puts endothelial cells at risk for the devel.
maintain blood pressure and limit tissue hypoxia. Suffice
opment of anoxic injury with subsequent DIC. With wide-
it to say that even in the best of clinical centers, septic shock
 spread tissue hypoxia, vital organs are affected and begin
reimains an obstinate clinical challenge.
to fail.
An additional group of secreted bacterial proteins called
 In the absence of appropriate intervention, or in severe
rs sdas o rens aupus e asnes ose suuiadrs
cases, the process eventually enters an irreversible stage.
(e.g, toxic shock syndrome). Superantigens are polyclonal
Widespread cell injury is reflected in lysosoimal enzyme
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Shock
119
leakage, further aggravating the shock state. Myocardial
contractile function worsens, in part because of increased
+ The major types of shock are cardiogenic (e.g, myocardial 
infarction), hypovolemic (e.g, blood loss), and septic (e.g,
NO synthesis. The ischemic bowel may allow intestinal
flora to enter the circulation, and thus bacteremic shock
infections).
· Shock of any form can lead to hypoxic tissue injury if not
 uoissaond rang uou pasouadns aq u
renal failure occurs as a consequence of ischemic injury of
corrected.
· Septic shock is caused by the host response to bacterial or
the kidney (Chapter 14), and despite the best therapeutic
fungal infections; it is characterized by endothelial cell activa-
interventions, the downward spiral frequently culminates
tion, vasodilation, edema, disseminated intravascular coagula-
in death.
tion, and metabolic derangements.
MORPHOLOGY
The cellular and tissue effects of shock are essentially those of
Jo uoeuqwoo e Aq pasneo aue pue (z jadeuo) Aunlui yixodsy
SUGGESTED READINGS
hypoperfusion and microvascular thrombosis. Although
any organ can be affected, the brain, heart, kidneys, adrenals, and
Akhtar S: Fat embolism, Anesthesiol Clin 27:533, 2009. {Recent o0erview
gastrointestinal tract are most commonly involved. Fibrin
of the pathogenesis and clinical issues in fat embolism syndrome.
thrombi can form in any tissue but typically are most readily
Alberelli MA, De Candia E: Functional role of protease activated
receptors in vascular biclogy, Vascut Pharmacot 62:72-81, 2014. [An
visualized in kidney glomeruli. Adrenal cortical cell lipid
exhaustive review of the role played by PARs in hemostasis.!
depletion is akin to that seen in all forms of stress and reflects
Angus DC, van der Poll T: Severe sepsis and septic shock, N Eng! J
increased use of stored lipids for steroid synthesis.Whereas the
Med 840:2013.fAn excellent review of ctinical featres,pathogenesis,and
outcome of septic shock.
ring after hemorrhage, sepsis or trauma can precipitate diffuse
 Benson MD: Current concepts of immunology and diagnosis in amni-
alveolar damage (Chapter I3), leading to so-called "shock
otic fluid embolism, Clin Deo fmmunol doi:10.1155/2012/946576:
lung." Except for neuronal and cardiomyocyte loss, affected
2012. Discussion of the pathophysiology of amiotic fuid ebotism.
tissues can recover completely if the patient survives.
Cawcutt KA, Peters SG: Severe sepsis and septic shock: clinical over-
view and update on management, Mayo Clir Proc 89:1572, 2014.
[A brief ctinical review of sepsis.
Clinical Features
Chapman JC, Hajar KA: Fibrinolysis and the control of blood coagula-
The clinical manifestations of shock depend on the pre-
tion, Blood Rev 29:17, 2015. fAn updated discussion of fibrinolysis and
its role in the regulation of coagulation.
cipitating insult. In hypovoleimic and cardiogenic shock,
Chaturvedi S, McCrae KR: Recent advances in the antiphospholipid
patients exhibit hypotension, a weak rapid pulse, tachy-
antibody syndrome, Curr Opin Hematot 21:371, 2014. ↓A discussion of
 pnea, and cool, clammy, cyanotic skin. As already noted, in
the pathophysiology of this important and complex entity.!
septicshock,theskinmaybewarmandflushedowing toperiph
Coleman DM, Obi A, Henke PK: Update in venous thromboembolism:
eral vasodilation. The primary threat to life is the underlying
pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment for surgical patients,
Cury Probt Surg 52:233, 2015. [An exhaustive review of this common
rhage, bacterial infection). However, the cardiac, cerebral,
clinical condition.}
J ens ay aeere pder saueo Aeuound pue
 Ellery PE, Adams MJ: Tissue factor pathway inhibitor: then and now,
 patients survive the initial period, worsening renal func-
Semin Thromb Hemost 40:881, 2014. fAdoances in understanding the role
tion can provoke a phase dominated by progressive oligu-
of tissue factor in coagulation.
ria, acidosis, and electrolyte imbalances.
Esmon CT, Esmon NL: The link between vascular features and throm-
bosis, Annu Reo Physiot 20ll. fAn excellent reviezw of the interactions of
Prognosis varies with the origin of shock and its dura-
endothelium,bloodflow,andhemostasis/thrombosis.
tion. Thus, more than 90% of young, otherwise healthy
Greinacher A: Heparin induced thrombocytopenia, N Engl ↓ Med
patients with hypovoleimic shock survive with appropriate
373:3, 2015. fA rice review on fhis common and enigmatic condition.
 manageinent; by comparison, septic or cardiogenic shock
Osinbowale O, Ali L, Chi YW: Venous thromboembolism: a clinical
is associated with substantially worse outcomes, even with
review, Postgrad Med 122:54, 2010. fGood review at α medical student/
state-of-the-art care.
house officer level.]
Rao LVM, Esom CT, Pendurthi UR: Endothelial cell protein C recep-
tor: a multiliganded and multifunctional receptor, Blood 124:1553,
2014. fA discussion of this novel reeptor in limiting coagulation.!
SUMMARY
 Renne T, Schmaier AH, Nickel KF, et al: In vivo roles of factor XII,
SHOCK
Blood 120:4296-4303, 2012. [A review summarizing new insights into
the stilt-uncertain in vivo functions of factor Xif in thrombosis and oas-
+ Shock is defined as a state of systemic tissue hypoperfusion
ctar biotogy.!
resulting from reduced cardiac output and/or reduced effective
Versteeg HH, Heemskerk JWM, Levi M, et al: New fundamentals in
hemostasis, Physiol Reo 93:327, 2013. {An update in seoeral issues in
circulating blood volume.
hemostasis.!
http://ebooksmedicine.net
See Targeted Therapy available online at studentconsult.com
CHAPTER
Diseases
of
the
mmune
PY
CHAPTER OUTLINE
The Normal Immune Response 121
Immedigte (Tybe l) Hybersensitivity ↑ 36
Transpiantotion of Hematopoietic Stem
Inngte immunity ↑22
Antibody-Medigted Diseases (Tybe I1
Celis 166
Adaptive Immunity I 24
Hybersensitivity)(39
Immunodeficiency Syndromes 168
Cells and Tissues of the Immune
Immune Compiex-Medigted Diseases (Tybe Ill 
 Primary (inhenited) immunodeficiencies 1 68
System 124
Hypersensitivity)140
Defects in Innate immunity ↑ 72
Lymphocytes 124
T Celf-Mediated Diseases (Tybe IV
Secondary (Acquired) immunodeficiencies ↑173
Antigen-Presenting Cells 128
Hypersensitivity)142
Acquired Immunodeficiency
Lymphoid Tissues 1 29
Autoimmune Diseases |45
Syndrome 173
Overview of Lymphocyte Activation and
Immunologic Tolerance 145
Epidemioiogy 173
 Adaptive Immune Responses 130
AMechanisms of Autoimmunity: General
Properties of HiV 74
Capture and Dispiay ofAntigens 1 30
 Pnncipies 147
Pathogenesis of HIV Infection and AIDS 175
Cell-/Mediated Immunity: Activation of
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 150
Natural History and Course of HIV
 T Lymphocytes ond Elimination of Intracellular
Rheumatoid Arthritis 1 58
Infection 178
Microbes ↑32
Sjogren Syndrome 158
Clinical Features ofAIDS 1 80
Humoral immunity: Activation of B Lymphocytes
Systemic Scierosis (Scieroderma) ↑59
Amyloidosis 182
and Elimination of Extracelluiar Microbes ↑ 32
Inflammatory Myopathies 162
Pathogenesis ofAmyioid Deposition 183
Decline of immune Responses and immunoiogic
Mixed Connective Tissue Disease 162
Ciassification of Amyioidosis and Mechanisms of
Memory 134
Polyarteritis Nodosg ond Other Vasculitides 162
Amyioid Formgtion 183
Hypersensitivity: Immunologically
gG4-Related Disease 162
Mediated Tissue Injury 134
Rejection of Transplants 162
Couses of Hypersensitivity Reactions I 35
Recognition and Rejection of Allografts 162
Ciasification of Hybersensitivity Reactions 1 35
Immunity refers to protection against infections. The
immune system is the collection of cells and molecules that
THE NORMAL IMMUNE RESPONSE
are responsible for defending the body against the count-
less pathogens that individuals encounter. Defects in the
Defense against pathogens consists of two types of reac-
immune system render individuals easy prey to infections
tions (Fig. 5.1). Innate immunity (also called natural, or
and are the cause of immunodeficiency diseases. But the
rative, immunity) is mediated by cells and proteins that
immune system is itself capable of causing tissue injury
are always present (hence the terim inrate), poised to react
 and disease, which are often referred to as rypersensitivity
against infectious pathogens. These mechanisms are
disorders.
called into action immediately in response to infection, and
This chapter is devoted to diseases caused by too little
thus provide the first line of defense. Soime of these imecha-
immunity or too much immunologic reactivity. We also
 nisms also are involved in clearing damaged cells and
consider amyloidosis, a disease in which an abnorimal
tissues. A major reaction of innate imununity is inflamma-
 protein, usually derived from fragiments of antibodies or
tion (Chapter 3).
produced during chronic inflaimmatory disorders, is depos-
 Many pathogens have evolved to resist innate imnu-
ited in tissues. First, we review some important features of
nity, and protection against these infections requires the
normal immune responses, to provide a foundation for
more specialized and powerful mechanisims of acdaptive
understanding the abnormalities that give rise to immuno-
immunity (also called acquired, or specific, imnunity).Adap-
logic diseases.
tive immunity is normally silent and responds (or adapts)
121
http://ebooksmedicine.net
122
CHAPTER5
Diseases of the Immune System
INNATE IMMUNITY
ADAPTIVEIMMUNITY
B lymphocytes
Antibodies
Epithelial
barriers
Phagocytes
T lymphocytes
Effector
Dendritic cells
T cells
Complement
NK cells
Dendritic cell
Hours
Days
门
6
12
3
Time after infection
Fig. 5.1 The principal components and kinetics of response of the innate and adaptive immune systems. NK cells, Natural killer cells.
to the presence of infectious agents by generating potent
 mechanisms for neutralizing and eliminating the patho-
EXTRACELLULAR
gens. By convention, the terms immune system and immune
Bacterial
Microbial
esporse generally refer to adaptive imnunity.
products
polysaccharide
LR
Innate Immunity
Lectin
 The major components of innate imnunity are epithelial
barriers that block the entry of microbes, phagocytic cells
(mainly neutrophils and macrophages), dendritic cells
Plasma membrane
(DCs), natural killer (NK) cells and other innate lymphoid
cells, and several plasima proteins, including the proteins
CYTOSOLIC
ENDOSOMAL
of the compleiment system. The various cells are discussed
later in this chapter; the compleiment system was discussed
 NOD-like receptor
in Chapter 3.
 Phagocytes, dendritic cells and many other cells, such
Nucleic acids
of ingested
 as epithelial cells, express receptors that sense the pres-
Bacterial
microbes
ence of infectious agents and substances released from
peptidoglycan;
dead cells. The imicrobial structures recognized by these 
products of
TLR
receptors are called pathogen-associated molecular patterns;
 damaged cells
Aa pue ad aues aui jo saqoiu buoure pareys aie Aau
Viral RNA
are essential for the survival and infectivity of the microbes
(so the microbes cannot evade innate iimmune recognition
RIG-like
receptor
by mutating these molecules). The substances released
Endosomalmembrane
froim injured and necrotic cells are called damage-associated
molecular patterrns. The cellular receptors that recognize
these molecules are often called pa ttern recognition receptors.
It is estimated that innate immunity uses about 100 differ-
ent receptors to recognize 1000 molecular patterns.
cytes, dendritic cells, and many types of epithelial cells express different
classes of receptors that sense the presence of microbes and dead cells.
Receptors of Innate Immunity
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) located in different cellular compartments, as well
 Pattern recognition receptors are located in all the cellu-
as other cytoplasmic and plasma membrane receptors, recognize products
lar compartments where pathogens may be present:
 of different classes of microbes.The major classes of innate immune recep-
plasma membrane receptors detect extracellular patho-
tors are TLRs, NOD-like receptors in the cytosol (NLRs), C-type lectin
receptors, RIG-like receptors for viral RNA, named after the founding
gens, endosomal receptors detect ingested microbes, and
member RIG-l, and cytosolic DNA sensors.
cytosolic receptors detect microbes in the cytoplasm
(Fig. 5.2). Several classes of these receptors have been
identified.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
The Normal Immune Response
123
Toll-Like Receptors
 Pathogenic bacteria
The best known of the pattern recognition receptors are the
Extracellular ATP
Toll-like receptors (TLRs). There are 10 TLRs in mamimals
K+
Plasma
 that recognize a wide range of microbial molecules. The
membrane
plasima meimbrane TLRs recognize bacterial products such
as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and endosoimal TLRs recog-
nize viral and bacterial RNA and DNA (see Fig. 5.2). Rec-
NLRP-3
k+
ognition of microbes 
by
 these receptors activates
(sensor)
transcription factors that stimulate the production of
Bacterial products
 several secreted and membrane proteins, including media-
Adapter
Crystals
K+efflux
tors of inflamnation, anti-viral cytokines (interferons), and
Caspase-1
 Reactive oxygen species
(inactive)
proteins that proimote lymphocyte activation and the even
more potent adaptive immune responses.
NOD-Lilke Receptors and the Inflammasome
Signals from
NOD-like receptors (NLRs) are cytosolic receptors named
TLRs, other
 after the founding meimbers NOD-1 and NOD-2. They
receptors
recognize a wide variety of substances, including prod-
ucts of necrotic cells (e.g, uric acid and released ATP), ion
NLRP-3
inflammasome
disturbances (e.g., loss of K'), and some microbial prod-
ucts. How this fainily of sensors detects so many diverse
signs of danger or damage is not known. Several of the
 Caspase-1 (active)
Mt
NLRs signal via a cytosolic multiprotein coimplex called
Pro-IL1β gene
the inflammasome, which activates an enzyime (caspase-l)
activation
that cleaves a precursor form of the cytokine interleukin-1
Pro-IL1β
IL-1β
(IL-1) to generate the biologically active forim (Fig. 5.3). As
discussed in Chapter 3, IL-1 is a mediator of inflaimuna-
Nucleus
tion that recruits leukocytes and induces fever. Gain-of-
function mutations in one of the NLRs result in periodic
fever syndromes, called autoinflammatory syndromes, which
Secreted IL-1β
respond very well to treatiment with IL-1 antagonists. The
NLR-inflamimasome pathway also may play a role in a
Acute inflammation
number of chronic disorders marked by inflammation. For
exaimple, recognition of urate crystals by a class of NLRs
Fig. 5.3 The inflammasome.The inflammasome is a protein complex that
underlies the inflaimmation associated with gout. These
recognizes products of dead cells and some microbes and induces the secre-
receptors may detect and respond to lipids and cholesterol
tion of biologically active interleukin-l. It is a complex of multiple copies of
shuoue arel Aeurnouqe ui pansodap are jeq sieisan
a sensor protein (a leucine-rich protein called NLRP3), an adapter, and the 
in tissues; the resulting inflammation may contribute to
enzyme caspase-l, which is converted from an inactive to an active form.
 obesity-associated type 2 diabetes and atherosclerosis,
The structure of the inflammasome as shown is simplified from known
crystal structures. The formation of the inflarmmasome complex proceeds
respectively.
a pane d ao ya n dd yo so ad e a
Other Receptors for Microbial Products
type. The net result is the activation and assembly of a large number of
C-type lectin receptors (CLRs) expressed on the plasima
identical polypeptides, formingfilament-like bundles of adapters and enzymes
meimbrane of macrophages and DCs detect fungal glycans
 and elicit inflammatory reactions to fungi. Several cytosolic
receptors detect the nucleic acids of viruses that replicate
Reactions of innate immunity
in the cytoplasim of infected cells, and stimulate the pro-
The innate imnune systeim provides host defense by the
duction of anti-viral cytokines. G protein-coupled recep-
following two main reactions:
tors on neutrophils, macrophages, and most other types of
Inflammation. Cytokines and products of compleiment
leukocytes recognize short bacterial peptides containing
activation, as well as other mediators, are produced
N-forinylmethionyl residues. Because all bacterial proteins
 during innate immune reactions and trigger the vascu-
and few maimnalian proteins (only those synthesized
lar and cellular components of inflaimmation. The
within mitochondria) are initiated by N-formylimethionine,
recruited leukocytes destroy pathogens and ingest and
this receptor enables neutrophils to detect bacterial pro-
eliminate daimaged cells. This reaction was described in
teins and stimulates cheimotactic responses. Mannose
Chapter 3.
receptors recognize microbial sugars (which often contain
terminal mannose residues, unlike mammalian glycopro-
 response to viruses act on infected and uninfected cells
teins) and induce phagocytosis of the microbes. In addi-
and activate enzymes that degrade viral nucleic acids
tion, two faimilies of cytosolic receptors, one named after
and inhibit viral replication.
the founding meimber RIG-I and the other called cytosolic
DNA sensors, recognize microbial RNA and DNA,
In addition to these defensive functions, the innate
respectively.
immune system generates signals that stimulate the 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
124
CHAPTER５[
 Diseases of the Immune System
subsequent, more powerful adaptive imnune response.
receptors that are expressed in B cells are called artibodies,
 Some of these signals are described later.
while their T-cell counterparts are called T-cell receptors.
Mature T and B lymphocytes recirculate through periph.
Adaptive Immunity
'sapou ydu a -suno proyui (ruos) [ee
spleen and mucosal tissues- and reside in these organs
The adaptive iimnune system consists of lyinphocytes and
 and in most tissues. Foreign antigens are concentrated in
their products, including antibodies. In contrast to the
these organs, where they bind to and activate the clones of
linited repertoire of the innate immune system, the adap-
lyimphocytes that express receptors for those antigens, a
tive imunune system can recognize a vast array of foreign
process known as clonal slection. All mature lyimphocytes
substances.
 go through distinct phases during their lives- naive lym-
There are two types of adaptive immunity: humoral
phocytes express antigen receptors but have not responded
immunity, mediated by soluble proteins called antibod-
to antigens and do not serve any functions; effector lympho-
H paes osie) saooudual g Aq paonpoid are peun sai
cytes are induced by lymphocyte activation and perform
cells), and cell-mediated (or cellular) immunity, medi-
the functions that eliminate microbes; and memory lympho-
ated by T lymphocytes (also called T cells). Antibodies
cytes, induced during activation, survive in a functionally
provide protection against extracellular pathogens in the
silent state even after the antigen is eliminated and respond
blood, mucosal surfaces, and tissues. T lymphocytes are
 rapidly upon subsequent encounters with the antigen.
TLymphocytes
work by either directly killing infected cells (accoimplished
 by cytotoxic T lymphocytes) or by activating phagocytes to
Thymus-derived T lymphocytes develop into the effector
kill ingested microbes, via the production of soluble protein
cells of cellular immunity and "help" B cells to produce
mediators called cytokines (imade by helper T cells). We next
antibodies against protein antigens. T cells constitute 60%
turn to the inain properties and functions of the cells of the
 to 70% of the lyimphocytes in peripheral blood and are the
imnune system.
major lymphocyte population in splenic periarteriolar
sheaths and lymph node interfollicular zones. T cells
cannot recognize free or circulating antigens; instead, the
CELLS AND TISSUES OF
-b apndad Aquo asuas shas 1 jo (%<) Aoeu is
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
ments of proteins displayed by molecules of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), discussed in more
The cells of the immune system consist of lymphocytes,
detail later. Because T cell antigen receptors have evolved
most of which have specific receptors for antigens and
to see MHC-bound peptides on cell surfaces, T cells only
mount adaptive immune responses; specialized APCs,
   ro a psd se a
which capture and display microbial and other antigens to
of this interaction varies dramatically depending on the
the lymphocytes; and various effector cells, whose func-
type of T cell that is involved and the identity of the other
tion is to eliminate microbes and other antigens. Some of
interacting cell, ranging from the killing of virus-infected
the remarkable features of the immune system are the
cells to the activation of phagocytes or B lymphocytes that
have ingested protein antigens.
on B and T cells, the specialization of the cells that that
Peptide antigens presented by MHC molecules are rec-
enable them to perform many different functions, and the
 ognized by the T-cell receptor (TCR), a heterodiner that
precise control mechanisims that permit useful responses
in most T cells is composed of disulfide-linked c and β
when needed and prevent potentially harimful ones.
protein chains (Fig. 5.5). Each chain has a variable region
nue apndad renonred e bupug u saedined jeu
 and a constant region that interacts with associated signal-
Lymphocytes
ing imolecules. TCRs are noncovalently linked to a cluster
Lyimphocytes are present in the circulation and in various
of five invariant polypeptide chains, the , &, and e proteins
lymphoid organs. Although all lymphocytes are morpho-
 of the CD3 molecular complex and two  chains (see Fig.
logically similar, they actually consist of several function-
5.5). The CD3 proteins and ( chains do not bind antigens;
ally and phenotypically distinct populations (Fig. 5.4).
instead, they are attached to the TCR and initiate intracel-
Lyimphocytes develop froin precursors in the generative
lular biocheimical signals after TCR recognition of antigen.
(primary) lymphoid organs; T lymphocytes mature in the
 T cells also express a number of other molecules that
thymus, whereas B lymphocytes mature in the bone marrow.
serve iimportant functions in imnune responses. CD4 and
Each T or Blyinphocyte and its progeny, which constitute a
CD8 are expressed on distinct T-cell subsets and act as
-dod ia pue odaauaue as e ssaxa o
coreceptors during T-cell activation. During antigen recog-
tion of lyimphocytes (numbering about 10²2 in humans) can
nition, CD4 molecules on T cells bind to invariant portions
recognize tens or hundreds of millions of antigens. The
of class II MHC molecules (described later) on selected
antigen-presenting cells (APCs); in an analogous fashion,
variant DNA sequences that are created during lymphocyte
CD8 binds to class I MHC molecules. CD4 is expressed on
 maturation by the joining and diversification of different
50% to 60% of T cells, whereas CD8 is expressed on about
gene segiments to forim functional antigen receptor genes, a
40% of T cells. The CD4- and CD8-expressing T cells-
process that occurs only in B cells and T cells. Hence the
called CD4+ and CD8+ cells, respectively- perforim differ-
aai e si saua roidasai uaue paueieai jo aouasaid
Imarker of these cells. As already mentioned, the antigen
helper T cells because they secrete soluble molecules
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cells and Tissues of the Immune System
125
ANTIGEN RECOGNITION
FUNCTION
 Antibody
 Neutralization of microbe,
B lymphocyte
phagocytosis,
complement activation 
Microbe
Complement 
Activation of macrophages
Helper
Cytokines
Inflammation
T lymphocyte
1
 Microbial antigen presented
 by antigen-presenting cells 
Activation (proliferation 
 and differentiation) of 
 T and B lymphocytes 
Iymphocyt
Cytotoxic
T lymphocyte
 Killing of infected cell 
(CTL)
Infected cell presenting 
 microbial antigen 
 Responding T lymphocyte
Regulatory
 Suppression of
T lymphocyte
 immune response 
 Natural
killer (NK)
Killing of infected cell
cell
Fig. 5.4 The principal classes of lymphocytes and their functions. B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes are cells of adaptive immunity, and natural killer (NK)
cells are cells of innate immunity. Several more classes of lymphocytes have been identified, including NK-T cells and so-called “innate ymphoid cells" (ILCs):
the functions of these cels are not established.
(cytokines) that help B cells to produce antibodies and also
While most T cells express TCRs composed of α and β
help macrophages to destroy phagocytosed microbes. The
chains, a minority of peripheral blood T cells and many T
central role of CD4+ helper cells in immunity is highlighted
cells associated with mucosal surfaces (e.g., lung, gastro-
by the severe compromise that results from destruction of
intestinal tract) express TCRs that are composed of  and
these cells by human imnunodeficiency virus (HIV) infec-
8 chains, which are similar but not identical to α and β
tion (described later). CD8+ T cells also can secrete cyto-
chains. Such y& T cells, which do not express CD4 or CD8,
kines, but their most inportant role is to directly kill
virus-infected cells and tumor cells; hence, they are called
cans), but their functional roles are not well understood.
cytotoxic T tymphocytes (CTLs). Other important invariant
Another simall population of T cells expresses markers
proteins on T cells include CD28, which functions as the
of both T cells and NK cells. These so-called NKT cells
receptor for molecules called costimulators that are induced
recognize microbial glycolipids and may play a role in
on APCs by microbes, and various adhesion molecules that
strengthen the bond between the T cells and APCs and
y& T cells and NKT cells recognize antigens independently
 control the imigration of the T cells to different tissues.
of MHC molecules, and are much less diverse than the
T cells that function to suppress immune responses are
receptors of the imore abundant CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
called regulatory T lymphocytes. This cell type is described
We will not discuss these rare lymphocyte populations
later, in the context of tolerance of self antigens.
further.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
126
CHAPTER５
 Diseases of the Immune System
chain contains a cleft where the polymorphic residues
ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELL
are located and where foreign peptides bind to MHC
Class II MHC molecule
molecules for presentation to T cells, and a conserved
α chain
β chain
region that binds CD8, ensuring that only CD8+ T cells
can respond to peptides displayed by class I molecules.
 In general, class I MHC molecules bind and display
 peptides derived from protein antigens present in the
CD80-
cytosol of the cell (e.g., viral and tumor antigens).
or CD86
Class II MHC molecules are encoded by genes in the
CD4
CD28
HLA-D region, which contains three subregions: DP,
DQ, and DR. Class II molecules are heterodimers of
Peptide
antigen
noncovalently linked α and β subunits (see Fig. 5.6).
 Unlike class I MHC molecules, which are expressed on
all nucleated cells, expression of class II MHC molecules
is restricted to a few cell types, mainly APCs (notably,
dendritic cells), macrophages, and B cells. The extracel-
lular portion of class II MHC molecules contains a cleft
COY
for the binding of antigenic peptides and a region that
binds CD4. In general, class II MHC molecules bind to
 peptides derived froim extracellular proteins synthe-
CD3
TCR
CD3
sized outside the cell, for example, from microbes that
are ingested and then broken down inside the cell. This
property allows CD4+ T cells to recognize the presence
CD4+T CELL
 of extracellular pathogens.
 Signal 1
Signal 2
· Several other proteins are encoded in the MHC locus,
Fig. 5.5 The T-cell receptor (TCR) complex and other molecules involved 
including complement components (C2, C3, and Factor
in T-cell activation. The TCR heterodimer, consisting of an α chain and a β
B) and the cytokines tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and
chain, recognizes antigen (in the form of peptide-MHC complexes expressed 
lymphotoxin.
on antigen-presenting cells), and the linked CD3 complex and & chains initi-
e a   oe ae    sis  e
HLA genes are highly polymorphic; that is, there are
(Note that some T cels express CD8 and not CD4;these molecules serve
analogous roles.) The sizes of the molecules are not drawn to scale. MHC,
alternative forims (alleles) of each gene at each locus (esti-
Major histocompatibility complex.
mated to number over 10,000 for all HLA genes and over
3500 for HLA-B alleles alone). Each individual expresses
only one set of HLA genes. It is believed that the polyimor-
phisim of MHC genes evolved to enable display of and
Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules:
response to any conceivable microbial peptide encoun-
The Peptide Display System of Adaptive Immunity
tered in the environment. As a result of the polymorphisim,
MHC molecules are fundamental to T-cell recognition of
a virtually infinite number of combinations of HLA mol-
 antigens, and genetic variations in MHC molecules are
 ecules exists in the population. The HLA genes are closely
associated with many iimnunologic diseases; hence, it is
linked on chromosome 6, so they are passed from parent
important to review the structure and function of these
to offspring er bloc and behave like a single locus with
molecules. The MHC was discovered on the basis of studies
respect to their inheritance patterns. Each set of maternal
of graft rejection and acceptance (tissue, or "histo," compat-
 and paternal HLA genes is referred to as an HLA haplotype.
ibility). It is now known that the normal function of MHC
 Because of this mode of inheritance, the probability that
molecules is to display peptides for recognition by CD4+
siblings will share the same two HLA haplotypes is 25%.
 and CD8+ T lymphocytes. In each person, T cells recognize
By contrast, in most populations the probability that an
only peptides displayed by that person's MHC molecules,
unrelated donor will share the same two HLA haplotypes
which, of course, are the only MHC molecules that the T
is very low. The implications of HLA polymorphism for
cells normally encounter. This phenomenon is called MHC
 transplantation are obvious; because each person has HLA
estriction.
alleles that differ to some extent froin those of every other
The human MHC, known as the human leukocyte
unrelated individual, grafts from unrelated donors will
antigen (HLA) coimplex, consists of a cluster of genes on
 elicit inimune responses in the recipient and be rejected.
chromosome 6 (Fig. 5.6). On the basis of their cheimical
Only identical twins can accept grafts from one another,
structure, tissue distribution, and function, MHC gene 
without fear of rejection. Even grafts from a donor to a
 products fall into two main categories:
pn aq A ad i as a m 
 Class I MHC imolecules are expressed on all nucleated
because of differences in so-called "minor histocompatibil-
cells and are encoded by three closely linked loci, des-
ity loci", other sets of polymorphic genes that are likely to
ignated HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C (see Fig. 5.6). Each
differ by chance. (The only exception to this rule, of course,
of these molecules consists of a polymorphic α chain
are identical twins) In fact, HLA molecules were discov-
noncovalently
associated with an invariant
ered in the course of early attempts at tissue transplanta-
 microglobulin polypeptide (encoded by a separate gene
 tion, because HLA molecules of the graft evoke immune
on chromosome 15). The extracellular portion of the Q
responses that eventually lead to graft destruction
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cells and Tissues of the Immune System
27
DP
DQ
DR
TNF LT
B
C
BαβC
BC
βββ
Class II MHC
Complement
Cytokines
Class I MHC
molecules
proteins, others
molecules
 Peptide-binding cleft
 Peptide-binding cleft 
Peptide
Peptide
B
Peptide
Peptide
domain
domain
NH2
H,N NH2
NH2
β2m
α chain
3chain
C
domain
β2 microglobulir
HOOC
α chain
HOOC
COOH
COOH
Fig. 5.6 The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex and the structure of HLA molecules. (A) The location of genes in the HLA complex. The relative
locations, sizes, and distances between genes are not to scale. Genes that encode several proteins involved in antigen processing (the TAP transporter, com-
ponents of the proteasome, and HLA-DM) are located in the class Il region (not shown). (B) Schematic diagrams and crystal structures of class I and class Il
HLA molecules. (Crystal structures are courtesy of Dr. P Bjorkman, Calformia institute of Technology, Pasadena, Calformia.)
(discussed later). This ability of MHC molecules to trigger
on the surface together with signaling molecules to forim
immune responses is the reason these molecules are often
the B-cell receptor (BCR) complex (Fig. 5.7). Whereas T
called antigens.
cells recognize only MHC-associated peptides, B cells rec-
 The inheritance of particular MHC alleles influences 
ognize and respond to many more cheimical structures,
both protective and harimful immune responses. The ability
 including soluble or cell-associated proteins, lipids, poly-
of any given MHC allele to bind the peptide antigens gen-
saccharides, nucleic acids, and simall cheimicals, without a
 erated from a particular pathogen will determine whether
requireiment for the MHC. As with TCRs, each antibody
a specific person's T cells can recognize and mount a pro-
has a unique amino acid sequence. This sequence diversity
tective response to that pathogen. Conversely, if the antigen
is a consequence of the rearrangeiment and asseimbly of a
is ragweed pollen and the response is an allergic reaction,
 Imultitude of imnunoglobulin (Ig) gene segiments, a process
inheritance of some HLA genes may make individuals sus-
that creates functional Ig genes. B cells express several
ceptible to hay fever, the colloquial naime for ragweed
invariant molecules that are responsible for signal trans-
allergy.
duction and B-cell activation (see Fig. 5.7). Some are signal-
Finally, many autoimmune diseases are associated with
ing molecules attached to the BCR; another exaimple is
 particular HLA allles. We return to a discussion of these
CD21 (also known as the type 2 complement receptor, or
 associations when we consider autoiimununity.
that frequently is deposited on microbes and promotes
B Lymphocytes
 B-cell responses to microbial antigens. Interestingly, the
B (bone marrow-derived) lymphocytes are the cells that
ubiquitous Epstein-Barr virus has cleverly evolved to use
produce antibodies, the mediators of humoral immunity.
 CD21 as a receptor for binding to B cells and infecting
B cells make up 10% to 20% of the circulating peripheral
theim.
lymphocyte population. They also are present in bone
After stimulation, B cells differentiate into plasma cells,
marrow and in the follicles of peripheral (secondary) lyim-
which secrete large amounts of antibodies. There are five
phoid organs.
classes, or isotypes, of immunoglobulins: IgG, IgM, and
IgA constitute more than 95% of circulating antibodies. IgA
 antibody of the imnunoglobulin M (IgM) class, expressed 
 is the major isotype in mucosal secretions; IgE is present in
http://ebooksmedicine.net
128
CHAPTER５
Diseases of the Immune System
Antigen
reduced expression of class I MHC molecules and increased
expression of proteins that engage activating receptors.
Complement
The net result is that the NK cells are activated and the
gM
lgM
protein
infected or stressed cells are killed and eliminated. NK cells
CD21
also secrete cytokines such as interferon- (IFN-), which
activates macrophages to destroy ingested microbes, and
thus NK cells provide early defense against intracellular
microbial infections.
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are populations of lympho-
cytes that lack TCRs but produce cytokines similar to those
that are made by T cells. They are classified into three
go
g
go
groups, which produce IFN-, IL-5, or IL-17, cytokines that
are characteristic of Thl, Th2, and T17 subsets of T cells,
 Signal 1
respectively (described later). NK cells are related to group
 Signal 2
1 ILCs based on their production of IFN-, a cytokine also
made by T1 cells. Because ILCs mostly reside in tissues,
they are thought to provide early defense against infections
in the tissues, before T cells are activated and can migrate
into tissues. ILCs also may be early participants in inflain-
matory diseases.
Antigen-Presenting Cells
The imimune systeim contains several cell types that are
Cu1
specialized to capture antigens and display these to lym-
phocytes. Foreimost among these APCs are dendritic cells,
the major cells for displaying protein antigens to naive T
CH2
cells. Several other cell types present antigens to lyimpho-
cytes at various stages of imimune responses.
B
FH3
Dendritic Cells
Fig. 5.7 Structure of antibodies and the B-cell antigen receptor. (A) The
Dendritic cells (DCs) are the most important antigen-
B-cell antigen receptor complex is composed of membrane immunoglobulin
presenting cells for initiating T-cell responses against
M (lgM; or IgD, not shown), which recognizes antigens, and the associated
 protein antigens. These cells have numerous fine cytoplas-
signaling proteins Igα and Igβ. CD2l is a receptor for a complerment com-
imic processes that reseimble dendrites, from which they
ponent that also promotes B-cell activation. (B) Crystal structure of a
derive their name. Several features of DCs account for their
secreted IgG molecule, showing the arrangement of the variable (V) and
key role in antigen capture and presentation.
constant (C) regions of the heavy (H) and light (L) chains. (Courtesy of Dr.
‘These cells are located at the right place to capture
Alex McPherson, University of Califomia,frvine, Calfomia.)
 antigens- under epithelia, the coimmon site of entry of
microbes and foreign antigens, and in the interstitia of
the circulation at very low concentrations and also is found
all tissues, where antigens may be produced. DCs within
attached to the surfaces of tissue mast cells; and IgD is
the epiderimis are callied Langerhans cells.
expressed on the surfaces of B cells but is secreted at very
DCs express many receptors for capturing and respond-
low levels. These isotypes differ in their ability to activate
ing to microbes (and other antigens), including TLRs
compleiment and recruit inflammatory cells, and thus have
and C-type lectin receptors.
different roles in host defense and disease states.
 In response to microbes, DCs are recruited to the T-cell
zones of lyimphoid organs, where they are ideally posi-
Natural Kilfer Cells and innate Lymphoid Cefls
tioned to present antigens to T cells.
 NK cells are lyimphocytes that arise froim the same coimnon
 DCs express high levels of MHC and other molecules
lymphoid progenitor that gives rise to T lymphocytes and
needed for antigen presentation and activation of T
B lymphocytes. However, NK cells are innate immune
cells.
celis, as they are functional without prior activation and
do not express highly variable and clonally distributed
One subset of DCs is called plasmacytoid DCs because of
receptors for antigens. Instead, NK cells have two types of
their reseimblance to plasima cells. These cells are present
receptors-inhibitory and activating. Inhibitory receptors
 in the blood and lymphoid organs, and are major sources
recognize self class I MHC imolecules, which are expressed
of the anti-viral cytokine type I interferon, produced in
 on all healthy cells, whereas activating_receptors recognize
response to many viruses.
 lo passans uo paieinbaidn ro passaidxa are ieu sansao
A second type of cell with dendritic morphology is
infected cells. Norimally, the effects of inhibitory receptors
 present in the geriminal centers of lymphoid follicles in the
doininate over those of activating receptors, preventing
spleen and lymph nodes and is called the follicular dendritic
spontaneous activation of the NK cells. Infections (espe-
cell (FDC). These cells bear Fc receptors for IgG and recep-
cially viral infections) and stress are associated with
1o saipoqnue on punoq uanue den uo pue qo rog sio
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cells and Tissues of the Immune System
129
Table 5.1 Distribution of Lymphocytes in Tissues**
Follicles
Tissue
Number of Lymphocytes x I0?
 Lymph nodes
061
Spleen
70
Bone marrow
50
Blood
10
Skin
20
Intestines
50
Liver
10
s8un7
OE
*Approximate numbers of lymphocytes in different tssues in a healthy adult.
Cortex
compleiment proteins. These cells display antigens to B
Medulla
lymphocytes in lymphoid follicles and promote antibody
responses, but are not involved in capturing antigens for
display to T cells.
 Afferent
 Dendritic  lymphatic
Naive
Other Antigen-Presenting Cells
cell
vessel
B cell
Macrophages (Chapter 3) ingest microbes and other par-
Naive
ticulate antigens and display peptides for recognition by T
Tcell
lymphocytes. These T cells in turn activate the macro-
phages to kill the microbes, the central reaction of cell-
I radiay oi sapndad puasand sis g Anl paepau
cells and receive signals that stimulate antibody responses
T-cell zone
to protein antigens, critical steps in humoral immune
B-cell zone-
responses.
Lymphoid Tissues
The tissues of the immune system consist of the generative
(also called primary, or central) lymphoid organs, in which T
Artery
lymphocytes and B lymphocytes mature and become coim-
B
petent to respond to antigens, and the peripheral (or second-
Bce
sa  d m  's g (
to microbes are initiated. The principal generative lym-
phoid organs are the thymus, where T cells develop, and
the bone marrow, the site of production of all blood cells
and where B lymphocytes mature. The major peripheral
organs are briefly described in the following sections.
Peripheral Lymphoid Organs
The peripheral lymphoid organs are organized to concen-
trate antigens, APCs, and lymphocytes in a way that opti-
mizes interactions ainong these cells and the developiment
of adaptive immune responses. Most of the body's lym-
phocytes are located in these organs (Table 5.1).
?
tions of lymphoid cells and innate imunune cells that are
located along lymphatic channels throughout the body
(Fig. 5.8A). As lymph passes through lymph nodes, resi-
C
B cells
T cells
dent APCs are able to sample antigens that are carried to
the node in lymph derived from the interstitial fluids of
Fig. 5.8 Morphology of a lymph node. (A) The histology of a ymph node,
with an outer cortex containing follicles and an inner medulla. (B) The seg-
tissues. In addition, DCs transport antigens from nearby
regation of B cells and T cells in different regions of the lymph node, illus-
epithelial surfaces and tissues by imigrating through
trated schermatically. (C) The location of B cells (stained green, using the
immunofluorescence technique) and T cells (stoined red) in a ymph node.
(e.g., of microbes that enter through epithelia orcolonize
(Courtesy of Drs. Kathryn Pape and jenniferWater, University of Minnesota School
tissues) becoime concentrated in draining lyimph nodes.
of Medicine, Minneapolis, Minnesota.)
The spleer has an important role in immune responses
to bloodborne antigens. Blood entering the spleen flows
through a network of sinusoids, which enables the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
130
CHAPTER５[
Diseases of the Immune System
tapping of bloodborne antigens by resident DCs and
proliferation and differentiation and to activate effector
Imacrophages.
cells. The imain ones in this group are IL-2, IL-4, IL-5,
The cutaneous and mucosal lymphoid systems are located
IL-17, and IFN-y; their roles in iiminune responses are
 under the epithelia of the skin and the gastrointestinal
described later. Some cytokines serve mainly to limit
and respiratory tracts, respectively. They respond to
and terminate immune responses; these include TGF-β
ada a ui saea yno raua ie suaue
and IL-10.
Pharyngeal tonsils and Peyer's patches of the intestine
 Some cytokines stinulate heimatopoiesis and are called
are two anatomically defined mucosal lymphoid tissues.
colory-stimulating factors because they stimulate forma-
The large number of lyimphocytes in mucosal organs
tion of blood cell colonies from bone marrow progeni-
(second only to lymph nodes) reflects the huge surface
tors (Chapter 12). Their functions are to increase
 area of these organs.
leukocyte numbers during immune and inflammatory
responses, and to replace leukocytes that are consumed
Within the peripheral lymphoid organs, T lymphocytes
during such responses. They are produced by marrow
stromal cells, T lymphocytes, macrophages, and other
(Fig. 5.8B, C). In lymph nodes, the B cells are concentrated
cells. Examples include GM-CSF and IL-7.
in discrete structures, called follicles, located around the
periphery, or cortex, of each node. If the B cells in a follicle
The knowledge gained about cytokines has numerous
have recently responded to an antigen, the follicle develops
a central pale-staining region called a germinal center. The
duction or actions can control the harimful effects of inflam-
Tlymphocytes are concentrated in the parafollicular cortex.
 mation and tissue-damaging imnune reactions. Patients
The follicles contain the FDCs that are involved in the
with rheumatoid arthritis often show draimatic responses
activation of B cells, and the paracortex contains the DCs
to TNF antagonists, an elegant exaimple of rationally
that present antigens to T lyinphocytes. In the spleen, T
 designed and molecularly targeted therapy. Many other
lyimphocytes are concentrated in periarteriolar lymphoid
cytokine antagonists are now approved for the treatinent
sheaths surrounding simall arterioles, and B cells reside in
of various inflaimnatory disorders. Conversely, adminis-
the follicles.
tration of cytokines is used to boost reactions that are nor-
Lymphocytes constantly travel between tissues and
mally dependent on these proteins, such as hematopoiesis
home to particular sites. Naive lymphocytes circulate
and defense against soime viruses.
through peripheral lymphoid organs where antigens are
concentrated and immune responses are initiated, and
effector lymphocytes migrate to sites of infection. The
OVERVIEW OF LYMPHOCYTE
process of lymphocyte recirculation is imost inportant for T
ACTIVATION AND ADAPTIVE
cells, because naive T cells have to “patrol" widely distrib-
uted peripheral lymphoid organs to find antigens, and
IMMUNE RESPONSES
effector T cells have to home to sites of infection to elimi-
nate microbes. In contrast, plasima cells do not need to
 Adaptive immune responses develop in steps, consisting
 migrate to sites of infection because they secrete antibodies
of: antigen recognition; activation, proliferation and dif-
that are transported via the blood and lymph to distant
ferentiation of specific lymphocytes into effector and
tissues.
memory cells; elimination of the antigen; and decline of
the response, with meimory cells being the long-lived sur-
Cytokines: Messenger Molecules of the Immune System
vivors. The major events in each step are suminarized next;
Cytokines are secreted proteins that mediate immune
these general principles apply to protective responses
and inflammatory reactions. Molecularly defined cyto-
against microbes as well as pathologic responses that injure
kines are called interleukirs, a name implying a role in
the host.
comnunication between leukocytes. Most cytokines have
a wide spectrun of effects, and some are produced by
Capture and Display of Antigens
several different cell types. The majority of these cytokines
act on the cells that produce them or on neighboring cells,
Microbes and other foreign antigens can enter the body
but some (like IL-1) have systemic effects.
virtually anywhere, and it is obviously impossible for lym-
Different cytokines contribute to specific types of
immune responses.
of antigen entry. To overcome this problem, microbes and
· In innate immune responses, cytokines are produced
their protein antigens in epithelia and other tissues are cap-
rapidly after microbes and other stimuli are encoun-
tured by resident dendritic cells, which then carry their
tered, and function to induce inflaimmation and inhibit
 antigenic cargo to draining lyinph nodes through which T
virus replication. These cytokines include TNF, IL-1,
cells constantly recirculate (Fig. 5.9). Here the antigens are
IL-12, type I IFNs, IFN-, and chemokines (Chapter 3).
 processed and displayed coinplexed with MHC molecules
Their major sources are macrophages, DCs, ILCs, and
on the cell surface, where the antigens are recognized by T
NK cells, but endothelial and epithelial cells also can
cells. Similarly, soluble antigens are captured and concen-
produce thein.
trated in follicles in lymph nodes and the spleen, where they
 In adaptive immune responses, cytokines are produced
may be recognized by B cells via their antigen receptors.
At the same time as microbial antigens are recog-
 and other signals, and function to proimote lymphocyte
nized by T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes, the microbe
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Overview of Lymphocyte Activation and Adaptive Immune Responses
3 1
Dendritic cell
with antigen
 Antigen recognition
 in lymphoid organs 
 T cell proliferation and differentiation
CD4+
CD8+
T cells
T cells Y
Naive
Tcell
L-2R
CD4+
CD8+
APC
Effector
T cells 
Memor
effector
Tcell
Tcell
T cells
(CTLS)
Migration of
effector T cells to
 site of antigen
Differentiated
effector and memory
T cells enter
circulation
 Infected cell 
withmicrobes
Phagocytes
in cytoplasm
with ingested
microbes
CD4+
effector
T cells
CD8+ T cells
(CTLs)
Cytokine secretion
 INFLAMMATION 
MACROPHAGE ACTIVATION,
 KILLING OF
KILLING OF INGESTED MICROBES
INFECTED CELLS
Fig. 5.9 Cell-mediated immunity. Dendritic cells (DCs) capture microbial antigens from epithelia and tissues and transport the antigens to lymph nodes.
During this process, the DCs mature, and express high levels of MHC molecules and costirmulators. Naive T cells recognize MHC-associated peptide antigens
displayed on DCs. The T cells are activated to proliferate and to differentiate into effector and memory cells, which migrate to sites of infection and serve 
various functions in cell-mediated immunity. CD4+ effector T cells of the Tul subset recognize the antigens of microbes ingested by phagocytes, and activate
the phagocytes to kill the microbes, other subsets of effector cells enhance leukocyte recruitment and stimulate different types of immune responses.CD8
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill infected cells harboring microbes in the cytoplasm. Some activated T cells remain in the lymphoid organs and help B cells 
to produce antibodies, and some T cells differentiate into long-lived memory cells (not shown). APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
activates innate imnune cells expressing pattern rec-
produced during innate immune responses to microbes
 ognition receptors. In the case of imnunization with a
 protein antigen, as in a vaccine, a microbial mimic called
cific lymphocytes. The requireiment for microbe-triggered
an adjuvant that stimulates innate imumune responses is
signal 2 ensures that the adaptive imnune response is
given with the antigen. During the innate response, the
induced by microbes and not by harimless substances. In
imicrobe or adjuvant activates APCs to express 
mol-
Z [eubis, 'sjueldsuen pue sioum ol sasuodsan aununu!
ecules called costimulators and to secrete cytokines that
 may be provided by substances released from necrotic cells
 stimulate the proliferation and differentiation of T lym-
(the daimage-associated molecular patterns mentioned 
phocytes. The principal costimulators for T cells are the
earlier).
B7 proteins (CD80 and CD86), which are expressed on
 The reactions and functions of T lyimphocytes and B
APCs and are recognized by the CD28 receptor on naive
lymphocytes differ in important ways and are best consid-
T cells. Antigen ("signal 1") and costimulatory molecules
 ered separately.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
32
CHAPTER5D
 Diseases of the Immune System
Cell-Mediated Immunity: Activation
helminthic parasites. Th17 cells, so called because the sig-
of T Lymphocytes and Elimination of
nature cytokine of these cells is IL-17, recruit neutrophils
Intracellular Microbes
and monocytes, which destroy soime extracellular bacteria
and fungi and are involved in certain inflaimmatory
 Naive T lyinphocytes are activated by antigen and costim-
diseases.
ulators in peripheral lymphoid organs, and proliferate and
Activated CD8+ T lymphocytes differentiate into CTLs
differentiate into effector cells that migrate to any site
that kill cells harboring cytoplasimic microbes, thereby
where the antigen (imicrobe) is present (see Fig. 5.9). One
eliminating otherwise hidden reservoirs of infection. The
of the earliest responses of CD4+ helper T cells is secretion
principal imechanisim of killing by CTLs depends on the
 of the cytokine IL-2 and expression of high-affinity recep-
perforin-granzyme system. Perforin and granzymes are
tors for IL-2. IL-2 is a growth factor that acts on these T
stored in the granules of CTLs and are rapidly released
lymphocytes and stimulates their proliferation, leading to
when CTLs engage their targets (cells bearing the appro-
an increase in the number of antigen-specific lyimphocytes.
priate class I MHC-bound peptides). Perforin binds to the
The functions of helper T cells are mediated by the com-
plasima meimbrane of the target cells and promotes the
bined actions of CD40-ligand (CD40L) and cytokines.
 a s s ssd 's g a
CD40 is a meimber of the TNF-receptor family, and CD40L
thereby activate cellular caspases (Chapter 2), which induce
is a meinbrane protein homologous to TNF. When CD4+
the apoptosis of target cells.
helper T cells recognize antigens being displayed by mac-
The responses of T cells are regulated by a balance
rophages or B lyimphocytes, the T cells express CD40L,
 between costimulatory and inhibitory receptors. The major
 pue s g ro saedon a uo ota saeua rirm
costimulatory receptor is CD28, imentioned earlier as the
activates these cells.
molecule that recognizes B7 ligands on APCs and provides
 Some of the activated CD4+ T cells differentiate into
second signals that work together with antigen recogni-
effector cells that secrete different sets of cytokines and
tion. Other proteins of the CD28 family include two "coin-
perforim different functions (Fig. 5.10). Cells of the T1
hibitory" receptors, CTLA-4 and PD-1, which block signals
subset secrete the cytokine IFN-, which is a potent macro-
from the TCR and from CD28 and thus teriminate T cell
phage activator. The combination of CD40- and IFN--
 responses. Blocking these coinhibitors has proved to be a
Imediated activation results in “classical" macrophage
powerful approach for enhancing anti-tumor imimune
activation (Chapter 3), leading to the induction of microbi-
responses (Chapter 6).
cidal substances in imacrophages and the destruction of
ingested microbes. Th2 cells produce IL-4, which stimu-
Humoral Immunity: Activation of B Lymphocytes
lates B cells to differentiate into IgE-secreting plasma cells;
and Elimination of Extracellular Microbes
IL-5, which activates eosinophils; and IL-13, which acti-
vates mucosal epithelial cells to secrete mucus, and induces
Upon activation, B lymphocytes proliferate and then dif-
ferentiate into plasma cells that secrete different classes
is associated with tissue repair and fibrosis (Chapter 3).
of antibodies with distinct functions (Fig. 5.1l). There are
Eosinophils bind to and kill IgE-coated pathogens such as
two major pathways of B-cell activation.
Defining
Target
Host 
Role in
cytokines
cells
defense
disease
Autoimmunity:
IFN-Y
Intracellular
Chronic
pathogens 
inflammation
IH1
Macrophages
IL-4
IL-5
Helminthis
Allergy
IL-13
TH2
Eosinophils
IL-17
Extracellular
Autoimmunity
IL-22
pathogens
TH17
Neutrophils
ferentiate into populations of effector cells that produce distinct sets of cytokines that act on different cels (indicated as target cells) and mediate different
functions. The roles of these subsets in host defense and immunologic diseases are summarized. These populations may be capable of converting from one
to another. Some activated T cells produce multiple cytokines and do not fall into a distinct subset.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Overview of Lymphocyte Activation and Adaptive Immune Responses
133
Functions of antibodies
 Neutralization
of microbe
and toxins
IgM
 Proliferation
Antibody-secreting
Phagocyte
Naive IgM+,
plasma cells
Opsonization
IgD+Bcell
 and phago-
3
IgG
cytosis
1E
Fc receptor
Antibody-
Diff
IgG-expressing
dependent
B cell
cytotoxicity
Microbe
Helper
NK cell
Tcells,
High-affinity
other stimuli
IgG
Complement
Lysis of
 activation
microbes
High-affinity
 Phagocytosis
Ig-expressing
 of opsonized 
B cell
microbes
C3b receptor
Memory B cell
 Inflammation
Fig. 5.ll Humoral irmmunity. Naive B lymphocytes recognize antigens, and under the influence of Th cells and other stimuli (not shown), the B cells are
activated to proliferate and to differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells. Some of the activated B cells undergo heavy-chain class switching and affinity
maturation, and some become long-lived memory cells.Antibodies of different heavy-chain classes (isotypes) perform different effector functions, shown on
the right. Note that the antibodies shown are IgG; these and IgM activate
of IgA (mucosal immunity) and IgE (mast
cell and eosinophil activation) are not shown.
T cell-independent. Many polysaccharide and lipid anti-
higher affinity for the antigen. This process, called affinity
gens have multiple identical antigenic determinants
mturation, improves the quality of the humoral immune
(epitopes) that are able to simultaneously engage and
 response. Some activated B cells migrate into follicles and
cross-link several antibody molecules on each B cell and
form geriminal centers, which are the major sites of isotype
initiate the process of B-cell activation.
switching and affinity maturation. The helper T cells that
 se d r   m
stimulate these processes in B lymphocytes also migrate to
not able to bind to multiple antigen receptors, and the
and reside in the germinal centers and are called follicular
full response of B cells to protein antigens requires help
helper T (Tfh) cells.
from CD4+ T cells. B cells also act as APCs- they ingest
The humoral imimune response combats microbes in
protein antigens, degrade them, and display peptides
 numerous ways (see Fig. 5.11).
bound to class II MHC molecules for recognition by
Antibodies bind to microbes and prevent theim from
helper T cells. The helper T cells express CD40L and
 infecting cells, thereby neutralizing the microbes.
secrete cytokines, which work together to activate the B
 IgG antibodies coat (opsonize) microbes and target
cells.
them for phagocytosis, since phagocytes (neutrophils
and imacrophages) express receptors for the Fc tails of
Some of the progeny of the expanded B-cell clones dif-
IgG molecules.
ferentiate into antibody-secreting plasima cells. Each plasima
IgG and IgM activate the compleiment system by the
cell secretes antibodies with the same specificity as the cell
classical pathway, and complement products proimote
surface antibodies (B-cell antigen receptors) that first rec-
phagocytosis and destruction of microbes.
 ognized the antigen. Polysaccharides and lipids stimulate
IgA is secreted in mucosal tissues and neutralizes
secretion mainly of IgM antibody. Protein antigens, by
 microbes in the lumens of the respiratory and gastro-
virtue of CD40L- and cytokine-inediated helper T-ceil
intestinal tracts (and other mucosal tissues).
actions, induce the production of antibodies of different
 IgG is actively transported across the placenta and pro-
classes (IgG, IgA, IgE). Production of functionally differ-
tects the newborn until the iimnune systein becoimes
 ent antibodies, ali with the same specificity, relies on
mature. This is a form of passive immunity.
heavy-chain class (isotype) switching, which increases
 IgE coats helminthic parasites and functions with mast
the range of functions that antibodies serve. Some of the
 cells and eosinophils to kill them.
isotype-specific functions of antibodies include opsoniza-
tion and transplacental transfer of IgG, IgA secretion into
Circulating IgG antibodies have half-lives of about 3
mucosal lumens, and binding of IgE to mast cells. Helper
weeks, which is much longer than the half-lives of most
T cells also stimulate the production of antibodies with
blood proteins, as a consequence of special mechanisims for
http://ebooksmedicine.net
134
CHAPTER5D
 Diseases of the Immune System
recycling IgG and reducing its catabolisim. Some antibody-
secreting plasima cells migrate to the bone marrow and live
+ The defense reactions of adaptive immunity develop slowly, but 
for years, continuing to produce low levels of antibodies.
are more potent and specialized.
pue soa Ag paunides ane suaaue uaiauoy yauro pue sagoui -
Decline of Immune Responses and
transported to lymph nodes, where the antigens are recog-
nized by naive lymphocytes. The lymphocytes are activated to
Immunologic Memory
proliferate and differentiate into effector and memory cells.
Cell-mediated immunity is the reaction of T lymphocytes,
The majority of effector lymphocytes induced by an infec-
tious pathogen die by apoptosis after the pathogen is elimi-
designed to combat cell-associated microbes (e.g, phagocy-
nated, thus returning the immune system to its basal
tosed microbes and microbes in the cytoplasm of infected
cells). Humoral immunity is mediated by antibodies and is
resting state. The initial activation of lymphocytes gener-
effective against extracellular microbes (in the circulation and
ates long-lived memory cells, which may survive for years
after the infection. Memory cells are an expanded pool of
mucosal lumens).
antigen-specific lyimphocytes (more numerous than the
 CD4+ helper T cells help B cells to make antibodies, activate
macrophages to destroy ingested microbes, stimulate recruit-
encounter with that antigen), and they respond faster and
ment of leukocytes, and regulate all immune responses to
 protein antigens.The functions of CD4+ T cells are mediated 
more effectively when reexposed to the antigen than do
naive cells. This is why the generation of meimory cells is
by secreted proteins called cytokines.
+
 CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes kill cells that express antigens
an important goal of vaccination.
in the cytoplasm that are seen as foreign (e.g., virus-infected
and tumor cells) and can also produce cytokines.
· Antibodies secreted by plasma cells neutralize microbes and
SUMMARY
 block their infectivity, and promote the phagocytosis and
ThE NOrMAL ImmuNE ReSPONSE: OVErVIEW Of 
destruction of pathogens. Antibodies also confer passive 
Cells,TIsSues, recepToRs, And medIaTors 
immunity to neonates.
+ The innate immune system uses several families of receptors,
such as the Tollike receptors, to recognize molecules present
The brief outline of basic immunology presented here
in various types of microbes and produced by damaged cells.
 provides a foundation for considering the diseases of the
+ Lymphocytes are the mediators of adaptive immunity and the
immune system. We first discuss the immune reactions
only cells that produce specific and diverse receptors for
that cause injury, called hypersensitivity reactions, and then
antigens.
disorders caused by the failure of tolerance to self antigens,
+ T (thymus-derived) lymphocytes express antigen receptors
called au toimmune disorders, and the rejection of transplants.
called Fcell receptors (TCRs) that recognize peptide fragments
This is followed by diseases caused by a defective immune
of protein antigens that are displayed by MHC molecules on 
system, called immunodeficiency diseases. We close with a
the surface of antigen-presenting cells.
consideration of amyloidosis, a disorder that is often asso-
+ B (bone marrow-derived) lymphocytes express membrane-
ciated with immune and inflammatory diseases.
bound antibodies that recognize a wide variety of antigens. B
cells are activated to become plasma cells, which secrete
antibodies.
HYPERSENSITIVITY:
· Natural killer (NK) cells kill cells that are infected by some
la yn iedau puoaag paewep pue passas ane ro 'sagoi
IMMUNOLOGICALLY MEDIATED
express inhibitory receptors that recognize MHC molecules 
TISSUE INIURY
that are normally expressed on healthy cells, and are thus
prevented from killing normal cells.
 Immune responses that norimally are protective also are
+ Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) capture microbes and other
capable of causing tissue injury. Injurious immune reac-
antigens,transport them to lymphoid organs, and display them 
tions are grouped under ruypersensitivity, and the resulting
for recognition by lymphocytes. The most efficient APCs are
diseases are called hypersersitivity diseases. This term origi-
DCs, which live in epithelia and most tissues.
nated froin the idea that persons who mount imimune
+ The cells of the immune system are organized in tissues, some
of which are the sites of production of mature lymphocytes
responses against an antigen are sensitized to that antigen,
s0 pathologic or excessive reactions represent manifesta-
(the generative ymphoid organs, the bone marrow, and
 tions of a hypersensitive state. Norimally, an exquisite
thymus), and others are the sites of immune responses (the
systeim of checks and balances optimizes the eradication of
peripheral lymphoid organs, including lymph nodes, spleen, and 
infecting organisims without serious injury to host tissues.
mucosal lymphoid tissues).
However, immune responses may be inadequately con-
· The early reaction to microbes is mediated by the innate
 trolled or directed against norimally harimless antigens or
immune system, which is ready to respond to microbes. Com-
inappropriately targeted to host tissues, and in such situa-
ponents of the innate immune system include epithelial barri
tions, the norimally beneficial response is the cause of
ers, phagocytes, NK cell, and plasma proteins, for example, of 
the complement system. Innate immune reactions are often 
disease. In this section, we describe the causes and general
mechanisims of hypersensitivity diseases and then discuss
manifested as inflammation. Innate immunity, unlike adaptive
specific situations in which the immune response is respon-
Xowaw lo Aioyads uaaue auy aaey sou saop Kiunwu!
sible for the disease.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hypersensitivity: Immunologically Mediated Tissue Injury
135
Causes of Hypersensitivity Reactions
T cells try to eliminate infected cells, and this normal
imnune response damages liver cells.
Pathologic immune responses may be directed against dif-
Reactions against environmental antigens. Almost 20% of
ferent types of antigens and may result froim various
the population is allergic to common environmental
underlying abnormalities.
substances (e.g, pollens, animal danders, and dust
·Autoimmunity: reactions against self antigens. Norimally,
a p sn h  s m se s
the iimimune system does not react against one's own
 drugs. Such individuals are genetically predisposed to
antigens. This phenomenon is called self toterance, imply-
 make unusual immune responses to noninfectious, typi-
ing that the body "tolerates" its own antigens. On occa-
cally harimless antigens to which all persons are exposed
sion, self-tolerance fails, resulting in reactions against
but against which only some react.
one's own cells and tissues. Collectively, such reactions
constitute au toimmunity, and diseases caused by autoim-
In all of these conditions, tissue injury is mediated by
munity are referred to as autoimmune diseases. We will
the saime mechanisims that norimally function to eliminate
return to the mechanisims of self-tolerance and autoim-
 infectious pathogens - namely, antibodies, effector T lym-
munity later in this chapter.
phocytes, and various other effector cells. The fundamental
Reactions against microbes. There are many types of reac-
problem in these diseases is that the immune response is
tions against microbial antigens that may cause disease.
triggered and maintained inappropriately. Because the
In soime cases, the reaction appears to be excessive or
stimuli for these abnorimal immune responses are difficult
the microbial antigen is unusually persistent. If antibod-
or impossible to eliminate (e.g-, self antigens, persistent
ies are produced against such antigens, the antibodies
 microbes, or environimental antigens), and the immune
may bind to the microbial antigens to produce immune
systen has many intrinsic positive feedback loops (which
coinplexes, which deposit in tissues and trigger inflam-
norimally promote protective imnunity), once a hypersen-
mation; this is the underlying mechanisim of post-
sitivity reaction starts, it is difficult to control or teriminate
streptococcal glomerulonephritis (Chapter 14).
T-cell
it. Therefore, these diseases tend to be chronic and debili-
tating, and are therapeutic challenges. Since inflammation
severe inflamnation, sometimes with the formation of
 is a major component of the pathology of these disorders,
granulomas (Chapter 3); this is the cause of tissue injury
they are sometimes grouped under the term immune-
in tuberculosis and other infections. Rarely, antibodies
mediated inflammatory diseases.
or T cells reactive with a microbe cross-react with a host
tissue; such cross-reactivity is believed to be the basis
Classification of Hypersensitivity Reactions
for rheumatic heart disease (Chapter 1l). In some
instances, the disease-causing immune response may be
Hypersensitivity reactions can be subdivided into four
entirely norimal, but in the process of eradicating the
types based on the principal immune mechanism respon-
infection, host tissues are injured. In viral hepatitis, the
sible for injury; three are variations on antibody-mediated
virus that infects liver cells is not cytopathic, but it is
injury, and the fourth is T-cell mediated (Table 5.2). The
recognized as foreign by the imunune systen. Cytotoxic
rationale for this classification is that the mechanisn of
Table 5.2 Mechanisms of Hypersensitivity Reactions
Type
 Immune Mechanisms
Histopathologic Lesions
 Prototypical Disorders
Immediate (type I)
Production of IgE antibody →
 Vascular dilation, edema, smooth
 Anaphylaxis; allergies; bronchial 
hypersensitivity
immediate release of vasoactive
muscle contraction, mucus
 asthma (atopic forms)
amines and other mediators from
 production, tissue injury,
mast cells; later recruitment of
inflammation 
inflammatory cells
 Antibody-mediated (type Il)
 Production of IgG, IgM → binds to 
 Phagocytosis and ysis of cells;:
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia;
hypersensitivity
antigen on target cell or tissue →
 inflammation; in some diseases, 
 Goodpasture syndrome
 e jo sis Jo sso
functional derangements
by activated complerment or Fc
without cell or tissue injury
receptors; recruitment of 
leukocytes
 Immune complex-mediated
 Deposition of antigen-antibody
 Inflammation, necrotizing vasculitis 
Systemic lupus erythermatosus; some
(type Ill) hypersensitivity
complexes → complement
(fibrinoid necrosis)
 forms of glomerulonephritis;
activation → recruitment of
serum sickness; Arthus reaction 
leukocytes by complement
products and Fc receptors →
release of enzymes and other toxic
molecules 
Cell-mediated (type IV)
Activated T lymphocytes → (l)
 Perivascular cellular infiltrates;
Contact dermatitis; multiple sclerosis; 
hypersensitivity
release of cytokines, inflarmmation 
 edema; granuloma formation; 
 type I diabetes; tuberculosis
and macrophage activation; (2) T
 cell destruction
cell-mediated cytotoxicity
Ig, Immunoglobulin.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
136
CHAPTER5D
 Diseases of the Immune System
imnune injury is often a good predictor of the clinical
Allergen (e.g., pollen)
manifestations and may help to guide the therapy.
uab
Mucosal lining
However, this classification of imimune-imediated diseases
 is not perfect, because several imnune reactions may
coexist in any one disease.
s ae sun Asuasiad jo sad u a
follows:
Dendritic cell
·In immediate (type I) hypersensitivity, often called allergy.
the injury is caused by Th2 cells, IgE antibodies, and
Naive
Tcell
mast cells and other leukocytes. Mast cells release medi-
ators that act on blood vessels and simooth muscle as
 well as cytokines that recruit and activate inflaimimatory
cells.
Activation of TH2
·Antibody-mediated disorders (type II hypersensitivity) are
 cells and lgE
caused by secreted IgG and IgM antibodies that bind to
class switching
B cell
TH2
in B cells
cell
fixed tissue or cell surface antigens. Antibodies injure
tissues by inducing inflaimunation. Antibodies also imay
interfere with cellular functions and cause disease
Production of IgE
IgE-secreting
without cell or tissue injury.
gE
plasma cell
·In immune complex-mediated disorders (type Ill hypersensi-
tivity), IgG and IgM antibodies bind antigens, usually in
the circulation, and form antigen-antibody complexes
that deposit in vascular beds and induce inflamnation.
FceRI
 Binding of lgE to
The leukocytes that are recruited (neutrophils and
FceRI on mast cells
Mast cell
monocytes) produce tissue damage by release of lyso-
somal enzyimes and generation of toxic free radicals.
·T cell-mediated (type IV) hypersensitivity disorders are
-  ym u sasuosn a Aq Anur pasn
phocytes of the T1 and T17 subsets produce cytokines
Repeat exposure
that induce inflaimnation and activate neutrophils and
to allergen
 macrophages, which are responsible for tissue injury.
CD8+ CTLs also may contribute to injury by directly
killing host cells.
Immediate (Type I) Hypersensitivity
Activation of mast
cell; release of
 Immediate hypersensitivity is a tissue reaction that
mediators
occurs rapidly (typically within minutes) after the
Mediators
interaction of antigen with IgE antibody bound to the
surface of mast cells. The reaction is initiated by entry of
an antigen, which is called an allerger because it triggers
Vasoactive amines,
allergy. Many allergens are environimental substances that
lipid mediators
Cytokines
certain individuals are predisposed to developing allergic
 asosi ae gn u s zi e son
 Immediate hypersensitivity
Late phase reaction
the clinical and pathologic manifestations of the reaction.
 reaction (minutes after
(2-24 hours after repeat
Immediate hypersensitivity may occur as a local reaction
 repeat exposure to allergen)
 exposure to allergen) 
that is merely annoying (e.g, seasonal rhinitis, hay fever),
severely debilitating (asthima), or even fatal (anaphylaxis).
Fig. 5.12 Sequence of events in irmmediate (type I) hypersensitivity Immedi-
Sequence of Events in Immediate
Hypersensitivity Reactions
individuals. IgE binds to Fc receptors (FceRl) on mast cells, and subsequent 
Most hypersensitivity reactions follow a stereotypic
exposure to the allergen activates the mast cells to secrete the mediators
that are responsible for the pathologic manifestations of immediate hyper-
sequence of cellular responses (Fig. 5.12):
sensitivity. See text for abbreviations.
·Activation of Ty2 cells and production of IgE antibody. Aller-
 gens may be introduced by inhalation, ingestion, or
injection. Variables that probably contribute to the
responses. Immediate hypersensitivity is the prototypi-
strong Th2 responses to allergens include the route of
cal T2-mediated reaction. The T2 cells that are induced
entry, dose, and chronicity of antigen exposure, and the
secrete several cytokines, including IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13,
genetic makeup of the host. It is not clear if allergenic
which are responsible for essentially all the reactions of
substances also have unique structural or cheimical
immediate hypersensitivity. IL-4 stimulates B cells spe-
 properties that endow them with the ability to elicit TH2
cific for the allergen to undergo heavy-chain class
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hypersensitivity: Immunologically Mediated Tissue Injury
137
switching to IgE and to secrete this imnunoglobulin
are several thousand times more active than his-
isotype. IL-5 activates eosinophils that are recruited to
the reaction, and IL-13 acts on epithelial cells and stimu-
causing bronchial simooth muscle contraction. LTB4 is
lates mucus secretion. Th2 cells often are recruited to the
highly chemotactic for neutrophils, eosinophils, and
site of allergic reactions in response to chemokines that
monocytes.
are produced locally; one of these chenokines, eotaxin,
 Cytokines. Activation of mast cells results in the syn-
also recruits eosinophils to the same site.
thesis and secretion of several cytokines that are
Sensitization of mast cells by IgE antibody. Mast cells are
important for the late-phase reaction. These include
derived from precursors in the bone mnarrow and widely
TNF and chemokines, which recruit and activate leu-
distributed in tissues, often residing near blood vessels
kocytes (Chapter 3), and IL-4 and IL-5, which aimplify
and nerves and in subepithelial locations. Mast cells
the T2-initiated imunune reaction.
express a high-affinity receptor for the Fc portion of the
ε heavy chain of IgE, called FceRl. Even though the
The reactions of immediate hypersensitivity clearly did
seruim concentration of IgE is very low (in the range of
not evolve to cause human discomfort and disease. The
1 to 100 μg/imL), the affinity of the imast cell FceRI
Th2 response plays an important protective role in coimbat-
receptor is so high that the receptors are always occu-
 ing parasitic infections. IgE antibodies target helminths for
pied by IgE. These antibody-bearing mast cells are sen-
destruction by eosinophils and mast cells. Mast cells also
sitized to react if the specific antigen (the allergen) binds
to the antibody molecules. Basophils are circulating cells
snake aficionados will be relieved to hear that their mast
that reseimble mast cells. They also express FceRi, but
 cells may protect thein from soime snake venoins by releas-
their role in most imnediate hypersensitivity reactions
ing granule proteases that degrade the toxins. Why these
is not established (since these reactions occur in tissues
beneficial responses are inappropriately activated by harm-
and most basophils are in the circulation). The third cell
less environinental antigens, giving rise to allergies,
type that expresses FceRI is eosinophils, which often are
reinains a puzzle.
present in these reactions.
·Activation of mast cells and release of mediators. When a
Development of Allergies
uarae ue on ainsodxa Aq paznisuas sem oum uosiad
Susceptibility to immediate hypersensitivity reactions is
is reexposed to the allergen, the allergen binds to
genetically determined.  An  increased  propensity _ to
antigen-specific IgE molecules on mast cells, usually at
develop imimediate hypersensitivity reactions is called
or near the site of allergen entry. Cross-linking of these
atopy. Atopic individuals tend to have higher serun IgE
IgE molecules triggers a series of biochemical signals
 levels and imore IL-4-producing Th2 cells than does the
that culminate in the secretion of various mediators
general population. A positive family history of allergy is
froin the mast cells.
found in 50% of atopic individuals. The basis of faimilial
predisposition is not clear, but genes that are implicated in
Three groups of mediators are important in different
susceptibility to asthima and other atopic disorders include
imnediate hypersensitivity reactions:
those encoding HLA molecules (which may confer immune
Vasoactive amines released from granule stores. The
granules of mast cells contain histamine, which is
may control Th2 responses), a component of the FceRl, and
released within seconds or minutes of activation.
ADAM33, a metalloproteinase that may be involved in
Histaimine causes vasodilation, increased vascular
tissue remodeling in the airways.
permeability, 
 smooth muscle contraction, and
Envirormental factors are also important in the develop-
increased secretion of mucus. Other rapidly released
 ment of allergic diseases. Exposure to environmental pol-
mediators include chemotactic factors for neutro-
lutants, all too coimmon in industrialized societies, is an
phils and eosinophils as well as neutral proteases
important predisposing factor for allergy. It is notable that
(e.g-, tryptase), which may damage tissues and also
dogs and cats living in the same environment as humans
generate kinins and cleave complement components
develop allergies, whereas chimps living in the wild do not
 to produce additional chemotactic and inflainmatory
despite their much closer genetic similarity to humans.
factors (e.g., C5a) (Chapter 3). The granules also
This simple observation suggests that environmental
contain acidic proteoglycans (heparin, chondroitin
factors may be more important in the development of aller-
sulfate), the main function of which seeims to be as a
gic disease than genetics. Viral infections of the airways are
storage matrix for the aimines.
important triggers for bronchial asthma, an allergic disease
 Newly synthesized lipic mediators. Mast cells synthe-
affecting the lungs (Chapter 13). Bacterial skin infections 
size and secrete prostaglandins and leukotrienes by
are strongly associated with atopic derimatitis.
the saime pathways as do other leukocytes (Chapter
It is estimated that 20% to 30% of imunediate hypersen-
3). These lipid mediators have several actions that
s s  p ae s A
are important in immediate hypersensitivity reac-
such as teimperature extremes and exercise, and do not
tions. Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) is the most abundant
involve Th2 cells or IgE. It is believed that in these cases
 mast cells are abnorimally sensitive to activation by various
in mast cells. It causes intense bronchospasim as
 nonimmune stimuli.
well as increased mucus secretion. The leukotrienes
The incidence of many allergic diseases is increasing in
 LTC4 and LTD4 are the most potent vasoactive and
developed countries and seems to be related to a decrease
spasimogenic agents known; on a molar basis, they
in infections during early life. These observations have
http://ebooksmedicine.net
138
CHAPTER５
Diseases of the lmmune System
Immediate 
Late-
reaction
 phase reaction 
Allergen
exposure
Mast cells
Vascular
Eosinophils
Edema
congestion
Clin
16
20
8
12
A
Hours after allergen exposure 
Fig. 5.13 Phases of immediate hypersensitivity reactions. (A) Kinetics of the immediate and late-phase reactions.The immediate vascular and smooth muscle
inflarmmatory infiltrate rich in eosinophils, neutrophils, and T cells.(Courtesy of Dr Daniel Friend, Departrment of Pathology, Brigham ond Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massochusetts.)
led to an idea, sometimes called the hygiene hypothesis, that
iimmediate hypersensitivity. Because inflamnation is a
 early childhood and even prenatal exposure to microbial
major component of many allergic diseases, notably asthima
antigens educates the imunune systein in such a way that
and atopic dermatitis, therapy includes anti-inflammatory
subsequent pathologic responses against common environ-
drugs such as corticosteroids.
mental allergens are prevented. Thus, too much hygiene
 An immediate hypersensitivity reaction may occur as
in childhood may increase allergies later in life. The idea
 a systemic disorder or as a local reaction (Table 5.3). The
that early childhood exposure to antigens may reduce
route of antigen exposure often deterimines the nature of
later allergies against those antigens has received support
the reaction. Systeimic exposure to protein antigens (e.g., in
bee venom) or drugs (e.g- penicillin) may result in sys-
 peanuts reduces the incidence of peanut allergy later in life.
teimic araphylaxis. Within minutes of the exposure in a sen-
sitized host, itching, urticaria (hives), and skin erythema
Clinical and Pathologic Manifestations
 appear, followed in short order by profound respiratory
Often, the IgE-triggered reaction has two well-defined
difficulty caused by pulmonary bronchoconstriction and
accentuated by hypersecretion of mucus. Laryngeal edema
lated by mast cell granule contents and lipid mediators and
 may exacerbate matters by causing upper airway obstruc-
is characterized by vasodilation, vascular leakage, and
tion. In addition, the musculature of the entire gastro-
simooth muscle spasim, usually evident within 5 to 30
intestinal tract may be affected, with resultant vomiting.
minutes after exposure to an allergen and subsiding by 60
abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. Without immediate
Iminutes; and (2) α second, late-phase reaction stimulated
 intervention, there may be systeinic vasodilation with a fall
mainly by cytokines, which usually sets in 2 to 8 hours
later, may last for several days, and is characterized by
inflaimnation as well as tissue destruction, such as mucosal
epithelial cell damage. The dominant inflamnatory cells in
Table 5.3 Examples of Disorders Caused by Immediate
the late-phase reaction are neutrophils, eosinophils,
s, and
Hypersensitivity
lymphocytes, especially T2 cells.Neutrophils arerecruited
 Clinical
 Clinical and Pathologic
by various chemokines; their roles in inflammation were
Syndrome
Manifestations
described in Chapter 3. Eosinophils are recruited by eotaxin
Anaphylaxis (may be
Fall in blood pressure (shock) caused by
and other chemokines released froim epithelium and are
caused by drugs,
vascular dilation; airway obstruction due
important effectors of tissue injury in the late-phase
bee sting, food) 
to laryngeal edema
response. Eosinophils produce major basic protein and
Bronchial asthma
Airway obstruction caused by bronchial
eosinophil cationic protein, which are toxic to epithelial
 smooth muscle hyperactivity; inflammation 
cells, and LTC4 and platelet-activating factor, which
and tissue injury caused by ate-phase
promote inflaimmation. The Th2 cells produce cytokines
reaction
that have multiple actions, as described earlier. These
Allergic rhinitis,
 Increased mucus secretion; inflammation of
recruited leukocytes can aimplify and sustain the inflam-
 sinusitis (hay fever)
upper airways and sinuses
 matory response, even in the absence of continuous aller-
Food allergies
 Increased peristalsis due to contraction of
 gen exposure. In addition, inflamnatory leukocytes are
 intestinal muscles, resulting in vomiting and
diarrhea
responsible for much of the epithelial cell injury in
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hypersensitivity: Immunologically Mediated Tissue Injury
139
in blood pressure (anaphylactic shock), and the patient
Antibody-Mediated Diseases
im qip pue asdenos Aoenni on ssaroid Au
(Type Il Hypersensitivity)
minutes.
Local reactions generally occur when the antigen is
Antibody-mediated (type I) hypersensitivity disorders
confined to a particular site, such as the skin (follow-
are caused by antibodies directed against target antigens
ing contact), the gastrointestinal tract (following inges-
 on the surface of cells or other tissue components. The
tion), or the lung (following inhalation). Atopic dermatitis,
antigens may be normal molecules intrinsic to cell mem-
food allergies, hay fever, and certain forims of asthma are
branes or in the extracellular matrix, or they may be
examples of localized allergic reactions. However, inges-
adsorbed exogenous antigens (e.g, a drug metabolite).
as  s o s no  r 
These reactions are the cause of several important diseases
reactions.
(Table 5.4).
Mechanisms of Antibody-Mediated Diseases
 Antibodies cause disease by targeting cells for phagocy-
tosis, activating the complement system, or interfering
SUMMARY
with normal cellular functions (Fig. 5.14). The antibodies
IMMEDIATE (TYPE I) HYPERSENSITIVITY
that are responsible typically are high-affinity antibodies
capable of activating complement and binding to the Fc
+ Immediate (type I) sensitivity is also called an allergic reaction,
or allergy.
receptors of phagocytes.
Opsonization and phagocytosis. When circulating cells,
+ Type I hypersensitivity is induced by environmental antigens
such as red blood cells or platelets, are coated (opso-
(allergens) that stimulate strong Th2 responses and IgE produc-
nized) with autoantibodies, with or without comple-
tion in genetically susceptible individuals.
ment proteins, the cells become targets for phagocytosis
+ IgE coats mast cells by binding to the FceRl receptor; reexpo-
by neutrophils and macrophages (Fig. 5.14A). These
sure to the allergen leads to cross-linking of the IgE and FceRl,
phagocytes express receptors for the Fc tails of IgG anti-
activation of mast cells, and release of mediators.
bodies and for breakdown products of the C3 comple-
· Principal mediators are histamine, proteases, and other granule
ment protein, and use these receptors to bind and ingest
contents; prostaglandins and leukotrienes; and cytokines.
opsonized particles. Opsonized cells are usually elimi-
· Mediators are responsible for the immediate vascular and
nated in the spleen, and this is why splenectomy is of
smooth  muscle  reactions  and  the  late-phase  reaction
(inflammation).
clinical benefit in some antibody-mediated diseases.
Antibody-mediated cell destruction and phagocyto-
+ The clinical manifestations may be local or systemic, and range
sis occur in the following clinical situations: (1) transfu-
from mildly annoying rhinitis to fatal anaphylaxis.
sion reactions, in which cells from an incompatible
Table 5.4 Examples of Antibody-Mediated Diseases (Type Il Hypersensitivity)
Clinicopathologic
Disease
Target Antigen
Mechanisms of Disease
Manifestations
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
 Red blood cell membrane proteins
Opsonization and phagocytosis of red 
Hemolysis, anemia
blood cells
 Autoimmune thrombocytopenic
 Platelet membrane proteins
Opsonization and phagocytosis of 
 Bleeding
purpura
(Gpllb :lla integrin)
platelets
Permphigus vulgaris
 Proteins in intercellular junctions of
 Antibody-mediated activation of 
Skin vesicles (bullae)
 epidermal cells (desmogleins)
 proteases, disruption of intercellular
adhesions
Vasculitis caused by ANCA
Neutrophil granule proteins,
 Neutrophil degranulation and 
Vasculitis
 presumably released from
 inflammation 
activated neutrophils 
 Goodpasture syndrome
 Protein in basement membranes of
Complement- and Fc receptor-
 Nephritis, lung hemorrhage 
kidney gomeruli and lung alveoli
 mediated inflammation
 Acute rheumatic fever
 Streptococcal cell wall antigen;
 Inflammation, macrophage activation
Myocarditis, arthritis
antibody cross-reacts with 
 myocardial antigen 
Myasthenia gravis
 Acetylcholine receptor
 Antibody inhibits acetylcholine binding.
Muscle weakness, paralysis
 down-modulates receptors
Graves disease (hyperthyroidism)
TSH receptor
Antibody-mediated stimulation of TSH
 Hyperthyroidism
receptors
Pernicious anemia
Intrinsic factor of gastric parietal
 Neutralization of intrinsic factor,
 Abnormal erythropoiesis,
cells
 decreased absorption of vitamin B2
anemia
ANCA, Anti-neutrophil cycoplasmic antibodies; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
40
CHAPTER5
Diseases of the Immune System
 A Opsonization and phagocytosis
Fcreceptor
Phagocytosed
Opsonized
 cell
cell
C3b
C3b
Phagocyte
receptor
Phagocytosis
 Complement activation
 B Complement- and Fc receptor-mediated inflammation
Fc
receptor
Neutrophil
Complement
enzymes,
by products
reactive oxygen
(C5a, C3a)
 intermediates 
Complement activation
Inflammation and tissue injury
C Antibody-mediated cellular dysfunction 
Nerve ending
Acetylcholine
Antibody
{ACh)
against
TSHreceptor
TSH
receptor
Antibody to
ACh
Thyroid
AChreceptor
epithelial
receptor
cell
Muscle
 Thyroid hormones
Antibody inhibits binding of
neurotransmitter to receptor
Antibody stimulates receptor without hormone
 Fig. 5.14 Mechanisms of antibody-mediated injury. (A) Opsonization of cells by antibodies and complement components and ingestion by phagocytes. (B)
Inflarmmation induced by antibody binding to Fc receptors of leukocytes and by complerment breakdown products.(C) Anti-receptor antibodies disturb the 
normal function of receptors. In these examples, antibodies to the acetylcholine (ACh) receptor irmpair neuromuscular transmission in myasthenia gravis, and
antibodies against the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor activate thyroid cells in Graves disease.
donor react with preforimed antibody in the host
·Antibody-mecdiated cellular dysfunction. In some cases,
(Chapter 12); (2) heinolytic disease of the newborn
antibodies directed against a host protein impair or dys-
(erythroblastosis fetalis), in which IgG anti-red blood
regulate important functions without directly causing
cell antibodies from the mother cross the placenta and
cell injury or inflammation (Fig. 5.14C). In myasthenia
cause destruction of fetal red blood cells (Chapter 7); (3)
gravis, antibodies against acetylcholine receptors 
in
autoimnune hemolytic aneimia, agranulocytosis, and
the motor end plates of skeletal muscles inhibit neu-
thrombocytopenia, in which individuals produce anti-
romuscular transimission, with resultant muscle weak-
bodies to their own blood cells (Chapter 12); and (4)
ness. Antibodies also can stimulate cellular responses
certain drug reactions, in which a drug attaches to
excessively. In Graves (
disease, antibodies against
plasma meimbrane proteins of red blood cells and anti-
the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor stimulate
bodies are produced against the drug-protein complex.
thyroid epithelial cells to secrete thyroid hormones,
Inflammation. Antibodies bound to cellular or tissue anti-
resulting in hyperthyroidism. Antibodies against hor-
gens activate the complement system by the classical
 mones and other essential proteins can neutralize and
pathway (Fig. 5.14B). Products of complement activa-
 block the actions of these molecules, causing functional
tion serve several functions (see Fig. 3.1l, Chapter 3),
derangements.
one of which is to recruit neutrophils and monocytes,
triggering inflaimunation in tissues. Leukocytes also may
Immune Complex-Mediated Diseases
be activated by engageiment of Fc receptors, which rec-
(Type Ill Hypersensitivity)
ognize the bound antibodies. Antibody-mediated
inflammation is responsible for tissue injury in some
   s ( 
forins of glomerulonephritis, vascular rejection in organ
in the circulation may deposit in blood vessels, leading
grafts, and other disorders.
to complement activation and acute inflammation. Less
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hypersensitivity: Immunologically Mediated Tissue Injury
141
Table 5.5 Examples of Immune Complex-Mediated Diseases
Clinicopathologic
Disease
Antigen Involved
Manifestations
 Systemic lupus erythematosus 
Nuclear antigens (circulating or “planted" in kidney)
 Nephritis, skin lesions, arthritis, others 
 Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
u! panueld, aq kew :(s)usgiue lem lao jerosondans
Nephritis
gomerular basement membrane 
 Polyarteritis nodosa
Hepatitis B virus antigens in some cases
Systemic vasculitis
 Reactive arthritis
Bacterial antigens (e.g., Yersinio)
Acute arthritis
 Serum sickness
Various proteins (e.g., foreign serum protein) (horse
 Arthritis, vasculitis, nephritis 
 Arthus reaction (experimental)
Various foreign proteins
Cutaneous vasculitis
frequently, the complexes may be formed at sites where
 Antigen in 
 Immune Complex Formation 
antigen has been
mis un pae) Asnonaand pauend, 
circulation
immune complexes). The antigens that form imnune com-
 plexes may be exogenous, such as a foreign protein that is
B cell
injected or produced by an infectious microbe, or endog-
enous, if the individual produces antibody against self
disorders and the antigens involved are listed in Table 5.5.
Free
Plasma
Immune coimplex-mediated diseases tend be systeimic, but
antibody
cell
often preferentially involve the kidney (glomerulonephri-
tis), joints (arthritis), and small blood vessels (vasculitis),
all of which are coimunon sites of imunune complex
deposition.
Antigen-
antibody
Endothelium
Systemic immune Complex Disease
complex
Acute serum sickress is the prototype of a systemic immune
Immune Complex
complex disease; it was once a frequent sequela to the
administration of large amounts of foreign serum (e.g-)
Deposition
serum from immunized horses used for protection against
Neutrophil
diphtheria). In modern times, the disease is infrequent and
usually seen in individuals who receive antibodies from
other individuals or species, e.g. horse or rabbit anti-
thymocyte globulin administered to deplete T cells in
recipients of organ grafts. Nevertheless, it is an inforimative
model that has taught us a great deal about immune
complex disorders.
Complement
 The pathogenesis of systeimic imnune complex disease
Antigen-
can be divided into three phases (Fig. 5.15).
antibody
complex
Immune Complex-Mediated
 Inflammation and 
Formation of Immune Complexes. The introduction of a
Tissue Injury
protein antigen triggers an immune response that results
in the formation of antibodies, typically about 1 week after
the injection of the protein. These antibodies are secreted
into the blood, where they react with the antigen still
 Platelet
 present in the circulation and forim antigen-antibody
"aggregation
complexes.
Deposition of Immune Complexes. In the next phase, the
various tissues. The factors that deterimine whether immune
complex forimation will lead to tissue deposition and
 disease are not fully understood, but the major influences
Vasculitis
seeim to be the characteristics of the complexes and local
 Neutrophil lysosomal enzymes
vascular alterations. In general, complexes of medium size
Fig. 5.15 Immune complex disease.The sequential phases in the induction
that are forimed when antigen is in slight excess are the
 of systemic immune complex-mediated diseases (type Ill hypersensitivity).
most pathogenic. Organs where blood is filtered at high
http://ebooksmedicine.net
142
CHAPTER5D
 Diseases of the Immune System
pressure to form other fluids, like urine and synovial fluid,
SUMMARY
are sites where iimmune complexes become concentrated
and deposit; hence, imnune complex disease often affects
PATHOGENESIS OF DISEASES CAUSED BY
glomeruli and joints.
ANTIBODIES AND IMMUNE COMPLEXES
· Antibodies can coat (opsonize) cells, with or without comple-
Inflammation and Tissue Injury. Once deposited in
ment proteins, and target these cells for phagocytosis by
tissues, immune complexes initiate an acute inflamimatory
phagocytes (macrophages), which express receptors for the Fc
reaction via compleiment activation and engagement of
tails of lgG and for complement proteins. The result is deple-
leukocyte Fc receptors. Typically, the antibodies are IgG or
tion of the opsonized cells.
IgM. Deposition of compleiment proteins can be detected
· Antibodies and immune complexes may deposit in tissues or
at the site of injury. Consumption of complement during
blood vessels, and elicit an acute inflammatory reaction by
the active phase of the disease decreases serum levels of
activating complement, with release of breakdown products,
C3, which can be used as a marker for disease activity.
or by engaging Fc receptors of leukocytes. The inflammatory
During this phase (approximately 10 days after antigen
reaction causes tissue injury.
adiministration), clinical features such as fever, urticaria,
+ Antibodies can bind to cell surface receptors or other essen-
-ond pue uarea apou qdu (re) ud o!
tial molecules and cause functional derangements (either inhi-
teinuria appear. Wherever coimplexes deposit, the tissue
bition or unregulated activation) without cell injury.
damage is similar. The resultant inflaimmatory lesion is
terimed vasculitis if it occurs in blood vessels, glomerulone-
phritis if it occurs in renal glomeruli, arthritis if it occurs in
the joints, and so on.
T Cell-Mediated Diseases
(Type IV Hypersensitivity)
MORPHOLOGY
Several autoimmune disorders, as well as pathologic
The principal morphologic manifestation of immune complex
reactions to environmental chemicals and persistent
injury is acute vasculitis, associated with fibrinoid necrosis of
microbes, are now known to be caused by T cells (Table
the vessel wall and intense neutrophilic infiltration (Fig. 3.12,
5.6). Two types of T cell reactions are capable of causing
Chapter 3). When deposited in the kidney, the complexes can be 
-u paiepaur-auos () asas pue Ainju anss
 seen on immunofluorescence microscopy as granular deposits of 
mation, in which the cytokines are produced mainly by
immunoglobulin and complement and on electron microscopy as
 CD4+ T cells, and (2) direct cell cytotoxicity, mediated by
electron-dense deposits along the glomerular basement mem-
CD8+ T cells (Fig. 5.16). This group of diseases is of great
brane (see Fig. 5.24).
   s  a is 
nized as the basis of chronic inflammatory diseases, and
many of the new rationally designed therapies for these
 In acute serum sickness induced by adiministration of a
diseases have been developed to target the abnorimal T
single large dose of antigen, the lesions tend to resolve as
cell reactions.
a result of phagocytosis and degradation of the immune
CD4+T CellMediated Inflammation
complexes. A forim of chronic serum sickress results from
 repeated or prolonged exposure to an antigen. This occurs
 In CD4+ T cell-mediated hypersensitivity reactions,
a sn ss  rs ssas ras 
cytokines produced by the T cells induce inflammation
(SLE), which is associated with persistent antibody
that may be chronic and destructive. The prototype of
responses to autoantigens. In many diseases, the morpho-
T cell-imediated inflamimation is celayed-type hypersersitiv-
xaduros aur sans shuu rao pue sasue sr
ity (DTH), a tissue reaction to antigens given to iimimune
deposition, but the inciting antigens are unknown. Included
individuals. In this reaction, an antigen administered
 in this category are membranous gloimerulonephritis and
into the skin of a previously inununized individual
several vasculitides.
results in a detectable cutaneous reaction within 24 to
48 hours (hence the term delayed, in contrast to immediate
Local immune Complex Disease (Arthus Reaction)
hypersensitivity).
A model of local imimune complex diseases is the Arthus
As described earlier, naive T cells are activated in second-
ractior, in which an area of tissue necrosis appears as
 ary lynphoid organs by recognition of peptide antigens
a result of acute imnune complex vasculitis. The reac-
displayed by dendritic cells. The T cells differentiate into
e u a  xa pd si uo
effector cells under the influence of various cytokines (see
into the skin of a previously immunized animal with
Figs. 5.9 and 5.10). Classical T cell-1mediated hypersensitiv-
preforimed antibody. Imunune complexes forim as the
ity is a reaction of T1 effector cells, but T17 cells also may
antigen diffuses into the vascular wall at the site of injec-
contribute to the reaction, especially when neutrophils are
tion, triggering the saime inflaimmatory reaction and
 prominent in the inflamnatory infiltrate. Tl cells secrete
histologic appearance as in systeimic immune complex
cytokines, mainly IFN-, which are responsible for many of
disease. Arthus lesions evolve over a few hours and reach
the manifestations of delayed-type hypersensitivity. IFN-
a peak 4 to 10 hours after injection, when the injection site
-activated (classically activated) macrophages produce
develops edema and heimorrhage, occasionally followed
substances that destroy microbes and damage tissues, and
by ulceration.
mediators that promote inflamnation (Chapter 3).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hypersensitivity: Immunologically Mediated Tissue Injury
143
Table 5.6 T Cell-Mediated Diseases
 Specificity of Pathogenic T
Principal Mechanisms of
Clinicopathologic
Disease
Cells
Tissue Injury
Manifestations
 Rheumatoid arthritis
Collagen?
 Inflammation mediated by Tμ1 7 (and 
Chronic arthritis with
Citrullinated self proteins?
Tul) cytokines; role of antibodies 
 inflammation, destruction of
and immune complexes?
articular cartilage
 Multiple sclerosis
 Protein antigens in rmyelin (e.g..
 Inflammation mediated by Tul and
 Demyelination in CNS with 
myelin basic protein)
Tul 7 cytokines, rmyelin destruction
 perivascular inflammation;
by activated macrophages
paraly sis
 Type I diabetes mellitus
 Antigens of pancreatic islet β cells
 T cell-mediated inflammation,
 Insulitis (chronic inflammation in 
(insulin, gutarmic acid
 destruction of islet cells by CTLs 
islets), destruction of β cells; 
decarboxylase, others)
diabetes
 Inflammatory bowel disease 
 Enteric bacteria; self antigens?
 Inflammation mediated by Tul and 
Chronic intestinal inflammation,
Tul7 cytokines
obstruction
 Psoriasis
Unknown
 Inflammation mediated mainly by 
 Destructive plaques in the skin 
Tul7 cytokines
Contact sensitivity
Various environmental chemicals
 Inflammation mediated by Tul (and 
 Epidermal necrosis, dermal
(e.g., urushiol from poison ivy or
Tμ17!) cytokines
 inflarmmation, causing skin rash
poison oak, therapeutic drugs)
and blisters
Examples of human T cell-mediated diseases are listed. In many cases, the speificity of the T cells and he mechanisms of dssue injury are inferred based on the similarity with
experimental animal models of the diseases.
Activated T17 cells secrete cytokines that recruit neutro-
by the intracutaneous injection of purified protein deriva-
phils and monocytes.
tive (PPD, also called tuberculin), a protein-containing
antigen of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacillus. In a pre-
Clinical Examples of CD4+ T Cell-Mediated
viously exposed individual, reddening and induration of
Inflammatory Reactions
the site appear in 8 to 12 hours, reach a peak in 24 to 72
The classic example of DTHis the tuberculin reaction (known
hours, and thereafter slowly subside. Morphologically,
in clinical medicine as the PPD skir test), which is produced
delayed-type  hypersensitivity is characterized by the
Cytokine-mediated inflammation
Cytokines
Inflammation
CD4+
T cell
 APC presenting
tissue antigen 
Tissue injury
Normal
tissue
A
T cell-mediated cytolysis
CD8+
Cell killing and
T cell
tissue injury
APC presenting
tissue antigen
B
Fig. 5.16 Mechanisms of T-cell-mediated (type IV) hypersensitivity reactions. (A) CD4+ Tul cells (and sometirmes CD8+ T cells, not shown) respond to tissue
antigens by secreting cytokines that stimulate inflarmmation and activate phagocytes, leading to tissue injury. CD4+ Tul7 cels contribute to inflarmmation by
recruiting neutrophils (and, to a lesser extent, monocytes). (B) In some diseases, CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) directly kill tissue cells expressing
intracellular antigens (shown as orange bars inside cells). APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
144
CHAPTER 5
 Diseases of the Immune System
tion and inflammation. Drug reactions often manifest as
skin rashes.
CD4+ T cell-imediated inflamimation is the basis of tissue
injury in many organ-specific and systemic autoimmune
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclero-
sis, as well as diseases probably caused by uncontrolled
reactions to bacterial coimmensals, such as inflammatory
bowel disease (see Table 5.6).
B
Fig. 5.17 Delayed hypersensitivity reaction in the skin. (A) Perivascular
and macrophages), with associated dermal edema and fibrin deposition. (B)
Immunoperoxidase staining reveals a predominanty perivascular cellular
infltrate that marks positively with anti-CD4 antibodies. (Courtesy of Dr. Louis
Pcker, Department of Pathology, Oregon Heath Sciences University, Portland,
Oregon.)
accunulation of mononuclear cells, inainly CD4+ T cells
and macrophages, around venules, producing perivascular
"cuffing" (Fig. 5.17)
Prolonged DTH reactions against persistent microbes or
Antigen-presenting cell
 other stimuli may result in a special pattern of reaction
called granulomatous inflammation. The initial perivascular
  pa sd si a   t
phages over a period of 2 to 3 weeks. These accuinulated
Antigen
imacrophages typically exhibit morphologic evidence of
activation; that is, they become large,flat, and eosinophilic,
CD4+
and are called epithelioid cells. The epithelioid cells occa-
TH1 cell
sionally fuse under the influence of cytokines (e.g., IFN-)
to forim multinucleate giant celis. An aggregate of epitheli-
Giant cell
Epithelioid cell
oid cells, typically surounded by a collar of lymphocytes,
TNF
is called a granuloma (Fig. 5.18A). The process is essentially
a chronic forim of Tl-mediated inflammation and macro-
IFN-y
phage activation (see Fig. 5.18B) Older granuloimas develop
an enclosing rim of fibroblasts and connective tissue. In
certain situations, such as infection by heliminths known as
schistosoimes, Th2 cells also are involved, and as a result
eosinophils are proiminent in the lesions. Recognition of
granulomas is of diagnostic importance because they are
Monocytes
seen only in a limited number of conditions (Chapter 3).
Contact dermatitis is a coinunon exaimple of tissue injury
resulting from DTH reactions. It may be evoked by contact
Fibroblast
with urushiol, the antigenic component of poison ivy or
poison oak, and presents as a vesicular derimatitis. It is
thought that in these reactions, the environmental chemical
Lymphocyte
Macrophage
binds to and structurally modifies self proteins, and pep-
Fig. 5.18 Granulomatous inflammation. (A) A section of a lymph node
 tides derived froim these modified proteins are recognized
shows several granulomas, each made up of an aggregate of epithelioid cells
by T cells and elicit the reaction. The saime mechanisim is
and surrounded by ymphocytes.The granuloma in the center shows several
responsible for many drug reactiors, among the most
multinucleate giant cells. (B) The events that give rise to the formation of
comunon hypersensitivity reactions of humans. The respon-
cytokines. In some granulomatous disorders (e.g., schistosomiasis),T2 cells
sible drug (often a reactive cheimical) alters self proteins,
also contribute to the lesions. The role ofTμl7 cells in granuloma formation
including MHC molecules, and these neoantigens are rec-
is not proven. (A, Courtesy of Dr. Trace Worrelf, Department of Pathology, Univer-
ognized as foreign by T cells, leading to cytokine produc-
sity of Texas Southwestem Medical School, Dalfas, Texas.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
145
CD8+T Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity
Table 5.7 Autoimmune Diseases
In this type of T cell-mediated reaction, CD8+ CTLs kill
 Organ-Specific
Systemic
antigen-expressing target cells. Tissue destruction by
 Diseases Mediated by Antibodies
CTLs may be an important component of some T cell-
Imediated diseases, such as type 1 diabetes. CTLs directed
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
against cell surface histocompatibility antigens play an
 Autoimmune thrombocytopenia 
inportant role in graft rejection, which is discussed later.
 Autoimmune atrophic gastritis of
They also play a role in reactions against viruses. In a virus-
 pernicious anemia
 infected cell, viral peptides are displayed by class I MHC
Myasthenia gravis
molecules and the complex is recognized by the TCR of
Graves disease
CD8+ T lymphocytes. The killing of infected cells leads to
Goodpasture syndrome
elimination of the infection, but in some cases, it is respon-
Diseases Mediated by T Cells
sible for cell daimage that accoimpanies the infection (e.g-)
in viral hepatitis). CD8+ T cells also produce cytokines,
 Type I diabetes mellitus 
Rheumatoid arthritis
notably IFN-, and are involved in inflammatory reactions
 Multiple sclerosis
 Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)t
resembling DTH, especially following virus infections and
Sjogren syndromet
 exposure to soime contact sensitizing agents.
 Diseases Postulated to Be Autoimmune
 Inflammatory bowel diseases
(Crohn disease, ulcerative 
colitis}≠
SUMMARY
 Primary biliary cirrhosist
Polyarteritis nodosat
MECHANISMS OFT CELL-MEDIATED
Autoimmune (chronic active)
Inflarmmatory myopathiest
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS 
hepatitis
*A role for T cellshas been demonstrated in these disorders,buc antibodies may
+ Cytokine-mediated inflammation: CD4+ T cells are activated by
also be involved in ussue injury.
exposure to a protein antigen and differentiate into Tul and
fAn autoimmune basis of these disorders is suspected, but the supporting evidence is
T17 effector cells. Subsequent exposure to the antigen results
not strong.
These disorders may result from excessive immune responses to commensal enterit
in the secretion of cytokines. IFN-y activates macrophages to
microbes, autoimmunity, or a combination of the cwo.
produce substances that cause tissue damage and promote
fibrosis, and IL-17 and other cytokines recruit leukocytes, thus
 promoting inflammation.
disorders traditionally classified as autoimmune, this etiol-
· The  classical  T  cell-mediated   inflammatory  reaction  is
 ogy is suspected but not proved.
delayed-type hypersensitivity. Chronic TI reactions asso-
Autoimmune diseases may be organ-specific, in which
ciated with macrophage activation often lead to granuloma
 the immune responses are directed against one particular
formation.
 organ or cell type and result in localized tissue daimage, or
· I cell-mediated cytotoxicity: CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes
systemic, characterized by lesions in many organs (Table
(CTLs) specific for an antigen recognize cells expressing the
5.7). In systemic diseases that are caused by immune com-
target antigen and kill these cells. CD8+ T cells also secrete
IFN-Y-
plexes and autoantibodies, the lesions principally affect the
connective tissues and blood vessels of involved organs.
Therefore, these diseases are often referred to as collager
Now that we have described how the inumune system
vascular diseases or connective tissue diseases, even though the
can cause tissue damage, we turn to diseases in which
immunologic reactions are not specifically directed against
norimal control mechanisims fail. The prototypes of such
constituents of connective tissue or blood vessels.
diseases are autoimmune disorders, which are the result of
 Norimal persons are unresponsive (tolerant) to their
failure of tolerance to self antigens.
own (self) antigens, and autoimnunity results from a
failure of self-tolerance. Therefore, understanding the
 pathogenesis of autoimununity requires faimiliarity with
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
the mechanisms of normal immunologic tolerance.
Autoimmunity refers to immune reactions against self
Immunologic Tolerance
("auto") antigens. Autoimnune diseases are estimated to
 affect at least 1% to 2% of the U.S. population. The evidence
 Immunologic tolerance is a state of unresponsiveness to
that these diseases are indeed the result of autoimmune
-ui ooads jo amsodxa Aq paonpui si te ualue ue
reactions is more persuasive for some than for others. For
phocytes to that antigen. Self-tolerance refers to lack of
instance, in many of these disorders, high-affinity autoan-
immune responsiveness to one's own tissue antigens. Bil-
tibodies have been identified, and in soime cases these anti-
lions of different antigen receptors are randomly generated
bodies are known to cause pathologic abnorimalities. There
 in developing T lyinphocytes and B lymphocytes, and it is
is also growing evidence for the activation of pathogenic
not surprising that during this process, receptors are pro-
self-reactive T cells in some of these diseases. In addition,
duced that can recognize self antigens. Since these antigens
experimental models have proved very inforimative, pro-
cannot all be concealed from the imunune system, there
viding circumstantial evidence supporting an autoimmune
-as suonuos no Sa jo sueau e aq isnu
etiology. Nevertheless, it is fair to say that for many
 recognizing lyimphocytes. Several mechanisins work in
http://ebooksmedicine.net
46
CHAPTER 5
 Diseases of the Immune System
T cells
B cells
TOLERANCE
APC-
 presenting 
antigen
Deletion
Deletion
CENTRAL
Receptor
editing
Thymus
Development
 of regulatory T cells
Bone
marrow
CE
ERANG
Anergy
(failure to
Anergy
10.
respond)
(failure to
respond)
HER
IPH
Deletion
APC-presenting
Suppression by Treg cells
self antigen
Fig. 5.l9 Mechanisms of irmmunologic tolerance to self antigens. The principal mechanisms of central and peripheral self-tolerance in T cells and B cells are
llustrated. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; Treg cells, regulatory T cells.
concert to select against self-reactivity and to thus prevent
Central tolerance, however, is imperfect. Not all self
immune reactions against the body's own antigens. Two
 antigens are present in the thyimus or bone marow, and
broad imechanisms are recognized: central tolerance and
hence lyinphocytes bearing receptors for such autoanti-
peripheral toterance (Fig. 5.19).
gens escape into the periphery. Self-reactive lymphocytes
that escape negative selection can inflict tissue injury unless
Centra! Tolerance
they are eliminated or muzzled in the peripheral tissues.
The principal mechanism of central tolerance is the
antigen-induced deletion (death) of self-reactive T lym-
Peripheral Tolerance
phocytes and B lymphocytes during their maturation in
Several mechanisims silence potentially autoreactive T cells
central (generative) lymphoid organs (i.e., in the thymus
and B cells in peripheral tissues; these are best defined for
for T cells and in the bone marrow for B cells). In the
T cells. These imechanisims include the following:
thyimus, many autologous (self) protein antigens are pro-
 Anergy. This term refers to functional inactivation
cessed and presented by thyimic APCs. Any imumature T
Aq pau s i sai go (p r )
cell that encounters such a self antigen undergoes apopto-
encounter with antigens under certain conditions. As
sis (a process called deletion, or negative selection), and the
 described previously, activation of T cells requires two
T cells that complete their maturation are thereby depleted
signals: recognition of peptide antigen in association
of self-reactive cells. An exciting advance has been the
with MHC molecules on APCs, and a set of second
identification of a protein called AIRE (autoimnune regu-
costimulatory signals (e.g, through B7 molecules) pro-
lator), which stimulates expression of some peripheral
vided by the APCs. If the costimulatory signals are not
tissue-restricted self antigens in the thyimus and is thus
delivered, or if an inhibitory receptor on the T cell
critical for deletion of iminature T cells specific for these
(rather than the costimulatory receptor) is engaged
antigens. Mutations in the AIRE gene are the cause of an
when the cell encounters self antigen, the T cell becoimes
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy (Chapter 20). Not all
anergic and cannot respond to the antigen. Because
immature T cells that see self antigens in the thymus are
costimulatory molecules are expressed at low levels or
 deleted. Soime CD4+ T cells survive and develop into regu-
 not at all on APCs presenting self antigens, the encoun-
latory T cells (described later).
ter between autoreactive T cells and self antigens in
 Immature B cells that recognize self antigens with high
tissues may result in anergy.
 affinity in the bone marrow also may die by apoptosis.
It is believed that if mature B cells encounter
Other self-reactive B cells are not deleted but instead
self antigen in peripheral tissues, especially in the
undergo a second round of rearrangeiment of antigen
absence of specific helper T cells, these B cells becoime
receptor genes and then express new receptors that are no
unable to respond to the antigen. B lymphocytes also
express inhibitory receptors that may play a role in
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
147
limiting their activation and preventing responses to
Genetic
Environmental triggers
self antigens.
susceptibility
Suppression by regulatory T cells. A population of T cells
called regulatory T cells functions to prevent immune
Infections,
inflammation,
reactions against self antigens. Regulatory T cells
tissue injury
develop mainly in the thymus, but they also may be
induced in peripheral lymphoid tissues. The best-
defined regulatory T cells are CD4+ cells that express
high levels of CD25, the α. chain of the IL-2 receptor, and
Susceptibility
genes
Tissue
a transcription factor of the forkhead faimily, called
FOXP3. Both IL-2 and FOXP3 are required for the devel-
opment and maintenance of functional CD4+ regulatory
Failure of
T cells. Mutations in the FOXP3 gene result in severe
Activation
self-tolerance
of tissue APCs
autoimmunity in humans and mice; in humans, these
mutations are the cause of a systemic autoimmune
disease called IPEX (an acronyim for iminune dysregula-
tion, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked).
Influx of 
The nechanisms by which regulatory T cells sup-
self-reactive
lymphocytes
press imunune responses are not fully defined, but their
into tissues
inhibitory activity may be mediated in part by the secre-
Self-reactive
tion of immunosuppressive cytokines such as IL-10 and
lymphocytes
TGF-βB, which inhibit lymphocyte activation and effector
functions. Regulatory T cells also express CTLA-4,
which may bind to B7 molecules on APCs and reduce
their ability to activate T cells via CD28
 Activation of
self-reactive
lymphocytes
-dode Aq qeap ran aond e suis aan A
tosis. Two mechanisims of deletion of mature T cells
 u sapnis uo Aeu pase pasodond uaaq aay
It is postulated that if T cells recognize self antigens,
they upregulate a pro-apoptotic neinber of the Bcl-2
family called Bim, which triggers apoptosis by the mito-
Tissue injury:
chondrial pathway (Chapter 2). Another mechanisim of
 autoimmune disease
apoptosis involves the death receptor Fas (a meimber of
Fig. 5.20 Pathogenesis of autoimmunity. Autoimmunity results from mul-
the TNF receptor family), which can be engaged by its
tiple factors, including susceptibility genes that may interfere with self-
ligand coexpressed on the saime or neighboring cells.
tolerance and environmental triggers (such as infections, tissue injury, and
The importance of this pathway of self-tolerance is illus-
inflammation) that promote ymphocyte entry into tissues, activation of 
trated by the discovery that FAS mutations are respon-
self-reactive lymphocytes, and tissue damage.
sible for an autoimmune disease called the autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), characterized by
Unfortunately, there are no simple answers to this ques-
lynphadenopathy and production of autoantibodies.
tion, and the underlying causes of most human auto-
Some self antigens are hidden (sequestered) from the
imnune diseases reinain to be determined. The best guess
imnune systeim, because the tissues in which these anti-
is that breakdown of self-tolerance and development of
gens are located do not comnunicate with the blood
autoimmunity result from the combined effects of sus-
and lymph. As a result, unless released into the circula-
ceptibility genes, which influence lymphocyte tolerance,
tion, these antigens fail to elicit immune responses and
and environmental factors, such as infections or tissue
h s ass a   paon uassa ae
injury, that alter the display of and responses to self
believed to be the case for antigens that are only found
antigens (Fig. 5.20).
in the testis, eye, and brain, all of which are called
Genetic Factors in Autoimmunity
immune-privileged sites because antigens located in these
sites tend to be shielded from the immune systeim. If the
Most autoimmune diseases are complex multigenic dis-
antigens are released from these tissues, for exaimple, as
orders. There is abundant evidence that inherited genes
a consequence of trauma or infection, the result may be
play a role in the development of autoimmune diseases.
an imunune response that leads to prolonged tissue
 Autoimnune diseases have a tendency to run in fami-
inflamnation and injury. This is the postulated mecha-
lies, and there is a greater incidence of the saime disease
nisim for post-traumatic orchitis and uveitis.
 in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins.
Several autoimmune diseases are linked to the HLA
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity: General Principles
locus, especially class II alleles (HLA-DR, HLA-DQ).
 The frequency of a disease in individuals with a par-
Now that we have summarized the principal mechanisims
ticular HLA allele compared with those who do not
of self-tolerance, we can ask how these mechanisims might
inherit that allele, is called the odds ratio or relative risk
break down to give rise to pathologic autoimnunity.
(Table 5.8). The relative risk ranges from 3 or 4 for
http://ebooksmedicine.net
148
CHAPTER５
Diseases of the Immune System
Table 5.8 Association of HLA Alleles and Inflammatory
· Genome-wide association (GWAS) studies and linkage
Diseases
studies in faimilies are revealing many genetic polyinor-
spPO
phisms that are associated with different autoimmune
Disease
HLA Allele
Ratiat
diseases (Table 5.9). Some of these genetic variants are
Rheumatoid arthritis
DRBI, I SE allele!
4
disease-specific, but many of the associations are seen
(anti-CCP Ab
DRB1, 2 SE alleles
12
in multiple disorders, suggesting that they affect general
positive)t
 mechanisms of immune regulation and self-tolerance.
Type I diabetes
DRBI*0301-DQAI*0501-
4
However, the mechanisin by which most of these genetic
mellitus
DQB1*0201 haplotype
variants contribute to particular autoimnune diseases
DRBI*0401-DQAI*0301-
8
is not established.
DQB1*0302 haplotype
DRB1*0301/0401
35
haplotype heterozygotes
Role of Infections, Tissue Injury, and Other
Multiple sclerosis
DRB1*1501
E
Environmental Factors
 Systemic lupus
DRBI*0301
2
A variety of microbes, including bacteria, mycoplasimas,
erythematosus
DRB1*1501
1.3
 r s  p  aa s p
 Ankylosing spondylitis
B*27 (mainly B*2705 and
100-200
B*2702)
several mechanisims (Fig. 5.21):
Celiac disease
DQA|*050I-DQBI*0201
7
· Microbial infections with resultant tissue necrosis and
haplotype
 inflamnation can stimulate expression of costimulatory
fThe odds ratio refecs approximate values of increased risk for the disease
molecules on APCs in the tissue, thus favoring a break-
associated with che inheritance of particular HLA alleles. The daca are from
down of T cell tolerance and subsequent T cell
European-derived populations.
tAnt-CCPAbrefers to antibodies directed against cyclic cicullinated peptides.Daa
activation.
are from patients who test positive for these antibodies in the serum.
Viruses and other microbes may share cross-reacting
region of the DRBI protein (positions 70-74).The DRBl protein is the product of
epitopes with self antigens, and as a result responses
the β chain of the HLA DR molecule.
induced by the microbe may extend to self tissues, a
Courtesy of Dr Michelle Fernando, Imperial College London.
phenomenon called molecular mimicry. The best exaimple
of a pathogenic immunologic cross-reaction is rheu-
matic heart disease, in which an antibody response
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and HLA-DR4 to 100 or more
against streptococci cross-targets cardiac antigens. It is
for ankylosing spondylitis and HLA-B27. However,
not known if mimicry has a role in more common auto-
how MHC genes influence the developiment of auto-
imnune diseases.
immunity is still not clear. Notably, most individuals
with a susceptibility-related MHC allele never develop
Recently, there has been great interest in the idea that
disease, and, conversely, individuals without the rel-
the development of autoimnunity is influenced by the
evant MHC gene may get it. Expression of a particular
 norimal gut and skin microbiome (the diverse collection of
MHC gene is therefore but one variable that contributes
commensal microbes that live with us in a symbiotic rela-
to autoimmunity.
tionship). It is possible that different comumensal microbes
Table 5.9 Selected Non-HLA Gene Variants Associated With Autoimmune Diseases
 Putative Gene
Postulated Function of Encoded Protein and Role of Mutation/Polymorphism in
Involved
Diseases
Disease
 Genes Involved in Immune Regulation
PTPN22
RA,TID, IBD
Protein tyrosine phosphatase; may affect signaling in lymphocytes and may alter negative selection or activation
 of self-reactive T cells
IL23R
IBD, P5,A5
 Receptor for the Tμ17-inducing cytokine IL-23; may alter differentiation of CD4 T cells into pathogenic T17
effector cells
CTLA4
TID, RA
Inhibits T-cell responses by terminating activation and promoting activity of regulatory T cells; may interfere with
self-tolerance
IL2RA
MS,TID
Q chain of the receptor for IL-2, which is a growth and survival factor for activated and regulatory T cells; may
 affect development of effector cells and/or regulation of immune responses
 Genes Involved in Immune Responses to Microbes
NOD2
IBD
Cytoplasmic sensor of bacteria expressed in Paneth and other intestinal epithelial cells; may control resistance
to gut commensal bacteria
ATG16
IBD
Involved in autophagy; possble role in defense against microbes and maintenance of epithelial barrier function 
IRF5, IFIH1
SLE
Role in type I interferon production; type I IFN is involved in the pathogenesis of SLE (see text)
AS, Ankylosing spondylitis; BD, inflammatory bowel disease;IFN, interferon; MS, multiple sclerosis; PS, psoriasis; RA, rheumatoid arthritis: SLE, systemic lupus erychematosus;TID,
cype I diabetes.
The probable linkage of these genes with various autoimmune diseases has been defined by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and ocher methods for studying
disease-associated polymorphisms.
Adapced from Zenewicz LA,Abraham C, Flavell RA, et al: Unraveling the genetics of autoimmunity, Ceff |40:79l, 201 0.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
149
A Induction of costimulators on APCs
APC expresses
Microbe
costimulatory
 molecules 
Self-reactive
Activation
Tcell
of APC
Self-
Self
B7 CD28
 antigen
tissue
APC presents self-antigen
Autoimmunity
B Molecular mimicry
Microbe
Activation
of T cells
Self
Microbial   Self-reactive T cell that also 
 antigen   recognizes microbial peptide
tissue
APC presents microbial peptide that resembles self-antigen 
Autoimmunity
Microbe
Production of
 cross-reacting antibody
B cell
Self
tissue
Autoimmunity
Fig. 5.2I Postulated role of infections in autoirmmunity.lInfections may promote activation of self-reactive lymphocytes by inducing the expression of costirmu-
lators (A), or microbial antigens may mimic self antigens and activate self-reactive lymphocytes as a cross-reaction (B).
affect the relative proportions of effector and regulatory T
An autoimmune response may itself promote further
cells, and shape the host response toward or away from
 autoimnune attack. Tissue injury caused by an auto-
aberrant activation. However, it is still not clear which
annsodxa ol peal Aeu asnes iauo Aue 1o asuodsat aunun
microbes contribute to specific diseases in humans, or if the 
are now presented to T cells in an immunogenic form. The
disorders.
activation of such autoreactive T cells is called epitope
Adding to the complexity of the link between microbes
spreading, because the imnune response spreads to epit-
and autoiimnunity are recent observations suggesting that
 opes that were not recognized initially. This is one of the
mechanisims that may contribute to the chronicity of auto-
autoimnune diseases, notably type 1 diabetes, multiple
imnune diseases.
sclerosis, and Crohn disease. The possible mechanisims
underlying this effect are not understood.
 In addition to infections, the display of tissue antigens
also may be altered by a variety of environmental insults.
As discussed later, ultraviolet (lIV) radiation causes cell
SUMMARY
death and may lead to the exposure of nuclear antigens,
IMMUNOLOGIC TOLERANCE AND
AUTOIMMUNITY
mechanisim is the proposed explanation for the association
 Tolerance (unresponsiveness) to self antigens is a fundamental
of lupus flares with exposure to sunlight. Smoking is a risk
factor for RA, perhaps because it leads to cheimical modi-
 property of the immune system, and breakdown of tolerance
 is the basis of autoimmune diseases.
fication of self antigens. Local tissue injury for any reason
 Central tolerance: immature T and B lymphocytes that recog-
 may lead to the release of self antigens and autoimmune
nize self antigens in the central (generative) lymphoid organs
responses.
are killed by apoptosis; in the B-cell lineage, some of the
Finally, there is a strong gender bias of autoimmunity,
with many of these diseases being inore coimunon in woimen
self-reactive lymphocytes switch to new antigen receptors
that are not self-reactive.
than in men. The underlying mechanisims are not well
+ Peripherai tolerance: mature lymphocytes that recognize self 
understood, but may involve the effects of horimones and
other factors.
antigens in peripheral tissues become functionally inactive 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
150
CHAPTER５
Diseases of the Immune System
complexes and binding of antibodies to various cells
(anergic), are suppressed by regulatory T lymphocytes, or die
and tissues. Injury to the skin, joints, kidney, and serosal
by apoptosis.
a u uro Aaa a jq uaud si saq
· The factors that lead to a failure of self-tolerance and the
body may be affected. The presentation of SLE is so vari-
development of autoimmunity include (l) inheritance of sus-
able that a complex set of criteria for this disorder have
ceptibility genes that disrupt different tolerance pathways, and 
pue uisap a ron pue sueiun day on pasodoid uaan
(2) infections and tissue injury that expose self antigens and 
 activate APCs and lymphocytes in the tissues.
assessiment of clinical trials (Table 5.10). However, the
disease is very heterogeneous, and any patient may
 present with any number of these features. SLE is a fairly
 se a an p aund e m sas u
Having discussed the general principles of tolerance
as 400 per 100,000 in certain populations. Although SLE
 and autoimnunity, we proceed to a discussion of some of
often presents when a person is in the twenties or thirties,
 the most coimnon and important autoimunune diseases.
it may manifest at any age, even in early childhood.
Although each disease is discussed separately, consider-
Similar to many autoimnune diseases, SLE predomi-
 nantly affects woimen, with a feinale-to-imale ratio of 9:1
features and underlying pathogenesis. Here we cover the
for the reproductive age group of 17 to 55 years. By com-
systenic autoimmune diseases; autoimnune diseases that
parison, the female-to-imale ratio is only 2:1 for disease
affect single organ systems are discussed in chapters that
developing during childhood or after 65 years of age. The
deal with the relevant organs.
prevalence of the disease is 2- to 3-fold higher in blacks
and Hispanics than in whites.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Spectrum of Autoantibodies in SLE
SLE is an autoimmune disease involving multiple
The hallmark of SLE is the production of autoantibodies.
organs, characterized by a vast array of autoantibodies,
Some antibodies recognize nuclear and cytoplasmic com-
particularly antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), in which
 ponents, while others are directed against cell surface anti
injury is caused mainly by deposition of immune
gens of blood cells. Apart froim their value in the diagnosis
Table 5.10 Revised Criteria for Classification of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus*
Criterion
Definition
Clinical Criteria
 Acute cutaneous lupus
Malar rash (fixed erytherma, flat or raised, over the malar eminences), photosensitivity
Chronic cutaneous
Discoid rash: erythematous raised patches with adherent keratotic scaling and folicular pluging
sndnl
 Nonscarring alopecia
Diffuse thinning or hair fragility in the absence of other causes
Oral or nasal ulcers
Oral or nasopharyngeal ulceration, usually painless 
 Joint disease
Serositis
Peuritis (pleuritic pain or rub or evidence of pleural efusion), pericarditis
Renal disorder
Persistent proteinuria >0.5 g/24 hours, or red cell casts
 Neurologic disorder 
Seizures, psychosis, myelitis, or neuropathy, in the absence of offending drugs or other known causes 
Hemolytic anemia
Hemolytic anemia
Leukopenia or
Leukopenia—<4.0 × I0 cells/L (4000 cells/mm) total on two or more occasions, or
 ymphopenia
Lymphopenia<1.5 × 10 cells/L (1500 cells/mm) on two or more occasions
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia—<l00 × I0? cels/L (l00 × I0? cells/mm) in the absence of offending drugs and other conditions
 Immunologic Criteria
 Antinuclear antibody
Abnormal titer of antinuclear antibody by immunofluorescence
(ANA)
 Anti-dsDNA antibody
Abnormal titer
Anti-Sm antibody
Presence of antibody to Sm nuclear antigen
 Antiphospholipid 
 Positive finding of antiphospholipid antibodies based on (l) an abnormal serum level of lgG or IgM anti-cardiolipin
antibody
antibodies, (2) a positive test for lupus anticoagulant using a standard test, or (3) a false-positive serologic test for syphilis
known to be positive for at least 6 months and confirmed by negative Treponema palidum immobilization or fluorescent 
treponemal antibody absorption test
Low complement
Low C3, C4 or CH50
 Direct Coombs test
Assay for anti-red cell antibody, in the absence of dinically evident hemolytic anemia
*This clasification was initially proposed in 1997 by the American College of Rheumatology for the purpose of identifying patients in clinical studies. lt has been updated in 2012
by the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics.A patient is classified as having SLE if four of the clinical and immunologic criteria are present at any time (not
necessarily concurrently), including at least one clinical and one immunologic criterion. Some details have been omicced from the cable.
Modified from Petri M, OrbaiAM, Alarcon GS, et al: Derivation and validation of dhe Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics classification criteria for systemic lupus
erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 64:2677, 20 12.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
151
Table 5.ll Autoantibodies in Systemic Autoimmune Diseases
Disease
Specificity of Autoantibody
% Positive
Disease Associations
Systemic lupus
Double-stranded DNA
40-60
 Nephritis; specific for SLE
erythematosus (SLE)
UI-RNP
30-40
Smith (Sm) antigen (core protein of srmall
20-30
 Specific for SLE
RNP particles)
 Ro (Ss-A) nucleoprotein
30-50
Congenital heart block; neonatal lupus
Phospholipid-protein complexes (anti-PL)
30-40
Anti-phospholipid syndrome (in ~I0% of SLE patients)
 Multiple nuclear antigens ("generic ANAs")
95-100
Found in other autoimmune diseases, not specific
 Systemic sclerosis
 DNA topoisomerase I
30-70
 Diffuse skin disease, lung disease; specific for systemic
sclerosis
Centromeric proteins (CENPs) A, B, C
20-40
Limited skin disease,ischemic digital loss, pulmonary
hypertension
RNA polymerase Ill
15-20
Acute onset, scleroderma renal crisis, cancer
 Sjogren syndrome
Ro/SS-A
75
More sensitive
La/55-B
50
More specific
 Autoimmune myositis 
Histidyl aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, Jol
25
Interstitial lung disease, Raynaud phenomenon 
 Mi-2 nuclear antigen
5-10
Derrmatomyositis, skin rash 
MDA5 (cytoplasmic receptor for viral RNA)
20-35 (Japanese)
Vascular skin lesions, interstitial lung disease
TIFIy nuclear protein
15-20
Der matomyositis, can cer
 Rheumatoid arthritis
 CCP (cyclic aitrullinated peptides); various
60-80
 Specific for rheumatoid arthritis 
 citrullinated proteins
 Rheumatoid factor
60-70
Not specific 
"Generic" anti-nuclear antibodies (ANAs), which may react against many nuclear antigens, are positive in a large fration of patients wich SLE but also are positive in other
autoimmune diseases. % positive refers to the approximate % of patients who test positive for each antibody.
Table compiled with the asstance of Dr. Antony Rosen, Johns Hopkins University, and Dr. Andrew Gross University of California San Francisco.
and manageinent of patients with SLE, these autoantibod-
· A rucleolar pattern refers to the presence of a few dis-
ies are of major pathogenic significance, as, for exaimple, in
crete spots of fluorescence within the nucleus and rep-
the  immune complex-mediated  glomerulonephritis
SO
 resents antibodies to RNA. This pattern is reported most
typical of this disease. Autoantibodies also are found
often in patients with systeimic sclerosis.
in other autoimmune diseases, many of which tend to
be associated with specific types of autoantibodies
The fluorescence patterns are not absolutely specific for
(Table 5.11).
the type of antibody, and because imany autoantibodies
may be present, combinations of patterns are frequent.
Anti-Nuclear Antibodies
Attempts are ongoing to replace microscopic assays with
ANAs can be grouped into four categories: (l) antibod-
quantitative assays for antibodies against specific nuclear
ies to DNA, (2) antibodies to histones, (3) antibodies to
and other antigens. Indeed, antibodies to double-stranded
nonhistone proteins bound to RNA, and (4) antibod-
DNA and the so-called "Simith (Sim) antigen" can be
ies to nucleolar antigens. The most widely used method
detected by more quantitative assays and are virtually
diagnostic of SLE. Nevertheless, the staining pattern has
which can identify antibodies that bind  to  a variety  of
diagnostic value, and the test reinains in use.
nuclear antigens, including DNA, RNA, and proteins
(collectively called gereric ANAs). The pattern of nuclear
Other Autoantibodies
In addition to ANAs, lupus patients have a host of other
patient's serum. Several basic patterns are recognized
autoantibodies. Soime are directed against blood cells, such
(Fig. 5.22):
as red cells, platelets, and lymphocytes. Anti-phospholipid
A homogeneous or diffuse staining pattern usually reflects
antibodies are present in 30% to 40% of lupus patients. They
the presence of antibodies to chroimatin, histones, and,
are actually directed against epitopes of various plasima
Occasionally, double-stranded DNA.
proteins that are revealed when the proteins are in coimplex
 A rim or peripheral staining pattern is most often indica-
with phospholipids. Antibodies against the phospholipid-
tive of antibodies to double-stranded DNA and some-
B2-glycoprotein complex also bind to cardiolipin antigen,
times to nuclear envelope proteins.
used in syphilis serology, and therefore lupus patients may
A centromeric pattern is indicative of antibodies specific
have a false-positive test result for syphilis. Because these
for centromeres. This pattern is often observed in
antibodies bind to phospholipids, they may prolong the
patients with systeimic sclerosis.
partial thromboplastin time, an in vitro cloting test that
A speckled pattern refers to the presence of uniforim or
requires phospholipids. Therefore, these antibodies are
variable-sized speckles. This is one of the most coim-
sometimes referred to as lupus anti-coagulant. Despite the
monly observed patterns of fluorescence and therefore
observed clotting delays in vitro, patients with anti-
the least specific. It reflects the presence of antibodies to
phospholipid antibodies have complications related to
 non-DNA nuclear constituents such as Sim antigen, ribo-
excessive clotting (a hypercoagulable state), such as throm-
 nucleoprotein, and SS-A and SS-B reactive antigens.
bosis (Chapter 4).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
152
CHAPTER5
 Diseases of the Immune System
B
D
Fig. 5.22 Staining patterns of anti-nuclear antibodies.(A) Homogeneous or diffuse staining of nuclei is typical of antibodies reactive with dsDNA, nucleosomes,
and histones, and is common in SLE. (B) A speckled pattern is seen with antibodies against various nuclear antigens, including Sm and RNPs.(C) The pattern
of staining of anti-centromere antibodies is seen in some cases of systermic sclerosis, Sjogren syndrome, and other diseases. (D) A nucleolar pattern is typical
Autoimm 35:276,2010.)
Pathogenesis
· Other genes. Genetic deficiencies of classical pathway
The fundamental defect in SLE is a failure of the mecha-
complement proteins, especially Clq, C2, or C4, are seen
nisms that maintain self-tolerance. Although what causes
in about 10% of patients with SLE. The compleiment
this failure of self-tolerance reimains unknown, as is true of
deficiencies may result in defective clearance of immune
most autoiimmune diseases, both genetic and environmen-
 complexes and apoptotic cells, and failure of B-cell toler-
tal factors play a role.
ance. A polyimorphism in the inhibitory Fc receptor,
FcyRIIb, has been described in soime patients; this may
Genetic Factors
contribute to inadequate control of B-cell activation.
 Many lines of evidence support a genetic predisposition to
 Additional genes have been implicated by genoime-
SLE.
wide association studies, but their contribution to the
·Familial association. Family members have an increased
development of the disease remains unclear.
risk for the developiment of SLE, and up to 20% of unaf-
fected first-degree relatives have autoantibodies. There
Environmental Factors
is a higher rate of concordance in monozygotic twins 
There are many indications that environimental factors also
(25%) than in dizygotic twins (1% -3%).
are involved in the pathogenesis of SLE.
·HLA association. The odds ratio (relative risk) for persons
A ui aseasp a saqaexa  a o asodxi o
with HLA-DR2 or HLA-DR3 is 2 to 3, and if both hap-
individuals. UV irradiation may induce apoptosis and
lotypes are present, the risk is about 5.
also may alter DNA and make it imununogenic, perhaps
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
153
by enhancing its recognition by TLRs. In addition, UV
SUSCEPTIBILITY
EXTERNAL TRIGGERS
light may modulate the innune response, for example,
GENES
(e.g., UV radiation)
by stimulating keratinocytes to produce IL-1, a cytokine
that promotes inflammation.
● The gender bias of SLE is partly attributable to actions
Apoptosis
of sex hormones and partly related to genes on the X
chromosome, independent of hormone effects.
· Drugs such as hydralazine, procainamide,
and
Defective clearance
 D-penicillamine can induce an SLE-like disorder.
of apoptotic bodies 
Immunologic Factors
Recent studies in aniimal models and patients have revealed
B and T cells specific for
Increased burden of
several imnunologic aberrations that collectively may
 self nuclear antigens
nuclear antigens
result in the persistent and uncontrolled activation of self-
reactive lymphocytes.
· Failure of self-tolerance in B cells results from defective
 Anti-nuclear antibody.
elimination of self-reactive B cells in the bone marrow
 antigen-antibody
 or defects in peripheral tolerance mechanisims.
complexes
CD4+ helper T cells specific for nucleosoimal antigens
Endocytosis of
also escape tolerance and contribute to the production
antigen-antibody
 complexes and 
B cell
of high-affinity pathogenic autoantibodies. The autoan-
 TLR engagement
Dendritic
tibodies in SLE show characteristics of T cell-dependent 
 by nuclear antigens 
cell
antibodies produced in geriminal centers, and increased
numbers of follicular helper T cells have been detected
TLR stimulation of
in the blood of SLE patients.
B cells and DCs
 Type I interferons. Blood cells show a striking molecular
signature that indicates exposure to interferon-α (IFN-
 Stimulation of
c), a type I interferon that is produced mainly by plas-
B cells and T cells
Type 1 interferons
 macytoid DCs. Some studies have shown that such cells
by IFN
from SLE patients produce abnorimally large amounts
of IFN-α.
TLR signals. Studies in animal models have shown that
TLRs that recognize DNA and RNA, notably the DNA-
recognizing
g TLR9 and the RNA-recognizing TLR7,
produce signals that activate B cells specific for self
Persistent high-level anti-nuclear
nuclear antigens.
 IgG antibody production 
· Other cytokines that may play a role in unregulated
Fig. 5.23 Model for the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus. In
 B-cell activation include the TNF family meimber BAFF,
this hypothetical model, susceptibility genes interfere with the maintenance
which promotes survival of B cells. In some patients and
of selftolerance,and extenal triggersleadto persistence of nuclear antigens.
animal models, increased production of BAFF has been 
The result is an antibody response against self nuclear antigens, which is
reported, and this has led to modest success of an anti-
amplified by the action of nucleic acids on dendritic cells (DCs) and B cells,
body that blocks BAFF as a therapy for SLE.
and the production of type I interferons. TLRs, Toll-like receptors.
A Model for the Pathogenesis of SLE
It is clear from this discussion that the imnunologic abnor-
malities in SLE- both documented and postulated- are
produce interferons and other cytokines, which further
varied and complex. Nevertheless, an atteimpt can be made
enhance the imnune response and cause more apoptosis.
to synthesize results from human studies and animal
 The net result is a cycle of antigen release and imimune
models into a hypothetical model of the pathogenesis of
activation resulting in the production of high-affinity
SLE (Fig. 5.23). UV irradiation and other environmental
autoantibodies.
 insults lead to the apoptosis of cells. Inadequate clearance
of the nuclei of these cells results in a large burden of
Mechanisms of Tissue Injury
nuclear antigens. Underlying abnormalities in B lympho-
 Different autoantibodies are the cause of most of the lesions
cytes and T lymphocytes are responsible for defective tol-
of SLE.
erance, because of which self-reactive lymphocytes survive
· Most of the systemic lesions are caused by immune
and remain functional. These lymphocytes are stimulated
complexes (type III hypersensitivity). DNA-anti-DNA
by nuclear self antigens, and antibodies are produced
complexes can be detected in the glomeruli and simall
 against the antigens. Complexes of the antigens and anti-
blood vessels. Low levels of serum complement (sec-
bodies bind to Fc receptors on B cells and dendritic cells,
 and may be internalized. The nucleic acid coimponents
granular deposits of compleiment and imnunoglobulins
 engage TLRs and stimulate B cells to produce more auto-
in the glomeruli further support the immune complex
antibodies. TLR stimuli also activate dendritic cells to
nature of the disease. T cell infiltrates are also frequently
http://ebooksmedicine.net
154
CHAPTER５[
 Diseases of the Immune System
seen in the kidneys, but the role of these cells in tissue
Table 5.12 Clinical and Pathologic Manifestations of Systemic
damage is not established.
Lupus Erythematosus
 Autoantibodies of different specificities contribute to
 Clinical Manifestation
Prevalence in Patients (%)*
the pathology and clinical manifestations of SLE (type
Hematologic
100
IⅡI hypersensitivity). Autoantibodies specific for red
blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets opsonize
Arthritis, arthralgia, or myalgia
801%
these cells and promote their phagocytosis, resulting in
Skin
85
cytopenias. There is no evidence that ANAs, which are
Fever
55-85
involved in immune coimplex formation, can penetrate
Fatigue
80-100
intact cells. If cell nuclei are exposed, however, the
Weight loss
60
ANAs can bind to thein. In tissues, nuclei of damaged
 Renal
50-70
cells react with ANAs, lose their chroinatin pattern, and
becoime hoimogeneous, producing so-called "LE bodies"
 Neuropsychiatric
25-35
 Pleuritis
or hematoxylin bodies. Related to this phenomenon are
45
LE cells, which are readily seen when blood is agitated
Pericarditis
25
 no o) ard e si l i u o u
Gastrointestinal
20
rophage) that has engulfed the denatured nucleus of an 
 Raynaud phenomenon 
15-40
injured cell. The demonstration of LE cells in vitro was
Ocular
5-15
used in the past as a test for SLE. With new techniques
Peripheral neuropathy
15
for detection of ANAs, however, this test is now only of
*Percentages are approximate and may vary with age, ethnicity, and ocher faccors.
historic interest. Sometimes, LE cells are found in peri-
Table compiled wicth the assiscance of Dr Meenakshi Jolly, Rush Medical Center,
cardial or pleural effusions in patients.
Chicago.
Anti-phospholipid antibody syncrome. Patients with anti-
phospholipid antibodies may develop venous and arte-
rial thromboses, which may be associated with recurrent
 spontaneous miscarriages and focal cerebral or ocular
 of which are associated with the deposition of immune com-
ischeimia. This constellation of clinical features, in asso-
plexes within the glomeruli.According to the currently accepted
ciation with lupus, is referred to as the secondary anti-
classification, six patterns of glomerular disease are recognized.
phospholipid antibody syndrome. The mechanisins of
It should be noted that there is overlap within these classes and
thrombosis are not defined, and antibodies against clot-
ting factors, platelets, and endothelial cells have all been
that lesions may evolve from one class to another over time.
proposed as being responsible for thrombosis (Chapter
Thus, the exact percentage of patients with each of the six
classes of lesions is difficult to determine. Suffice it to say that
4). Some patients develop these autoantibodies and the
class I is the least common and class IV is the most common
clinical syndrome without associated SLE. They are said
pattern.
to have the primary anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome
+ Minimal mesangial lupus nephritis (class I) is very uncom-
(Chapter 4).
 The neuropsychiatric manifestations of SLE have been
mon, and is characterized by immune complex deposition in
the mesangium,identified by immunofluorescence and by elec-
attributed to antibodies that cross the blood-brain
tron microscopy, but without structural changes by light
barrier and react with neurons or receptors for various
microscopy.
 neurotransinitters. However, this is not established in
 all cases, and mechanisins involving other immune
+ Mesangial proliferative lupus nephritis (class ll) is char.
acterized by mesangial cell proliferation, often accompanied by
factors, such as cytokines, also may underlie the cogni-
accumulation of mesangial matrix, and granular mesangial 
tive dysfunction and other CNS abnorimalities that are
deposits of immunoglobulin and complement without involve-
associated with SLE.
ment of glomerular capillaries.
· Focal lupus nephritis (class Ill) is defined by involvement of
fewer than 50% of all glomeruli. The lesions may be segmental
MORPHOLOGY
(affecting only a portion of the glomerulus) or global (involving 
the entire glomerulus).Affected glomeruli may exhibit swelling
The morphologic changes in SLE are extremely variable. The
and proliferation of endothelial and mesangial cells associated
 frequency of individual organ involvement is shown in Table 5.12.
with leukocyte accumulation, capillary necrosis, and hyaline
The most characteristic lesions result from immune complex
thrombi. Often, there also is extracapillary proliferation associ-
deposition in blood vessels, kidneys, connective tissue, and skin.
ated with focal necrosis and crescent formation (Fig. 5.24A).
Blood Vessels.An acute necrotizing vasculitis involving capil.
The clinical presentation ranges from mild hematuria and pro-
laries, small arteries, and arterioles may be present in any tissue.
teinuria to acute renal insuffciency. Red blood cell casts in the
The arteritis leads to fibrinoid necrosis of the vessel walls. In
urine are common when the disease is active. Some patients
chronic stages, vessels undergo fibrous thickening with luminal
 progress to diffuse glomerulonephritis.The active (or prolifera-
narrowing.
tive) inflammatory lesions can heal completely or lead to
Kidney. Up to 50% of SLE patients have clinically significant
 chronic global or segmental glomerular scarring.
renal involvement, and the kidney virtually always shows evidence
+ Diffuse lupus nephritis (class IV) is the most common
 of abnormality if examined by electron microscopy and immu-
 and severe form of lupus nephritis. The lesions are identi-
nofuorescence. Renal involvement takes a number of forms, all
cal to those in class Ill, but differ in extent; in diffuse lupus 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
155
一
Fig. 5.24 Lupus nephritis. (A) Focal proliferative glomerulonephritis, with two focal necrotizing lesions at the Il o'clock and 2 o'clock positions (H&E stain).
Extracapillary proliferation is not prominent in this case. (B) Diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis. Note the marked increase in cellularity throughout the
complexes (periodic acid-Schiff stain). (D) Electron micrograph of a renal glomerular capillary loop from a patient with SLE nephritis. Subendothelial dense 
deposits (arrowheads) on basement membrane (arrow) correspond to “wire loops" seen by light microscopy. (E) Deposition of IgG antibody in a granular
pattern, detected by immunofluorescence.(A to C, Courtesy of Dr.Helmut Rennke, Departrment of Pathology, Brigham ond Women's Hospital, Boston,Massachusetts.
D, Courtesy of Dr. Edwin Eigenbrodt, Department of Pathology, University ofTexas, Southwestem Medical School, Dalls, Texas. E, Courtesy of Dr. Jean Olson, Department
ofPathotogy,University of Calfomia,San Froncisco,Calfomia.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
156
CHAPTER5
Diseases of the Immune System
nephritis, half or more of the glomeruli are affected. Involved 
 glomeruli show proliferation of endothelial, mesangial, and epi-
thelial cells (see Fig. 5.24B), with the latter producing cellular
 crescents that fill Bowman's space. Subendothelial immune
complex deposits may create a circumferential thickening
of the capillary wall, forming "wire-loop" structures on light
 microscopy (see Fig. 5.24C) Immune complexes can be readily
detected by electron microscopy (see Fig. 5.24D) and immu-
nofluorescence (see Fig. 5.24E). Lesions may progress to scar-
ring of glomeruli. Patients with diffuse glomerulonephritis are
usually symptomatic, showing hematuria as well as protein-
uria. Hypertension and mild to severe renal insufficiency also
are common.
+ Membranous lupus nephritis (class V) is characterized by
A
diffuse thickening of the capillary walls due to deposition of
subepithelial immune complexes, similar to idiopathic membra-
nous nephropathy, described in Chapter I4.The immune com-
plexes are usually accompanied by increased production of
basement membrane-like material, resulting in "holes" and 
"spikes" on silver stain.This lesion is usually accompanied by
severe proteinuria or nephrotic syndrome, and may occur
concurrently with focal or diffuse lupus nephritis.
+ Advanced sclerosing lupus nephritis (class Vl) is charac-
terized by sclerosis of more than 90% of the glomeruli, and
represents end-stage renal disease.
Changes in the interstitium and tubules are frequently
 present. Rarely, tubulointerstitial lesions may be the dominant 
abnormality. Discrete immune complexes similar to those in
Fig. 5.25 Systemic lupus erythermatosus involving the skin. (A) An H&E-
glomeruli are present in the tubular or peritubular capillary base-
stained section shows liquefactive degeneration of the basal layer of the
ment membranes in many lupus nephritis patients. Sometimes,
epidermis and edema at the dermoepidermal junction. (B) An immunofluo-
rescence micrograph stained for IgG reveals deposits of lg along the dermo-
there are well-organized B-cell follicles in the interstitium, associ-
epidermal junction. (A, Courtesy of Dr Jog Bhowon, Boston University School of
ated with plasma cells that may be sources of autoantibodies.
Medicine, Boston, Massochusetts B, Courtesy of Dr.Richard Sontheimer, Depart-
Skin. Characteristic erythema affects the face along the
ment of Dermatology, University of Texas Southwestem Medical School, Dallas,
bridge of the nose and cheeks (the butterfly rash) in approxi-
Texos.)
mately 50% of patients, but a similar rash also may be seen on
the extremities and trunk. Urticaria, bullae, maculopapular
lesions, and ulcerations also occur. Exposure to sunlight incites 
tissue that may lead to partial or total obliteration of the serosal 
or accentuates the erythema. Histologically the involved areas
 cavity. Pleural and pericardial effusions may be present.
show vacuolar degeneration of the basal layer of the epidermis 
Cardiovascular system involvement may manifest as 
(Fig. 5.25A). In the dermis, there is variable edema and perivas-
 damage to any layer of the heart. Symptomatic or asymptomatic
cular inflammation. Vasculitis with fibrinoid necrosis may be
 pericardial involvement is present in up to 50% of patients. Myo-
 prominent. Immunofluorescence microscopy shows deposits of 
carditis is less common and may cause resting tachycardia and
immunoglobulin and complement along the dermoepidermal
electrocardiographic abnormalities. Valvular (so-called "Libman-
junction (Fig. 5.25B); these also may be present in uninvolved skin.
 Sacks") endocarditis was more common prior to the wide-
This finding is not diagnostic of SLE and is sometimes seen in 
 spread use of steroids. This sterile endocarditis takes the form
scleroderma and dermatomyositis.
 of single or multiple I- to 3-mm verrucous deposits, which may
 Joints. Joint involvement is typically a nonerosive synovitis
form on either surface of any heart valve, distinctively on either
with little deformity, which contrasts with rheumatoid arthritis.
 surface of the leaflets (Fig. 5.26). By comparison, the vegetations
Central Nervous System. Although it was suggested in 
 in infective endocarditis are larger, while those in rheumatic heart 
the past that the neuropsychiatric manifestations of SLE may be
disease (Chapter Il) are smaller and confined to the lines of
 due to acute vasculitis, in histologic studies of the nervous system
 closure of the valve leaflets.
in such patients, significant vasculitis is rarely present. Instead,
 An increasing number of patients are affected by coronary
noninflammatory occlusion of small vessels by intimal prolifera-
tion is sometimes noted, which may be due to endothelial
This complication may be seen in young patients with long-
damage caused by autoantibodies or immune complexes.
 standing disease, and is especially prevalent in those who have 
Pericarditis and Other Serosal Cavity Involvement.
 been treated with corticosteroids. The pathogenesis of acceler-
Inflammation of the serosal lining membranes may be acute,
 ated coronary atherosclerosis is unclear but is probably multi-
subacute, or chronic. During the acute phase, the mesothelial
factorial. Risk factors for atherosclerosis, including hypertension,
surfaces are sometimes covered with fibrinous exudate. Later
obesity, and hyperlipidemia, are more commonly present in SLE
they become thickened, opaque, and coated with shaggy fibrous
 patients than in the population at large. In addition, immune 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
157
presenting manifestations in some patients and may be
dominant clinical problems. In others, neuropsychiatric
 manifestations including psychosis or convulsions, or cor-
comnon, presumably because of the imnune dysfunction
that underlies SLE as well as treatment with imnunosup-
 pressive drugs.
The course of SLE is variable and unpredictable. Rare
acute cases result in death within weeks to months. More
often, with appropriate therapy, SLE follows a relapsing
and reimitting course over a period of years or decades.
During acute flares, increased formation of immune com-
plexes results in compleiment activation, often leading to
hypocomplementemia. Disease flares are usually treated
with corticosteroids or other imnunosuppressive drugs.
Even without therapy, in some patients the disease runs an
indolent course for years with relatively mild manifesta-
tions, such as skin changes and mild hematuria. The overall
pue %0 Aaeuxondde are sieaiains re-ot pue raa-g
 80%, respectively. The most comnon causes of death are
renal failure and intercurrent infections. Coronary artery
disease also is becoiming an important cause of death.
Patients treated with steroids and immunosuppressive
Fig. 5.26 Libman-Sacks endocarditis of the mitral valve in lupus erythema-
drugs incur the usual risks associated with such therapy.
tosus.The vegetations attached to the margin of the thickened valve leaflet
As mentioned earlier, involveinent of skin along with
are indicated by arrows. (Courtesy of Dr. Fred Schoen, Department of Pathology.
multisysteim disease is fairly common in SLE. The follow-
Brigham ond Women's Hospital, Boston, Massochusetts.)
ing sections describe two syndromes in which the cutane-
ous involvement is the exclusive or most prominent feature.
complexes and anti-phospholipid antibodies may cause endothe-
Chronic Discoid Lupus Erythematosus
lial damage and promote atherosclerosis.
Chronic discoid lupus erythematosus is a disease in which
Spleen. Splenomegaly, capsular thickening. and follicular
the skin manifestations may mimic SLE, but systemic mani-
hyperplasia are common features. Central penicilliary arteries
festations are rare. It is characterized by the presence of
may show concentric intimal and smooth muscle cell hyperplasia, 
skin plaques, most often on the face and scalp, showing
producing so-called onion-skin lesions.
varying degrees of edeima, erytheima, scaliness, follicular
Lungs. In addition to pleuritis and accompanying pleural
plugging, and skin atrophy surrounded by an elevated
effusions, some cases are complicated by chronic interstitial
J0 %Ot 01 %s u1 ETS 0l sassaibo1d 1 1apioq snojeuraya1a
fibrosis and secondary pulmonary hypertension.
patients, usually after many years. Conversely, some pa-
Other Organs and Tissues. LE, or hematoxylin, bodies in
tients with SLE may have proiminent discoid lesions in the
the bone marrow or other organs are strongly indicative of SLE.
skin. Approximately 35% of patients have a positive test for
Lymph nodes may be enlarged due to hyperplasia of B cell fol-
 generic ANAs, but antibodies to double-stranded DNA are
licles or even demonstrate necrotizing lymphadenitis due to
rarely present. Imnunofluorescence studies of skin biopsy
vas culitis.
specimens show deposition of imnunoglobulin and C3 at
the dermoepidermal junction similar to that in SLE.
The terim subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus refers to
Clinical Features
a group interimediate between SLE and lupus erytheinato-
SLE is a highly variable multisystem disease, and its diag-
sus localized only to skin. The skin rash in this disease
nosis relies on a constellation of clinical, serologic, and
tends to be widespread and superficial. Most patients have
10 anse aq Aeui hl (ot'g ae1 aas) supu sronoydio
 mild systeimic syimptoms similar to those in SLE. There is
insidious in its onset. Often, the patient is a young woman
a strong association with antibodies to the SS-A antigen
with soine or all of the following features: a butterfly rash
 and with the HLA-DR3 genotype.
on the face; fever; pain without deformity in one or more
joints; pleuritic chest pain; and photosensitivity. In many
Drug-induced Lupus Erythematosus
patients, however, the presentation is subtle and puzzling.
 An SLE-like syndrome may develop in patients receiving
 taking forims such as fever of unknown origin, abnorimal
a variety of drugs, including hydralazine, procainamide,
urinary findings, or joint disease masquerading as rheuma-
isoniazid, and D-penicillamine. Surprisingly, anti-TNF
toid arthritis or rheumatic fever. Generic ANAs, detected
by immunofluorescence assays, are found in virtually
other autoiimumune diseases, also can cause drug-induced
100% of patients, but these are not specific for SLE. Renal
 lupus. Many of these drugs are associated with the devel-
involvement may produce a variety of findings, including
 opment of ANAs, especially antibodies specific for his-
hematuria, red blood cell casts, proteinuria, and nephrotic
 tones. The disease remits after withdrawal of the offending
syndrome (Chapter 14). Aneimia or thrombocytopenia are
drug.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
158
CHAPTER５
Diseases of the Immune System
Pathogenesis
SUMMARY
The pathogenesis of Sjogren syndrome remains obscure,
 SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
but the pathology and serology, as well as an association,
+ SLE is a systemic autoimmune disease caused by autoantibod-
albeit weak, with HLA alleles, all point to activation of
autoreactive T cells and B cells. The initiating trigger may
ies produced against numerous self antigens and the formation
be a viral infection of the salivary glands, which causes local
of immune complexes.
cell death and release of tissue self antigens. In genetically
+ The major autoantibodies, and the ones responsible for the
 formation of circulating immune complexes, are directed 
susceptible individuals, CD4+ T cells and B cells specific for
against nuclear antigens. Other autoantibodies react with red 
 r  a adsa e s s as
blood cells, platelets, and various phospholipid-proteins
immune reactions that lead to tissue damage and, eventu-
ally, fibrosis. However, the role of particular cytokines or T
complexes.
 cell subsets, and the nature of the autoantigens recognized
+ Disease manifestations include nephritis, skin lesions, and 
by these lymphocytes, remain mysterious.
arthritis (caused by the deposition of immune complexes),
hematologic abnormalities (caused by antibodies against red
cells, white cells and platelets) and neurologic abnormalities
(caused by obscure mechanisms).
MORPHOLOGY
+ The underlying cause of the breakdown in self-tolerance in SLE
 Lacrimal and salivary glands are the major targets of the disease,
 is unknown; non-exclusive possiblities include excessive gen-
 but other exocrine glands, including those lining the respiratory
eration or persistence of nuclear antigens, in individuals with 
 and gastrointestinal tracts and the vagina, also may be involved.
 inherited susceptibility genes, and environmental triggers (e.g..
 The earliest histologic finding in both the major and the minor
UV irradiation, which results in cellular apoptosis and release 
salivary glands is periductal and perivascular lymphocytic infiltra-
of nuclear antigens).
tion. Eventually the lymphocytic infiltrate becomes extensive (Fig.
5.27), and in the larger salivary glands, lymphoid follicles with
 germinal centers may be seen. The epithelial cells lining the ducts
 may become hyperplastic and obstruct the ducts. Later there is
Rheumatoid Arthritis
 atrophy of the acini, fibrosis, and hyalinization; still later in the 
course, the atrophic parenchyma may be replaced with fat. In
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that affects
some cases, the lymphoid infiltrate may be so intense as to give
primarily the joints but also may involve extraarticular
the appearance of a lymphoma. Indeed, these patients are at high
tissues such as the skin, blood vessels, lungs, and heart.
 risk for development of B-cell lymphomas of the salivary gland
Because the principal manifestations of the disease are in
 and other extranodal sites (Chapter I2). The histologic findings
 the joints, it is discussed in Chapter 21.
 are not specific or diagnostic and may be mimicked by chronic
sialdenitis caused by ductal obstruction due to calculi.
The lack of tears leads to drying of the corneal epithelium,
Sjogren Syndrome
which becomes inflamed, eroded, and ulcerated; the oral mucosa
Sjogren syndrome is a chronic disease characterized by
may atrophy, with inflammatory fissuring and ulceration; and
dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca) and dry mouth (xero-
dryness and crusting of the nose may lead to ulcerations and
stomia)  resulting  from  immunologically  mediated
 even perforation of the nasal septum.
destruction of the lacrimal and salivary glands. It occurs
as an isolated disorder (primary form), also known as the
Clinical Features
sicca syndrome, or more often in association with another
 autoimnune disease (secondary form). Rheumatoid arthri-
Sjogren syndrome occurs most coimmonly in women
tis is the most common associated disorder, while other
between 50 and 60 years of age. As might be expected,
 patients have SLE, polymyositis, scleroderima, vasculitis,
symptoims result froim inflammatory destruction of the
mixed connective tissue disease, or autoimmune thyroid
exocrine glands. Keratoconjunctivitis produces blurred
disease.
The lacrimal and salivary glands characteristically show
mulate in the conjunctival sac. Xerostomia results in diffi-
dense lymphocytic infiltration consisting mainly of acti-
culty in swallowing solid foods, a decrease in taste, cracks
vated CD4+ helper T cells and soime B cells, including
and fissures in the mouth, and dryness of the buccal
plasima cells. Serologic studies frequently reveal autoanti-
mucosa. Parotid gland enlargement is present in half the
bodies. Antibodies against two ribonucleoprotein antigens,
patients; dryness of the nasal mucosa, epistaxis, recurrent
SS-A (Ro) and SS-B (La) (see Table 5.11), can be detected in
bronchitis, and pneumonitis are other syimptoms. Manifes-
as many as 90% of patients by sensitive techniques. High
 tations of extraglandular disease are seen in one third of
titers of antibodies to SS-A are associated with early disease
 patients and include synovitis, pulmonary fibrosis, and
onset, longer disease duration, and extraglandular mani-
peripheral neuropathy. In contrast to SLE, glomerular
festations, such as cutaneous vasculitis and nephritis.
lesions are rare in Sjogren syndrome. Defects of tubular
These autoantibodies also are present in a simaller percent-
function, however, including renal tubular acidosis, uricos-
age of patients with SLE and hence are not diagnostic of
uria, and phosphaturia, often are seen and are associated
Sjogren syndrome. In addition, about 75% of patients have
with tubulointerstitial nephritis (Chapter 14). About 60%
rheumatoid factor (an antibody reactive with self IgG), and
 of patients have another accoimpanying autoimnune dis-
50% to 80% of patients have ANAs.
 order, such as rheumatoid arthritis.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
159
B
Fig. 5.27 Sjogren syndrome. (A) Enlargement of the salivary gland. (B) Intense lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration with ductal epithelial hyperplasia in a
salivary gland. (A, Courtesy of Dr. Richard Sontheimer, Department of Dermatology, University ofTexas Southwestem Medicat Schoo, Dalls, Texas. B, Courtesy of Dr.
Dennis Burms, Departmernt of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestem Medical Schoor, Dallas, Texas.)
SUMMARY
Pathogenesis
  o  si sios    
SJOGREN SYNDROME
disease likely results from three interrelated processes --
· Sjogren syndrome is an inflammatory disease that primarily
 autoimmune responses, vascular damage, and collagen 
affects the salivary and lacrimal glands, causing dryness of the
deposition (Fig. 5.28).
mouth and eyes.
·Autoimmunity. Itis proposed that CD4+ T cells respond-
+ The disease is believed to be caused by an autoimmune T-cell
ing to an as yet unidentified antigen accumulate in the
reaction against an unknown self antigen expressed in these
skin and release cytokines that activate inflaimimatory
glands, or immune reactions against the antigens of a virus that 
cells and fibroblasts. Although inflammatory infiltrates
infects the tissues.
 in the affected skin typically are sparse, they include
 activated CD4+ TH2 cells. Several cytokines, including
Aq paonpond g- pue so z1 Aq panpond ci-T
Imacrophages and other cell types, stimulate synthesis
of collagen and extracellular matrix proteins (e.g., fibro-
Systemic Sclerosis (Scleroderma)
nectin) in fibroblasts. Other cytokines recruit leukocytes
and propagate the chronic inflamnation.
Systemic sclerosis is an immunologic disorder character-
The presence of various autoantibodies, notably
ized by excessive fibrosis in multiple tissues, obliterative
ANAs, provides diagnostic and prognostic information.
vascular disease, and evidence of autoimmunity, mainly
It has been postulated that these antibodies stimulate
the production of multiple autoantibodies. Although
fibrosis, but the evidence in support of this idea is not
the terim scleroderma is ingrained in clinical medicine,
convincing.
the naime systemic sclerosis is preferred because excessive
Vascular damage. Microvascular disease is consistently
fibrosis is seen in multiple organs. Cutaneous involve-
present early in the course of systemic sclerosis. Telltale
anaa pue uoisaeu suuasand ensn an st jua
signs of endothelial activation and injury and increased
 appears in approximately 95% of cases, but it is the visceral
platelet activation have been noted. However, the cause
involvement- of the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, kidneys,
of the vascular injury is not known; it could be the ini-
heart, and skeletal muscles- that is responsible for most of
tiating event or the result of chronic inflammation, with
the morbidity and mortality. Disease limited to the skin is
also called localized sclerocderma.
damage on microvascular endotheliun. Repeated cycles
 Systeinic sclerosis is classified into two groups on the
 of endothelial injury followed by platelet aggregation
basis of its course:
lead to release of platelet and endothelial factors (e.g-)
 Diffuse systemic sclerosis, characterized by initial wide
PDGF, TGF-β) that trigger endothelial proliferation and
spread skin involvement, with rapid progression and
intimal and perivascular fibrosis. Eventually, wide-
early visceral involvement
spread narrowing of the microvasculature leads to
Limited systemic sclerosis, with relatively imild skin
ischeimic injury and scarring. The pulmonary vascula-
involveiment, often confined to the fingers and face.
ture is frequently involved, and the resulting pulmo-
 Involvement of the viscera occurs late, so the disease
nary hypertension is a serious complication of the
generally follows a fairly benign course. This presenta-
disease.
tion alsoiscalled CRESTsyndrome because of its frequent
 Fibrosis. The progressive fibrosis characteristic of the
features of calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, esopha-
disease may be the culmination of multiple abnor-
 geal dysimotility, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia.
malities, including the accumulation of alternatively
http://ebooksmedicine.net
60
CHAPTER５
 Diseases of the Immune System
EXTERNAL STIMULI?
GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY
EXTERNAL STIMULI?
Endothelial injury
T- and B-cell activation 
 Proliferative and 
obliterative
 Production of pro-fibrotic 
Autoantibodies
vasculopathy
cytokines
(e.g., TGF-β, IL-13, PDGF)
Ischemia, repair 
Pulmonary
+ Synthesis of extracellular matrix
 arterial
 proteins: fibrosis involving skin
hypertension
 and parenchymal organs 
Fig. 5.28 A model for the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis. Unknown external stimuli cause vascular abnormalities and immune activation in genetically
susceptible individuals, and both contribute to the excessive fibrosis.
activated macrophages, actions of fibrogenic cytokines
 produced by infiltrating leukocytes, hyperresponsive-
The associated dysfunction of the lower esophageal sphincter
 gives rise to gastroesophageal reflux and its complications,
ness of fibroblasts to these cytokines, and scarring fol-
including Barrett metaplasia (Chapter I5) and strictures. The
lowing ischemic damage caused by the vascular lesions.
 mucosa is thinned and may ulcerate, and there is excessive col-
Studies with cultured fibroblasts from patients have
lagenization of the lamina propria and submucosa. Loss of villi 
suggested an intrinsic abnorimality that causes the cells
 and microvilli in the small bowel is the anatomic basis for a
to produce excessive aimounts of collagen.
 malabsorption syndrome that sometimes is encountered.
Musculoskeletal System. Inflammation of the synovium,
associated with synoviocyte hypertrophy,is common in the early
MORPHOLOGY
 stages; fbrosis later ensues. These changes are reminiscent of
 rheumatoid arthritis, but joint destruction is not common in
In systemic sclerosis, the most prominent changes occur in the
 systemic sclerosis. In a small subset of patients (approximately
 skin, alimentary tract, musculoskeletal system, and kidney, but 
10%), inflammatory myositis indistinguishable from polymyositis
lesions also are often present in the blood vessels, heart, lungs,
may develop.
and peripheral nerves.
 Kidneys. Renal abnormalities occur in two-thirds of patients.
Skin. Most patients have diffuse fbrosis of the skin and 
 The most prominent are the vascular lesions. Interlobular arter-
associated atrophy, which usually begins in the fingers and distal
 ies show intimal thickening as a result of deposition of mucinous
 regions of the upper extremities and extends proximally to
 material containing glycoproteins and acid mucopolysaccharides
involve the upper arms, shoulders, neck, and face. Edema and
 and concentric proliferation of intimal cells. These changes 
perivascular infiltrates containing CD4+ T cells are seen,together
resemble those seen in malignant hypertension, but in systemic
with swelling and degeneration of collagen fibers, which become
 sclerosis the alterations are restricted to vessels 150 to 500 μm
eosinophilic. Capillaries and small arteries (150-500 μm in diam-
in diameter and are not always associated with hypertension.
eter) may show thickening of the basal lamina, endothelial
 Hypertension, however, does occur in 30% of patients, and in
damage, and partial oclusion.With disease progression, there is
20% it takes an ominously rapid, downhill course (malignant 
increasing fibrosis of the dermis, which becomes tightly bound 
hypertension). In hypertensive patients, vascular alterations are
to the subcutaneous structures. Fibrosis often is accompanied by
 more pronounced and are often associated with fibrinoid necro-
thinning ofthe epidermis, loss of rete pegs, atrophy ofthe dermal
 sis of arterioles that can lead to thrombosis and infarction. Such
 appendages, and hyaline thickening of the walls of dermal arteri-
 patients often die of renal failure, which accounts for about 50%
oles and capillaries (Fig. 5.29B). Subcutaneous calcifications may
 of deaths. There are no specific glomerular changes.
develop, especially in patients with CREST syndrome. In advanced
Lungs. The lungs are affected in more than 50% of cases.This
stages the fingers take on a tapered, clawlike appearance and
have limited joint mobility, and the face becomes a drawn mask.
 Loss of blood supply may lead to cutaneous ulcerations and
dysfunction is considered important in the pathogenesis of pul-
atrophic changes (Fig. 5.29C) or even autoamputation of the
 monary hypertension. Pulmonary fibrosis, when present, is indis-
terminal phalanges.
tinguishable from that seen in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Alimentary Tract. The alimentary tract is affected in 
(Chapter 13).
 approximately 90% of patients. Progressive atrophy and fibrous
Heart. Pericarditis with effusion, myocardial fibrosis, and 
replacement of the muscularis may develop at any level of the
 thickening of intramyocardial arterioles occur in one third of
gut but are most severe in the esophagus. The lower two thirds
 patients. Because of the changes in the lung, right ventricular
of the esophagus often develops a rubber-hose-like inflexibility.
"uanbay aue (ajeuownd jos) aungy pue Aydoauadky 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Autoimmune Diseases
161
A
B
C
Fig. 5.29 Systemic sclerosis. (A) Normal skin. (B) Skin biopsy from a patient with systermic sclerosis. Note the extensive deposition of dense collagen in the
dermis, the virtual absence of appendages (e.g., hair follicles),and foci of inflarmmation (arrow). (C) The extensive subcutaneous fibrosis has virtually immobilized
the fingers, creating a dawlike flexion deformity. Loss of blood supply has led to cutaneous ulcerations. (C, Courtesy of Dr Richord Sontheimer Departrment of
Dermatology,University ofTexas Southwestem Medicat Schoo, Dalls, Texas.)
Clinical Features
dysfunction, and myocardial fibrosis may cause either
Systeimic sclerosis has a feimale-to-imale ratio of 3: 1 and a
arrhythimias or cardiac failure. Mild proteinuria occurs in
 peak incidence in the 50- to 60-year age group. Although
as many as 30% of patients, but rarely is severe enough to
systemic sclerosis shares features with SLE, rheunatoid
cause nephrotic syndrome. The most oiminous manifesta-
arthritis (Chapter 21), and polymyositis (Chapter 22), it is
tion is malignant hypertension, with the subsequent devel-
distinguished by the striking cutaneous changes, notably
 opiment of fatal renal failure (Chapter 14), but in its absence
skin thickening. Raynaud phenoimenon, caused by epi-
 progression of the disease may be slow. In imost patients
sodic vasoconstriction of the arteries and arterioles of the
the disease pursues a steady downhill course over the span
extreimities, is seen in virtually all patients and precedes
a ym ul si uds al noe sea Ai o
other syimptoims in 70% of cases. Progressive collagen
treatiment of the complications. The disease tends to be
deposition in the skin leads to increasing stiffness, espe-
more severe in blacks, especially black women. As treat-
cially of the hands, with eventually complete imnobiliza-
 ment of the renal complications has improved, pulmonary
tion of the joints. Nailfold capillary loops are distorted
and cardiac complications have becoime the major cause of
early in the disease, and later disappear. Dysphagia attrib-
death.
utable to esophageal fibrosis and its resultant hypomotility
Virtually all patients have ANAs that react with a
are present in more than 50% of patients. Eventually,
variety of nuclear antigens (see Table 5.1l). Two ANAs are
destruction of the esophageal wall leads to atony and dila-
strongly associated with systeinic sclerosis. One directed
tion, especially at its lower end. Abdominal pain, intestinal
obstruction, or malabsorption syndrome reflect involve-
and is associated with a greater likelihood of pulmonary
ment of the simall intestine. Respiratory difficulties caused
fibrosis and peripheral vascular disease. The other, an anti-
by the pulimonary fibrosis may result in right-sided cardiac
centromere antibody, is associated with a higher likelihood
http://ebooksmedicine.net
162
CHAPTER5D
Diseases of the Immune System
of CREST syndroime. Patients with this syndrome have
vessels that show strong evidence of an imumunologic basis.
relatively limited skin disease, often confined to fingers,
Any type of vessel may be involved - arteries, arterioles,
forearims and face, and subcutaneous calcifications.
veins, or capillaries. These vasculitides are discussed in
 Involvement of the viscera, including esophageal lesions,
Chapter 10.
pulmonary hypertension, and biliary cirrhosis, may not
occur at all or occur late. In general, these patients live
IgG4-Related Disease
longer than those with systeimic sclerosis with diffuse vis-
ceral involvement fron the outset.
IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a newly recognized
constellation of fibro-inflammatory disorders character-
ized by tissue infiltrates rich in IgG4 antibody-producing
plasma cells and lymphocytes, particularly T cells, associ-
SUMMARY
ated with fibrosis and obliterative phlebitis (Fig. 5.30).
 SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS
The disorder is often, but not always, associated with ele-
vated serum IgG4 concentrations. Increased numbers of
+ Systemic sclerosis (commonly called scieroderma) is character-
IgG4-producing plasima cells in tissue are a sine qua non
ized by progressive fibrosis involving the skin, gastrointestinal
of this disorder. IgG4-related disease has now been
tract, and other tissues.
described in virtually every organ system, including the
+ Fibrosis may be the result of activation of fibroblasts by cyto-
biliary tree, salivary glands, periorbital tissues, kidneys,
kines produced by T cells, but what triggers T cell responses 
is unknown.
lungs, lymph nodes, meninges, aorta, breast, prostate,
thyroid, pericardium, and skin. Many conditions long
viewed as disorders of single organs are now part of the
present in the lesions of systemic sclerosis, perhaps causing
IgG4-RD spectrum. These include Mikulicz syndrome
chronic ischemia, but the pathogenesis of vascular injury is not
(enlargement and fibrosis of salivary and lacrimal glands),
known.
Riedel thyroiditis, idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis, auto
immune pancreatitis, and inflammatory pseudotumors of the
orbit, lungs, and kidneys, to name a few. The disease most
Inflammatory Myopathies
 often affects middle-aged and older imen.
The pathogenesis of this condition is not understood,
 Inflammatory myopathies comprise an uncoimmon, het-
and although IgG4 production in lesions is a hallimark of
erogeneous group of disorders characterized by injury
the disease, itis not known if this antibody type contributes
and inflammation of mainly the skeletal muscles that are
to the pathology. The key role of B cells is supported by
probably imnunologically mediated. Based on clinical,
clinical trials in which depletion of B cells by anti-B-cell
morphologic, and immunologic features, three disorders --
 reagents such as rituxiimab provided clinical benefit.
polymyositis,
 dermatomyositis, and inclusion body
myositis— have been described. Each may occur alone or
with other imunune-mediated diseases, particularly sys-
REIECTION OF TRANSPLANTS
teimic sclerosis. These diseases are described in Chapter 22.
A major barrier to transplantation is the process of rjection,
Mixed Connective Tissue Disease
in which the recipient's immune systen recognizes the
graft as foreign and attacks it. The key to successful trans.
Mixed connective tissue disease is a disorder with clinical
plantation has been the development of therapies that
features that overlap those of SLE, systemic sclerosis, and
prevent or miniimize rejection. Transplant rejection is dis-
polymyositis. The disease is characterized serologically by
cussed here because it involves several of the imununologic
high titers of antibodies to U1 ribonucleoprotein. Typically,
reactions that underlie immune-mediated inflammatory
it presents with synovitis of the fingers, Raynaud phenom-
diseases.
enon, and mild myositis. Renal involvement is modest, and
there is a favorable response to corticosteroids, at least in
Recognition and Rejection of Allografts 
the short term. Because these clinical features are shared
with other diseases, imixed connective tissue disease may
 Rejection is a process in which T lymphocytes and anti-
not be a distinct entity, and in fact it may evolve over time
bodies produced against graft antigens react against and
into classic SLE or systemic sclerosis. However, progres-
destroy the grafts. We next discuss how this occurs.
sion to other autoiimnune disorders is not universal, and
there may be a forim of mixed connective tissue disease that
Recognition of Graft Alloantigens
is distinct from other autoimmune diseases. Serious com-
 The major antigenic differences between a donor and
plications of mixed connective tissue disease include pul-
recipient that result in rejection of transplants are differ-
ences in HLA alleles. Grafts exchanged between individu-
disease.
als of the same species are called allografts. Because HLA
 genes are highly polymorphic, there are always some dif-
Polyarteritis Nodosa and Other Vasculitides
ferences between individuals (except, of course, identical
twins). Following transplantation, the recipient's T cells
Polyarteritis nodosa belongs to a group of disorders char-
recognize donor antigens from the graft (the allogeneic
acterized by necrotizing inflamimation of the walls of blood
antigens, or alloantigens) by two pathways. The graff
http://ebooksmedicine.net
 Rejection of Transplants
163
1.0 cm
Fig. 5.30 IgG4-related disease: representative lesions. (A) Bile duct showing sclerosing cholangitis. (B) Sclerotic area of the bile duct with storiform fibrosis.
(C) Submandibular gland with infiltrates of lymphocytes and plasma cells and whorls of fibrosis. (D) Section of an involved lacrimal gland stained with an
antibody against IgG4, showing large numbers of IgG4-producing plasma cells. (From Komisowa T, ZenY, Pilai 5, et ol:igG4-related disease. Lancet 385:1 460, 2015.)
antigens are either presented directly to recipient T cells by
Mechanisms of Graft Rejection
graft APCs, or the graft antigens are picked up by host
Graft rejection is classified into hyperacute, acute, and
APCs, processed (like any other foreign antigen), and pre-
chronic, on the basis of clinical and pathologic features.
sented to host T cells. These are called the direct and indi-
rect pathways of recognition of alloantigens. Both lead to
pathologists based on rejection of kidney allografts, and
the activation of CD8+ T cells, which develop into CTLs,
has stood the test of time reimarkably well. Each type of
and CD4+ T cells, which becoime cytokine-producing effec-
a ro pu rnd e q  si 
tor cells, imainly Th1 cells. We do not know the relative
response. In the following discussion, the description of the
importance of these pathways in the rejection of allografts.
 morphology of rejection is limited to kidney allografts, but
The direct pathway may be most important for CTL-
similar changes are seen in other organ transplants.
 mediated acute rejection, and the indirect pathway may
 Hyperacute rejection is mediated by preformed anti-
play a greater role in chronic rejection, described later.
 bodies specific for antigens on graft endothelial cells.
The frequency of T cells that can recognize the foreign
The preformed antibodies may be natural IgM anti-
I jo Aouanbany ay ueq aq ynu si en e u suasque
bodies specific for blood group antigens, or may be
cells specific for any microbe. For this reason, imimune
 antibodies specific for allogeneic MHC molecules that
responses to allografts are stronger than responses to
were induced by prior exposure through blood trans-
pathogens. Predictably, these strong reactions can destroy
fusions, pregnancy, or organ transplantation. Imme-
 grafts rapidly, and their control requires powerful innu-
diately after the graft is implanted and blood flow is
nosuppressive agents.
restored, the antibodies bind to antigens on the graft
http://ebooksmedicine.net
164
CHAPTER5
Diseases of the Immune System
 Complement activation, endothelial damage,
Blood
Endothelial
inflammation and thrombosis
vessel
cell
Alloantigen
Circulating alloantigen-
(e.g., blood group antigen)
 specific antibody
A
B
Fig. 5.31 Hyperacute rejection. (A) Deposition of antibody on endothelium and activation of complement causes thrombosis. (B) Hyperacute rejection of 
a kidney allograft showing platelet fibrin thrombi and severe ischemic injury in a glomerulus.
endothelium and activate the complement and clotting
MORPHOLOGY
systems, leading to endothelial injury, thrombus for-
mation, and ischeimic necrosis of the graft (Fig. 5.31A).
Acute cellular (T cellmediated) rejection may produce two dif-
 Hyperacute rejection is not a common problem, because
ferent patterns of injury.
every donor and recipient are matched for blood
· In the tubulointerstitiai pattern (sometimes called type I), there
type and potential recipients are tested for antibodies
is extensive interstitial inflammation and tubular
 against the cells of the prospective donor, a test called a
inflammation (tubulitis) associated with focal tubular injury
cross-match.
(Fig. 5.32B).As might be expected, the inflammatory
infiltrates contain activated CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes.
+ The vascuiar pattern shows inflammation of vessels (type Il)
MORPHOLOGY
(Fig. 5.32C) and sometimes necrosis of vessel walls (type lll).
The affected vessels have swollen endothelial cells, and at 
In hyperacute rejection, the affected kidney rapidly becomes
places lymphocytes are seen between the endothelium and
cyanotic, mottled, and anuric.Virtually all arterioles and arteries 
the vessel wall, a finding termed endothelis or intirmal
exhibit acute fibrinoid necrosis of their walls and narrowing or
arteritis. The recognition of cellular rejection is important 
complete occlusion of their lumens by thrombi (Fig. 5.3IB).
because,in the absence of accompanying humoral rejection, 
Neutrophils rapidly accumulate within arterioles, glomeruli, and 
most patients respond well to immunosuppressive therapy.
peritubular capillaries. As these changes intensify and become
diffuse, the glomerular capillaries also undergo thrombotic occlu-
 sion, and eventually the kidney cortex undergoes outright necro-
sis (infarction). Affected kidneys are nonfunctional and have to
In acute antibody-mediated (uascular or humoral) rejec-
be removed.
tior, antibodies bind to vascular endothelium and acti-
vate complement via the classical pathway (Fig. 5.33A).
The resultant inflamimation and endothelial damage
 Acute rejection is mediated by T cells and antibodies
cause graft failure.
that are activated by alloantigens in the graft. It occurs
within days or weeks after transplantation, and is the
principal cause of early graft failure. It also may appear
MORPHOLOGY
suddenly months or even years later, after imumunosup-
pression is tapered or teriminated. Based on the role of
Acute antibody-mediated rejection is manifested mainly by
T cells or antibodies, acute rejection is divided into two
damage to glomeruli and small blood vessels. Typically, there is
types, although in most rejecting grafts, both patterns
 inflammation of glomeruli and peritubular capillaries (Fig. 5.33B)
are present.
associated with deposition of complement products, which is due
In acute cellular rejection, CD8+ CTLs may directly
to activation of the complement system by the antibody-
 destroy graft cells, or CD4+ cells secrete cytokines and
dependent classical pathway (Fig. 5.33C). Small vessels also may
induce inflaimnation, which damages the graft (Fig.
 show focal thrombosis.
5.32A). T cells also imay react against graft vessels,
leading to vascular damage. Current immunosuppres-
Chronic rejection is an indolent form of graft damage
acute rejection by blocking the activation of alloreactive
that occurs over months or years, leading to progres-
T cells.
sive loss of graft function. Chronic rejection manifests
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Rejection of Transplants
165
Alloantigen-specific CD8+ and CD4+ T cells
Direct
CD8
Cytokines
killing
O
Recruitment
ofmacrophages
Parenchymal cells
and neutrophils
B
Neutrophil
Macrophage
Parenchymal cell damage
Interstitial inflammation 
Fig. 5.32 Acute cellular rejection. (A) Destruction of graft cells by T cells.Acute T
and inflammation caused by cytokines produced by CD4 T cels. (B) Acute cellular rejection of a kidney graft, manifested by inflarmmatory cells in the inter-
stitium and between epithelial cells of the tubules (tubulitis). Collapsed tubules are outlined by wavy baserment membranes. (C) Rejection vasculitis in a kidney
graft. An arteriole is shown with inflammatory cells attacking and undermining the endothelium (endothelitis) (arrow). (Courtesy of Drs. Zoton Loszik ond
Kuang-Yu Jen, Department of Pathology, University of Calformio, Son Francisco, Calformia.)
as interstitial fibrosis and gradual narrowing of graft
Methods of increasing Graft Survival
blood vessels (graft arteriosclerosis). In both lesions, the
Because HLA molecules are the major targets in transplant
culprits are believed to be T cells that react against graft 
rejection, better imatching of the donor and the recipient
alloantigens and secrete cytokines, which stimulate the
improves graft survival. HLA matching is more beneficial
proliferation and activities of fibroblasts and vascular
for living related kidney transplants than for other kinds
smooth muscle cells in the graft (Fig. 5.34A). Alloanti-
 of transplants, and survival improves with increasing
bodies also contribute to chronic rejection. Although
number of loci matched. However, as drugs for immuno-
 treatiments to prevent or curtail acute rejection have
suppression have improved, HLA matching is no longer
steadily iimproved, leading to longer than l-year sur-
done for heart, lung, liver, and islet transplantation; in such
vival of transplants, chronic rejection is refractory to
 instances, the recipient often needs a transplant urgently
 most therapies and is becoming the principal cause of
and other considerations, such as anatomic compatibility,
 graft failure.
are of greater importance.
 Immunosuppression of the recipient is a necessity in
all organ transplantation, except in the case of identical
MORPHOLOGY
twins. At present, drugs such as cyclosporine, the related
 Chronic rejection is dominated by vascular changes, often with
FK506, mofetil mycophenolate (MMF), rapamycin, azathi-
oprine, corticosteroids, anti-thyimocyte globulin, and
intimal thickening and vascular occlusion (Fig. 5.34B). Chronically
monoclonal antibodies (e.g-, monoclonal anti-CD3) are
rejecting kidney grafts show glomerulopathy, with duplication of
used. Cyclosporine and FK506 suppress T cell-mediated
the basement membrane, likely secondary to chronic endothelial
injury (Fig. 5.34C) and peritubular capillaritis with multilayering
particular, the gene for IL-2. Although imununosuppres-
Of peritubular capillary basement membranes. Interstitial fibrosis
sion has made transplantation of many organs feasible, it
and tubular atrophy with loss of renal parenchyma may occur
has its own problems. Suppression of the immune systeim
secondary to the vascular lesions (Fig. 5.34D). Interstitial mono-
 nuclear cell infiltrates are typically sparse.
 results in increased susceptibility to opportunistic fungal,
viral, and other infections. Reactivation of latent viruses,
http://ebooksmedicine.net
166
CHAPTER 5
Diseases of the Immune System
Blood
Endothelial cell
vessel
Alloreactive
antibody
Endothelialitis
Complement
A
activation
Fig. 5.33 Acute antibody-mediated (humoral) rejection. (A) Graft damage caused by antibody deposition in vessels. (B) Light micrograph showing inflamma-
tion (capilaritis) in peritubular capillaries (arrows) in a kidney graft. (C) Immunoperoxidase stain shows C4d deposition in peritubular capilaries and a glo-
such as cytoimegalovirus (CMV) and polyoima virus, are
topoietic steim cells obtained from affected patients inay be
frequent coimplications. Immunosuppressed patients also
 useful in treating inherited forms of imnunodeficiency.
are at increased risk for developing virus-induced tumors,
Historically, HSCs were obtained from the bone marrow,
such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-induced lymphomas and
but now they usually are harvested from peripheral blood
human papillomavirus (HPV)-induced squamous cell car-
after they are mobilized froin the bone marrow by adimin-
cinomas. To circumvent the untoward effects of immuno-
istration of hematopoietic growth factors, or from the
suppression, much effort is being devoted to induce
umbilical cord blood of newborn infants, a rich source of
donor-specific tolerance in host T cells. One strategy is to
HSCs. In most of the conditions in which HSC transplanta-
prevent host T cells from receiving costimulatory signals
tion is indicated, the recipient is irradiated or treated with
froim donor DCs during the initial phase of sensitization.
chemotherapy to destroy the immune system (and some-
This can be accomplished by adiministration of agents that
times, cancer cells) and to "open up" niches in the micro-
block the interaction of the B7 molecules on the DCs of the
environiment of the marrow that nurture HSCs, thus
graft and the CD28 receptor on host Tcels, which, by inter-
allowing the transplanted HSCs to engraft. Two major
rupting the second signal for T cell activation, induces
problems complicate this forim of transplantation and dis-
tinguish it froim solid organ transplants: graft-versus-host
injecting into recipients regulatory T cells enriched for cells
disease and immune deficiency.
specific for donor alloantigens; these trials are in their
infancy.
Graft-Versus-Host Disease
GVHD occurs when immunologically competent cells
Transplantation of Hematopoietic Stem Cells
 or their precursors are transplanted into immunologi-
cally crippled recipients, and the transferred cells recog-
 Use of heinatopoietic stem cell(HSC) transplants for hema-
nize alloantigens in the host and attack host tissues. It
tologic malignancies, bone marrow failure syndromes
is seen most coimmonly in the setting of HSC transplanta-
(such as aplastic aneimia), and disorders caused by inher-
tion but, rarely, may occur following transplantation of
ited HSC defects (such as sickle cell anemia, thalasseinia,
solid organs rich in lymphoid cells (e.g, the liver). On
and imnunodeficiency states) is increasing in number each
receiving allogeneic HSCs, an immunologically compro-
r e, a g sn 
mised host cannot reject the graft, but T cells present in the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
 Rejection of Transplants
167
 Blood vessel
Antibody binding
 Chronic inflammatory reaction
to endothelial
in vessel wall
 antigens
Intimal smooth muscle
proliferation
Cytokines
Vessel occlusion
Alloantigen-
specific
CD4+ T cell
Cytokines
Vascular smooth muscle cell
Fig. 5.34 Chronic rejection. (A) Graft arteriosclerosis caused by T-cell cytokines and antibody deposition. (B) Graft arteriosclerosis in a cardiac transplant.
(C) Transplant glomerulopathy, the characteristic manifestation of chronic antibody-mediated rejection in the kidney.The glomerulus shows inflammatory cells
within the capillary loops (glomerulitis), accumulation of mesangial matrix, and duplication of the capillary baserment mermbrane.(D) Interstitial fibrosis and
tubular atrophy, resulting from arteriosclerosis of arteries and arterioles in a chronically rejecting kidney allograft. In this trichrome stain, the blue area (osterisk)
shows fibrosis, contrasted with the normal kidney (top right). An artery showing prominent arteriosclerosis is shown (bottom right). (B, Courtesy of Dr Richard
of Califormnia, San Froncisco, Califomia.)
donor graft perceive the host's tissue as foreign and react
There are two forms of GVHD.
against it. This results in the activation of donor CD4+ and
Acute GVHD (occurring days to weeks after transplan-
CD8+ T cells, ultimately causing inflammation and killing
recipient cells. To try to minimize GVHD, HSC transplants
target organs: liver, skin, and gut. Destruction of simall
are done between donor and recipient that are carefully
bile ducts gives rise to jaundice, and mucosal ulcer-
HLA-matched using  precise DNA  sequencing-based
ation of the gut results in bloody diarrhea. Cutane-
methods.
ous involveiment (Fig. 5.35) manifests as a rash, which
Fig. 5.35 Acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) involving the skin. (A) Patchy epithelial cell death and dermal infiltrates of mononuclear cells (lymphocytes
and macrophages). (B) Focally dead epithelial cells (arrows).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
168
CHAPTER5D
Diseases of the Immune System
characteristically appears first on the neck, ears, and
palims of the hands and soles of the feet and then
IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROMES
becomes generalized.
 Chronic GVHD may follow the acute syndrome or may
Immune deficiencies can be divided into primary (or con-
occur insidiously. Patients develop skin lesions resem-
bling those of systemic sclerosis (discussed earlier) and
manifestations mimicking other autoimmune disorders.
which may arise as complications of cancers, infections,
 malnutrition, or side effects of imununosuppression, irra-
Because GVHD is mediated by T lymphocytes con-
diation, or cheimotherapy for cancer and other diseases.
tained in the transplanted donor cells, depletion of donor
Immunodeficiencies
are
manifested
clinically
by
T cells before transplantation virtually eliminates the
increased infections, which may be newly acquired or
disease. This approach, however, has proven to be a mixed
reactivation of latent infections. The primary imnunode-
blessing: GVHD is aimeliorated, but the recurrence of
ficiency syndromes are accidents of nature that provide
tumor in leukeimic patients as well as the incidence of graft
valuable insights into soine of the molecules critical in the
failures and EBV-related B-cell lymphoima increase.
It
development of the imunune system. Paradoxically, several
seems that the multifaceted T cells not only mediate GVHD
immunodeficiencies also are associated with autoimmune
but also are required for engraftment of the transplanted
disorders, perhaps because the deficiency results in loss of
HSCs, suppression of EBV-infected B-cell clones, and
regulatory imechanisims or persistence of infections that
control of leukeimia cells.
 promote autoimnunity. Here we briefly discuss the inore
important and best-defined primary immunodeficiencies,
immune Deficiencies
to be followed by a more detailed description of acquired
These are often of prolonged duration in recipients of HSC
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), the imost devastating
transplants. Anong the many reasons for this impairment
example of secondary imnunodeficiency.
is the slow reconstitution of the adaptive imumune system
(derived from donor HSC), after the recipient's immune
Primary (Inherited) Immunodeficiencies
system is destroyed or suppressed to allow the graft to
1o papaau aq Aeur ie suou Auu a unq a
Primary immunodeficiency diseases are inherited genetic
immune reconstitution, recipients are susceptible to a
disorders that impair mechanisms of innate immunity
variety of infections, mostly with viruses, such as CMV and
 (phagocytes, NK cells, or complement) or the humoral
EBV.
and/or cellular arms of adaptive immunity (mediated by
 B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes, respectively). These
immunodeficiencies are usually detected  in  infancy.
between 6 months and 2 years of age, the telltale signs
SUMMARY
being susceptibility to recurrent infections. With advances
RECOGNITION AND REJECTION OF
in genetic analyses, the mutations responsible for many of
TRANSPLANTS
these diseases are now known (Fig. 5.36). Here we present
selected examples of immunodeficiencies, beginning with
· Rejection of solid organ transplants is initiated mainly by host
the more common defects in the maturation and activation
T cells that recognize the foreign HLA antigens of the graft,
of B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes, followed by disor-
either directly (on APCs in the graft) or indirectly (after uptake
ders of innate immunity.
and presentation by host APCs).
· Types and mechanisms of rejection of solid organ grafts are as
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
follows:
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) spans a con-
+ Hyperacute rejection: Preformed anti-donor antibodies bind 
stellation of genetically distinct syndromes, all having in
to graft endothelium immediately after transplantation,
common impaired development of mature T lympho-
leading to thrombosis, ischemic damage, and rapid graft 
failure.
cytes and/or B lymphocytes and defects in both humoral
 and cell-mediated immunity. Affected infants present
+ Acute celuior rejection: T cells destroy graft parenchyma (and
with thrush (oral candidiasis), severe diaper rash, and
failure to thrive. Some infants develop a generalized
+ Acute antibody-mediated (humoral) rejection:Antibodies damage
rash shortly after birth because maternal T cells are trans-
 graft vasculature.
ferred across the placenta and attack the fetus, causing
 Chronic rejection: Dominated by arteriosclerosis, this type is
GVHD. Children with SCID are extreimely susceptible to
caused by T cell activation and antibodies. The T cells may
recurrent, severe infections by a wide range of pathogens,
secrete cytokines that induce proliferation of vascular
including Candida albicans, Pneumocystis jiroueci, Pseucomo-
smooth muscle cells, and the antibodies cause endothelial
ras, cytomegalovirus, varicella, and a whole host of bacte-
injury. The vascular lesions and T cell reactions cause paren-
ria. Without HSC transplantation, death occurs within the
chymal fibrosis.
 Treatment of graft rejection relies on immunosuppressive
first year of life. The overall prevalence of the disease is
approximately 1 in 65,000 to 1 in 100,000, but it is 20 to
a ah asuet sasuodsau aunww yau yym 'shnp
+ Transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) requires
30
 times more frequent in soime Native American
 populations.
careful matching of donor and recipient and is often compli-
cated by graft-vs-host disease (GVHD) and immune deficiency.
 Despite the coimmon clinical manifestations, of different
forms of SCID the underlying defects are quite varied.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Immunodeficiency Syndromes
169
BONE MARROW
THYMUS
 Pluripotent stem cell
ADA
deficiency
Pro-B cell
Pro-T cell
Common
X-linked SCID
(cytokine  chain)
 myeloid-lymphoid 
progenitor
Pre-B cell
Immature T cell 
IgM
T-cell ~
 X-linked
heavy
receptor
Di George syndrome
agammaglobulinemia
chain
(BTK)
MHC class Il
deficiency
CD40L
IgM-
CD4+ T cell
Mature T cells
IgD--
Hyper-lgM syndrome
Immature B cell
(CD40L)
CD8+
CD4+
CVID
lgA
deficiency
IgM
IgG 
lgA s
IgE
Mature B cells
Fig. 5.36 Primary irmmune deficiency diseases. Shown are the principal pathways of lymphocyte development and the blocks in these pathways in selected
primary irmmune deficiency diseases. The affected genes are indicated in parentheses for some of the disorders. ADA, Adenosine deaminase; CD40L, CD40
ligand (also known as CDI54); CvID, common variable immunodeficiency; SCID, severe combined irmmunodeficiency.
Often, the defect resides in the T-cell coimpartinent, with a
recombinase responsible for the rearrangement of lym-
 secondary impairiment of humoral imnunity. Two major
phocyte antigen-receptor genes.
forms are described next.
 X-linked SCID. Approximately half of the cases of SCID
MORPHOLOGY
are X-linked; these are caused by mutations in the
gene encoding the common y (yc) chain shared by the
The histologic findings in SCID depend on the underlying defect.
receptors for the cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and
In the two most common forms (yc mutation and ADA defi-
IL-15. Of these cytokines, defective IL-7 signaling is the
ciency), the thymus is small and devoid of lymphoid cells. In
most important underlying basis of SCID because this
 X-linked SCiD, the thymus contains lobules of undifferentiated 
cytokine is responsible for stimulating the survival and
epithelial cells resembling fetal thymus, whereas in SCID caused
expansion of imnature B and T cell precursors in the
by ADA deficiency, remnants of Hassall's corpuscles can be found.
generative lyimphoid organs.
'im se sseidodsy aue sanss pioudu yauo 'sasasip yrog ul
Autosomal recessive SCID. Another 40% to 50% of SCID
with marked depletion ofT cell areas and in some cases both T
cases follow autosomal recessive pattern of inheri-
cell and B cell zones.
tance, with approximately half of these caused by
mutations in adenosine deaminase (ADA), an enzyme
Currently, HSC transplantation is the mainstay of treat-
 involved in purine metabolism. ADA deficiency results
 ment. X-linked SCID is the first disease in which gene
in accumulation of adenosine and deoxyadenosine tri-
therapy has been successful. For gene therapy, a normal c
phosphate metabolites, which inhibit DNA synthesis
 gene is expressed using a viral vector in HSCs taken froim
and are toxic to lymphocytes. Other autosomal recessive
patients, and the cells are then transplanted back into the
forins of SCID result variously from defects in another
patients. The clinical experience is simall, but soime patients
purine metabolic pathway, primary failure of class II
have shown reconstitution of their imumune systeims for
MHC expression, or mutations in genes encoding the
several years after therapy. Unfortunately, however, about
http://ebooksmedicine.net
170
CHAPTER5D
Diseases of the Immune System
20% of patients receiving a first-generation viral vector
there they can disseininate to the nervous system via the
developed T cell acute lymphoblastic leukeimia (T-ALL),
blood. Thus, imnunization with live poliovirus carries the
 e rnd s ro sp a 
risk for paralytic poliomyelitis, and infections with echovi-
gene therapy. The uncontrolled T-cell proliferation is likely
rus can cause fatal encephalitis. For similar reasons, Giardia
the result of the virus integrating into the genoime close to
lamblia, an intestinal protozoan that is norimally resisted by
an oncogene, leading to the activation of the oncogene, and
secreted IgA, causes persistent infections in individuals
possibly also because of the growth advantage conferred
with this disorder. Many intracellular viral, fungal, and
by the introduced norimal c gene. Current trials are using
protozoal infections are handled quite well by the intact T
new vectors with safety features built in. Patients with
cell-imediated imnunity. For unclear reasons, autoimmune
ADA deficiency also have been treated with HSC trans-
diseases (such as rheumatoid arthritis and dermatomyosi
plantation and, more recently, with adiministration of the
tis) occur in as many as 35% of patients with this disease.
enzyime or gene therapy involving the introduction of a
The treatment of X-linked agammaglobulinemia is
norimal ADA gene into T-cell precursors.
replacement therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) from pooled human serum.
X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia
X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), or Bruton disease,
DiGeorge Syndrome (Thymic Hypoplasia)
 is characterized by the failure of pre-B cells to differenti-
ate into mature B cells and, as the name implies, a resul-
thymic development resulting in deficient T-cell matu-
tant absence of antibodies (gamma globulin) in the blood.
ration. T cells are absent in the lymph nodes, spleen, and
 It is one of the more coimnon forims of primary imimuno-
peripheral blood, and infants with this defect are extreimely
deficiency, occurring at a frequency of about 1 in 100,000
vulnerable to viral, fungal, and protozoal infections.
male infants. During normal B-cell maturation, immuno-
Patients also are susceptible to infection with intracellu-
globulin (Ig) heavy chain genes are rearranged first, fol-
lar bacteria, because of defective T cell-mediated immu-
lowed by light chain genes. At each stage, signals are
 nity. B cells and serum immunoglobulins are generally
received froim the expressed components of the antigen
unaffected.
receptor that drive maturation to the next stage; these
 The disorder is a consequence of a developimental
signals act as quality controls, to ensure that the correct
malforimation affecting the third and fourth pharyngeal
receptor proteins are being produced. In XLA, B-cell matu-
pouches, structures that give rise to the thyimus, parathy-
ration stops after the initial heavy chain gene rearrange-
roid glands, and portions of the face and aortic arch. Thus,
ment because of mutations in a tyrosine kinase that is
in addition to the thymic and T-cell defects, there may be
associated with the pre-B-cell receptor and is involved in
parathyroid gland hypoplasia, resulting in hypocalceimic
pre-B-cell signal transduction. This kinase is called Brutor
tetany, as well as additional midline developmental abnor-
tyrosine kirase (BTK). When BTK is nonfunctional, the pre-
 malities. In 90% of cases of DiGeorge syndrome, there is
B-cell receptor cannot signal the cells to proceed along the
a deletion affecting chromosoimal region 22qll, discussed
maturation pathway. As a result, Ig light chains are not
in Chapter 7. Transplantation of thyimic tissue has suc-
produced, and the complete Ig molecule containing heavy
cessfully treated soime affected infants. In patients with
and light chains cannot be assembled and transported to
 partial defects, imnunity may improve spontaneously
the cell meimbrane, although free heavy chains can be
with age.
found in the cytoplasim. Because the BTK gene is on the X
chromosome, the disorder is only seen in males. Sporadic
Hyper-igM Syndrome
cases with the saime features have been described in
This disease is characterized by the production of normal
females, possibly due to mutations in other genes that
(or even supranormal) levels of IgM antibodies and
function in the saime pathway.
decreased levels of the IgG, IgA, and IgE isotypes; the
Classically, the disease is characterized by a profound
underlying defect is an inability of T cells to activate B
reduction in the number of B cells in the blood and second-
cells. As discussed earlier, many of the functions of CD4+
ary lymphoid organs and an absence of germinal centers
helper T cells require the engagement of CD40 on B cells,
 pue siaqunu las-i susio asa ui shas euseid pu
 macrophages, and dendritic cells by CD40L (also called
responses may be norimal.
CD154) expressed on antigen-activated T cells. This inter-
 [un juaredde auosaq jou saop Alensn aseasip au
about 6 months of age, as maternal antibodies that were
in the B cells, and stimulates the microbicidal functions of
transported via the placenta are depleted. In most cases,
macrophages. Approxiimately 70% of individuals with
recurrent bacterial infections of the respiratory tract, such as
hyper-IgM syndroime have the X-linked forim of the disease,
acute and chronic pharyngitis, sinusitis, otitis media, bron-
caused by mutations in the gene encoding CD40L located
chitis, and pneumonia, call attention to the underlying
on Xq26. In the remaining patients, the disease is inherited
immune defect. Almost always, thecausative organisms are
in an autosoimal recessive pattern caused by loss-of-
Haemophilus influenzae,Streptococus pneumoniae,or Staphy-
function mutations involving either CD40 or an enzyme
Aq pazuosdo Aneuou are e susuero snan snoo
called activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), a DNA-
antibodies and cleared by phagocytosis. Because antibodies
editing enzyme that is required for Ig class switching and
's so  i ro h a
affinity maturation.
individuals with this disease also are susceptible to soime
Patients present with recurrent pyogenic infections
viral infections, especially those caused by enteroviruses.
because of low levels of opsonizing IgG antibodies. Those
These viruses infect the gastrointestinal tract, and from
with CD40L mutations also are susceptible to pneuimonia
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Immunodeficiency Syndromes
171
caused by the intracellular organisim Preumocystis jiroveci,
(but unexplained) association with autoiimmune diseases.
because CD40L-nediated macrophage activation, a key
The pathogenesis of IgA deficiency seens to involve a
reaction of cell-imediated immunity, is compromised.
block in the teriminal differentiation of IgA-secreting B cells
Occasionally, the IgM antibodies react with blood cells,
to plasma cells; IgM and IgG subclasses of antibodies are
giving rise to autoimmune hemolytic aneimia, thrombocy-
present in norimal or even supranorimal levels. The molecu-
topenia, and neutropenia. In older patients, there may be
lar basis for this defect is not understood.
a proliferation of IgM-producing plasima cells that infiltrate
the mucosa of the gastrointestinal tract.
Other Defects in Lymphocyte Activation
Many rare cases of lyimphocyte activation defects have
Common Variable Immunodeficiency
been described that affect antigen receptor signaling and
various biocheinical pathways. Defects in Tl responses
passes a heterogeneous group of disorders in which the
are associated with atypical mycobacterial infections, and
common feature is hypogammaglobulinemia, generally
defective T17 responses are the cause of chronic mucocu-
affecting all the antibody classes but sometimes only
taneous candidiasis as well as bacterial infections of the
IgG. The diagnosis of common variable immunodeficiency
skin (a disorder called Job syndrome).
is based on exclusion of other well-defined causes
of
decreased antibody production. The estimated prevalence
Immunodeficiencies Associated With Systemic Diseases
of the disease is about 1 in 50,000.
In some inherited systemic disorders, inmune deficiency
Although most patients have normal numbers of mature
is a proiminent clinical problem. Two representative exam-
Bcells, plasma cells are absent, suggesting a block in B-cell
ples of such diseases are described next.
differentiation. In keeping with this idea, B cell areas of the
Wiskott-Altrich syrdrome is an X-linked disease charac-
lymphoid tissues (i.e., lymphoid follicles in nodes, spleen,
terized by thrombocytopenia, eczeima, and a marked
and gut) tend to be hyperplastic. The enlargement of B cell
vulnerability to recurrent infection that results in early
areas may reflect incomplete activation, such that B cells
death. The thyimus is norinal, at least early in the disease
can proliferate in response to antigen but do not differenti-
course, but there is progressive loss of T lymphocytes 
ate into antibody-producing plasma cells. The defective
from the blood and the T cell zones (paracortical areas)
antibody production has been variably attributed to intrin-
of lymph nodes, with variable defects in cellular immu-
sic B-cell defects, deficient T-cell help, or excessive T-cell
nity. Patients do not make antibodies to polysaccharide
suppressive activity. Paradoxically, these patients 
are
antigens, and the response to protein antigens is poor.
prone to develop a variety of autoimnune disorders
IgM levels in the serum are low, but levels of IgG are
(hemolytic aneimia, pernicious anemia) as well as lym-
usually normal and, paradoxically, IgA and IgE are
phoid tumors. Comnon variable imnunodeficiency imay
often elevated. The syndrome is caused by mutations in
be genetic or acquired. Different genetic causes have been
an X-linked gene encoding Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
discovered, including mutations in a receptor for BAFF, a
protein (WASP). WASP belongs to a family of signaling
cytokine that proimotes the survival and differentiation of
proteins that link meimbrane receptors, such as antigen
B cells, and in a molecule called ICOS (inducible costimula-
receptors, to cytoskeletal elements. The WASP protein
tor), a homologue of CD28 that contributes to the function
is involved in cytoskeleton-dependent responses,
 of T follicular helper cells. However, in the majority of
including cell migration and signal transduction, but
cases, the genetic basis is unknown.
how this contributes to the functions of lymphocytes
 Patients typically present with recurrent sinopulmonary
and platelets is unclear. The only treatnent is HSC
bacterial infections. About 20% of patients have recurrent
transplantation.
herpesvirus infections, and serious enterovirus infections
 Ataxia telangiectasia is an autosomal-recessive disorder
causing meningoencephalitis also may occur. Individuals
characterized by abnorimal gait (ataxia), vascular mal-
with this disorder also are prone to the development of
formations
(telangiectases),
 neurologic
deficits,
persistent diarrhea caused by G. lamblia. In contrast to
X-linked agamnaglobulineimia, coinnon variable iimnu-
The imununologic defects are of variable severity and
nodeficiency affects both sexes equally, and the onset of
 Imay affect both B cells and T cells. The inost proiminent
symptoms is later, in childhood or adolescence. As in
humoral immune abnormalities are defective produc-
X-linked agaimnaglobulinemia, these patients have a high
tion of isotype-switched antibodies, mainly IgA and
frequency of autoimmune diseases (approximately 20%),
IgG2. The T-cell defects are usually less pronounced,
including rheunatoid arthritis. The risk for lyimphoid
Imalignancy also is increased, and an increase in gastric
experience upper and lower respiratory tract bacterial
cancer has been reported.
infections, multiple autoimnune phenomena, and
increasingly frequent cancers, particularly lymphoid
Isolated igA Deficiency
tumors, with advancing age. The gene responsible for
This is the most coimnon primary immune deficiency
this disorder encodes a protein called ATM (ataxia tel-
disease, affecting about 1 in 700 whites. As noted previ-
angiectasia mutated), a sensor of DNA daimage that
ously, IgA is the major immunoglobulin in mucosal secre-
activates cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis in cells
 tions and is thus involved in defending the airways and
with daimaged DNA. Lack of ATM also leads to abnor-
the gastrointestinal tract. Weakened mucosal defenses due
malities in antigen gene recoimbination (and therefore
to IgA deficiency predispose patients to recurrent sinopul-
defects in the generation of antigen receptors) and
monary infections and diarrhea. There also is a significant
 abnorimal antibody isotype switching.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
172
CHAPTER5D
 Diseases of the Immune System
 Defects in Innate Immunity
appears at sites of infection if the initial neutrophil
defense is inadequate. These collections of activated
Inherited defects in the early innate iiminune response typi-
 macrophages form granulomas in an effort to wall off
cally affect leukocyte functions or the complement system
the microbes.
and lead to increased vulnerability to infections (Table
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is characterized by defective
5.13). Soime defects whose molecular bases are defined are
fusion of phagosomes and lysosoimes, resulting in defec-
sumnarized next.
tive phagocyte function and susceptibility to infections.
The main leukocyte abnorimalities are neutropenia,
Defects in Leukocyte Function
defective degranulation, and delayed microbial killing.
Leukocyte achesion deficiencies (LADs) stem from inher-
The affected leukocytes contain giant granules, which
ited defects in adhesion molecules that impair leukocyte
ane pue sieas poona laqdad un uas Apean ane
recruitiment to sites of infection, resulting in recurrent
thought to result from aberrant phagolysosome fusion.
bacterial infections. LADl is caused by defects in the βz
In addition, there are abnormalities in melanocytes
chain that is shared by the integrins LFA-1 and Mac-1,
(leading to albinisin), cells of the nervous systeim (asso-
while LAD2 is caused by a defect in a fucosyl transferase
ciated with nerve defects), and platelets (causing bleed-
that is required to synthesize functional sialyl-Lewis X,
ing disorders). The gene associated with this disorder
 the ligand for E- and P-selectins.
encodes a large cytosolic protein called LYST, which is
Chronic granulomatous disease results from inherited
believed to regulate lysosomal traffcking.
defects in the genes encoding coimponents of phagocyte
TLR defects are rare but informative. Mutations in TLR3,
oxidase, the phagolysosomal enzyme that generates
a receptor for viral RNA, result in recurrent herpes
ROS such as superoxide (O), resulting in defective bac-
simplex encephalitis, and mutations in MYD88,
，an
terial killing and susceptibility to recurrent bacterial
adaptor protein needed for signaling downstream of
infection. The name of this disease coimes froim the
 multiple TLRs, are associated with destructive bacterial
macrophage-rich chronic inflammatory reaction that
pneumonias.
Deficiencies Affecting the Complement System
· Deficiency of several complement components have been
Table 5.13 Common Inherited Immune Deficiencies of
 described, with C2 deficiency being the most comnon.
Phagocytic Leukocytes and the Complement System
Deficiencies of C2 or C4, early coimponents of the clas-
Disease
Defect
sical pathway, are associated with increased bacterial or
viral infections; however, many patients are asymptom-
Defects in Leukocyte Function
atic, presumably because the alternative complement
 Leukocyte adhesion
 Defective leukocyte adhesion because of 
pathway is able to control most infections. Surprisingly,
deficiency I
mutations in the β chain of CDII/
CD18 integrins
in soime patients with C2, C4, or Clq deficiency, the
dominant manifestation is an SLE-like autoinimune
 Leukocyte adhesion
 Defective leukocyte adhesion because of 
disease, possibly because these factors are involved in
deficiency 2
mutations in fucosyl transferase
clearance of imnune coimplexes. Deficiency of C3 is
required for synthesis of sialylated 
oligosaccharide (receptor for selectins)
 rare. It is associated with severe pyogenic infections as
 Decreased leukocyte functions because of
well as imnune complex-imediated glomerulonephritis.
Chédiak-Higashi
syndrome
 mutations affecting protein involved in 
Deficiency of the late components C5 to C9 results in
 ysosomal membrane traffic
 increased susceptibility to recurrent neisserial (gonococ-
Chronic granulomatous
 Decreased oxidative burst 
 cal and meningococcal) infections, as Neisseria bacteria
disease
have thin cell walls and are especially susceptible to the
 X-linked 
 Phagocyte oxidase (membrane
lytic actions of compleiment.
component,
Defects in complement regulatory proteins result in exces-
Autosomal recessive 
 Phagocyte oxidase (cytoplasmic
sive inflamnation or cell injury. A deficiency of C1
components)
inhibitor (C1 INH) gives rise to an autosomal domi-
nant disorder called hereditary angioedema, C1 INH is
Myeloperoxidase
 Decreased microbial killing because of
deficiency
defective MPO-HO2 system
  sd  o r 
 Defects in the Com
plement System
and coagulation factor XIl, both of which are involved
C2, C4 deficiency
- se qns sapndad aanoosa j uonnpond ar u
Defective classical pathway activation;
 results in reduced resistance to
dykinin. Therefore, defective C1 INH activity leads
infection and reduced clearance of 
to over-production of bradykinin, which is a potent
immune complexes 
vasodilator. Affected patients have episodes of edema
C3 deficiency
 Defects in all complerment functions 
affecting skin and mucosal surfaces such as the larynx
 Deficiency of 
Excessive complement activation; clinical
and the gastrointestinal tract. Acquired deficiencies of
complement
 syndromes include angioedema, 
other compleiment regulatory proteins are the cause of
regulatory proteins
 paroxysmal hemoglobinuria, and others 
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (Chapter 12), while
Modified in part from Gallin JI: Disorders of phagocytic cells In Gallin Jl, et al, edicors:
 d s  o p sas a
Mfammation:basi prinapes and dinical correlates, ed 2, New York, 1992, Raven Press,
stem from inherited defects in complement regulatory
pp 860-861.
proteins.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
173
Table 5.14 Causes of Secondary (Acquired)
SUMMARY
Immunodeficiencies
PRIMARY (INHERITED) IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
Cause
Mechanism
DISEASES
 Human immunodeficiency
Depletion of CD4+ helper T cells 
· These diseases are caused by inherited mutations in genes
virus infection
involved in lymphocyte maturation or function, or in innate
Irradiation and dhemotherapy
Decreased bone marrow precursors
immunity.
treatments for cancer
for all leukocytes
+ Some of the more common disorders affecting lymphocytes
 Involvement of bone marrow 
Reduced leukocyte development due
and the adaptive immune response are:
by cancers (metastases,
 to displacement of progenitors 
+ X-SCID: Failure ofT cell and B cell maturation; mutation in
leukemias)
the common y chain of a cytokine receptor, leading to failure 
 Protein-calorie malnutrition 
 Metabolic derangerments inhibit
 of IL-7 signaling and defective lymphopoiesis
lymphocyte maturation and 
+ Autosomal recessive SCID: Failure ofT cell development; sec-
function
 ondary defect in antibody responses; approximately 50% of
Removal of spleen
Decreased phagocytosis of microbes
cases caused by mutation in the gene encoding ADA, leading 
to accumulation of toxic metabolites during lymphocyte
 maturation and proliferation
· X-linked ogammaglobulinemia (XLA): Failure of B-cell matura-
infections, secondary neoplasms, and neurologic mani-
tion, absence of antibodies; caused by mutations in the BTK
festations. Although AIDS was first recognized as a dis-
 gene, which encodes B-cell tyrosine kinase, required for
tinct entity as recently as the 1980s, it has become one of
the most devastating afflictions in history. Of the estimated
maturation  signals  from  the  pre-B-cell and   B-cell 
36 million HIV-infected individuals worldwide, about 70%
receptors
are in Africa and 20% in Asia. More than 25 million deaths
+ Di George syndrome: Failure of development of thymus, with
T cell deficiency
are attributable to HIV/AIDS, with 1 to 2 million deaths
+ X-linked hyper-igM syndrome: Failure to produce isotype-
 oped, but the infection continues to spread in parts of the
 switched high-affinity antibodies (lgG, IgA, IgE); mutations in 
genes  encoding  CD4oL  or  activation-induced  cytosine
world where these therapies are not widely available, and
in some African countries, more than 30% of the popula-
deaminase
 Common variabie immunodeficiency: Defects in antibody pro-
 tion is HIV infected. Despite the reimarkable progress in
drug therapy of AIDS, cure is still a distant goal. The
duction; cause unknown in most cases.
· Selective lgA deficiency: Failure of IgA production; cause
advent of these drugs also raises its own tragic concern;
unknown
because more individuals are living with HIV, the risk of
· Deficiencies in innate immunity include defects of leukocyte
spreading the infection will increase if vigilance is relaxed.
function, complement, and innate immune receptors.
The enormous medical and social burden of AIDS has
+ These diseases present clinically with increased susceptibility
led to an explosion of research aiimed at understanding this
to infections in early life.
 modern plague and its reimarkable ability to cripple host
defenses. The literature on HIV and AIDS is vast. Here we
summarize the currently available data on the epidemiol-
ogy, pathogenesis, and clinical features of HIV infection.
Epidemiology
Secondary (Acquired) Immunodeficiencies
Epideimiologic studies in the United States have identified
 Secondary (acquired) immune deficiencies may be encoun-
five groups of adults at high risk for developing AIDS.
tered in individuals with cancer, diabetes and other meta-
 Homosexual or bisexual men constitute the largest
bolic diseases, malnutrition, chronic infection, and in
group, accounting for about 50% of the reported cases.
patients receiving chemotherapy or radiation therapy for
This includes about 5% who also are intravenous drug
cancer, or immunosuppressive drugs to prevent graft rejec-
abusers.
tion or to treat autoimunune diseases (Table 5.14). As a
 Heterosexual contacts of meimbers of other high-risk
groups constituted about 20% of infections from 2001 to
common than the disorders of primary genetic origin. Dis-
2004. In Africa and Asia, this is by far the largest group
cussed next is perhaps the most important secondary
 of patients with new infections, imost of which occur in
immune deficiency disease, AIDS, which has become one
women who are infected by male partners.
of the great scourges of humankind.
 Intravenous drug abusers with no previous history of
homosexuality represented about 20% of infected indi-
viduals and 9% of new cases in 2009.
ACOUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY
 Surviving hemophiliacs, especially those who received
SYNDROME
large aimounts of factor Vlll or factor IX concentrates 
before 1985, make up about 0.5% of all cases.
AIDS is a disease caused by the retrovirus human immu-
 Other recipients of HIV-infected whole blood or compo-
-od Aq paziaoeieuo s! pue (AH) snia Aouaioyapou
 nents (e.g. platelets, plasma) account for about 1% of
found immunosuppression that leads to opportunistic
patients.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
74
CHAPTER5D
 Diseases of the Immune System
· HIV infection of the newborn. Close to 2% of all AIDS
States has virtually elininated mother-to-child trans-
 cases occur in this pediatric population. The vast major-
mission, but it reimains a major source of infection in
ity acquires the infection by transimission of the virus
areas where these treatiments are not available.
from mother to child (discussed later).
· In approximately 5% of cases, the risk factors cannot be
 Much concern has arisen in the lay public and among
 determined.
healthcare workers about the spread of HIV infection
outside the high-risk groups. Extensive studies indicate
 It should be apparent from the preceding discussion
that HIV infection cannot be transimitted by casual per-
that transmission of HIV occurs under conditions that
sonal contact in the household, workplace, or school.
facilitate exchange of blood or body fluids containing the
 ss a si s as  
virus or virus-infected cells. The three major routes of
transimission of HIV infection to healthcare workers, an
transimission are sexual contact, parenteral inoculation,
extreimely simall but definite risk is present. Seroconversion
and passage of the virus from infected mothers to their
has been documented after accidental needle-stick injury
newborns.
 or exposure of nonintact skin to infected blood in labora-
· Sexual transmission is the dominant mode of infection
tory accidents. After needle-stick accidents, the risk for
worldwide, accounting for more than 75% of all cases
seroconversion is believed to be about 0.3%, and anti-
of HIV transimission. Because most infected individuals
retroviral therapy given within 24 to 48 hours of a needle
in the United States are imen who have sex with imen,
stick can greatly reduce the risk of infection. By compari-
sexual transinission has mainly occurred aimong homo-
son, approximately 30% of those accidentally exposed to
 sexual men. The virus is carried in the semen, and it
hepatitis B-infected blood become seropositive.
enters the recipient's body through abrasions in rectal
or oral mucosa or by direct contact with mucosal lining
Properties of HIV
cells. Viral spread occurs in two ways: (1) direct inocula-
tion into the blood vessels breached by trauma and (2)
 HIV is a nontransforming human retrovirus belonging to
infection of DCs or CD4+ cells within the mucosa. Sexual
the lentivirus family. Included in this group are feline
transimission of HIV is enhanced by coexisting sexually
immunodeficiency virus, simian immunodeficiency virus,
 transimitted diseases, especially those associated with
visna virus of sheep, bovine imnunodeficiency virus, and
genital ulceration.
the equine infectious aneimia virus.
 Parenteral trarsmission of HIV has occurred in intrave-
 Two genetically different but related forms of HIV,
nous drug abusers, hemophiliacs who received contam-
called HIV-1 and HIV-2, have been isolated froin patients.
inated factor VIll and factor IX concentrates, and other
HIV-1 is the most coiminon type associated with AIDS in
recipients of contaminated blood products. In the United
the United States, Europe, and Central Africa, whereas
HIV-2 causes a similar disease principally in West Africa
only among intravenous drug users. Transimission
and India. The ensuing discussion relates primarily to
occurs by sharing of needles, syringes, and other para-
HIV-1, but is generally applicable to HIV-2 as well.
phernalia contaminated with' HIV-containing blood.
Transimission of HIV by transfusion of blood or blood
Structure of HIV
 products, such as lyophilized factor VIIl and factor IX
Similar to most retroviruses, the HIV-1 virion is spherical
concentrates, has been virtually eliminated by public
and contains an electron-dense, cone-shaped core sur-
health measures, including screening of donated blood
rounded by a lipid envelope derived froim the host cell
and plasma for antibody to HIV, stringent purity criteria
Imembrane (Fig. 5.37). The virus core contains (1) the major
for factor VIII and factor IX preparations, and screening
 () 6d / 4d uaond pisdoaou (z) /zd uaod pisd
of donors on the basis of history. An extreimely sinall
copies of viral genomic RNA; and (4) the three viral
risk for acquiring AIDS through transfusion of serone-
enzymes (protease, reverse transcriptase, and integrase).
gative blood persists, because a recently infected indi-
 p24 is the most abundant viral antigen and is the antigen
vidual may be antibody-negative. Currently, this risk is
-saju AIH asouoeip oi pasn Apapim Aesse ue Aq paioaiap
estimated to be 1 in more than 2 million units of blood
tion. The viral core is surrounded by a matrix protein called
transfused.
p17, which lies underneath the virion envelope. Studding
·As alluded to earlier, mother-to-infant trarsmission is the
the viral envelope are two viral glycoproteins, gp120 and
 Imajor cause of pediatric AIDS. Infected mothers can
gp41, which are critical for HIV infection of cells.
transimit the infection to their offspring by three routes:
The HIV-1 RNA genome contains the gag. pol, and enu
Aaap bunp (z) (peads (euaedsuen Aq orain un (1)
genes, which are typical of retroviruses. The products of
through an infected birth canal; and (3) after birth by
the gag and pol genes are large precursor proteins that are
ingestion of breast imilk. Of these, transmission during
cleaved by the viral protease to yield the mature proteins.
birth (intrapartum) and in the immediate period there-
 In addition to these three standard retroviral genes, HIV
after (peripartum) is considered to be the most common
contains several accessory genes, including tat, rev, vif, nef.
Imode in the United States. The reported transimission
opr, and opu, which regulate the synthesis and assembly of
rates vary froim 7% to 49% in different parts of the
infectious viral particles and the pathogenicity of the virus.
world. Higher risk of transimission is associated with
Molecular analysis of different HIV-1 isolates has
high maternal viral load and low CD4+ T cell counts as
revealed considerable variability in certain parts of the
well as chorioamnionitis. Fortunately, anti-retroviral
-red aposua e saouanbas uim Asou 'aou e
therapy given to infected pregnant woimen in the United
ticular regions of the envelope glycoproteins. Because the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
175
gp41
p17 matrix
Infection of Cells by HIV
gp120 ~
HIV infects cells by using the CD4 molecule as a receptor
 and various chemokine receptors as coreceptors (see Fig.
5.38). Binding of HIV gp120 to CD4 is essential for infection
p24 capsid
and accounts for the tropisim of the virus for CD4+ T cells
Lipid bilayer~
and for CD4+ monocytes/ macrophages and DCs. However,
Integrase -
binding to CD4 is not sufficient for infection, as HIV gp120
also must bind to other cell surface molecules (coreceptors)
Protease
for entry into the cell. Chemokine receptors, particularly
RNA-
CCR5 and CXCR4, serve this role. HIV isolates can be dis-
tinguished by their use of these coreceptors: R5 strains use
Reverse
CCR5, X4 strains use CXCR4, and some strains (R5X4) are
transcriptase
dual-tropic. R5 strains preferentially infect cells of the
monocyte/macrophage lineage and are thus referred to as
M-tropic, whereas X4 strains are T-tropic, preferentially
infecting T cells, but these distinctions are not absolute.
 Polyimorphisms in the gene encoding CCR5 are associ-
ated with altered susceptibility to HIV infection. About 1%
of white Americans inherit two mutated copies of the
Fig. 5.37 The structure of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1
CCR5 gene and are resistant to R5 HIV isolates. About 20%
virion. The viral particle is covered by a lipid bilayer derived from the host
of individuals are heterozygous for this protective CCR5
allele; these individuals are not protected from AIDS, but
the onset of their disease after infection is delayed. Only
antibody response against HIV-1 is targeted against its
rare homozygotes for the mutation have been found in
envelope, such variability poses probleims for the develop-
African and East Asian populations.
ment of a single-antigen vaccine. Based on genetic varia-
Molecular details of the deadly handshake between HIV
tion, HIV-1 can be divided into three subgroups, designated
glycoproteins and their cell surface receptors have been
M (1major), O (outlier), and N (neither M nor O). Group M
elucidated. The HIV envelope contains two noncovalently
viruses are the most common forim worldwide, and they
associated glycoproteins, surface gp120 and the transimem-
are further divided into several subtypes, or clades, desig-
brane protein gp4l. The initial step in infection is the
nated A through K. Various subtypes differ in their geo-
- 1 on wandoi adoaua oids a jo buu
graphic distribution; for example, subtype B is the most
ecules, which leads to a conforimational change that creates
comumon form in western Europe and the United States,
a new recognition site on gp120 for the coreceptors CCR5
whereas subtype E is the most coimmon clade in Thailand.
 or CXCR4. Binding to the coreceptors induces conforma-
Currently, clade C is the fastest spreading clade world-
tional changes in gp41 that exposes a hydrophobic region
wide, being present in India, Ethiopia, and Southern
called the fusion peptide at the tip of gp4l. This peptide
Africa.
inserts into the cell membrane of the target cells (e.g, T
cells or macrophages), leading to fusion of the virus with
Pathogenesis of HIV Infection and AIDS
the host cell. After fusion, the virus core containing the HIV
 genoime enters the cytoplasim of the cell.
While HIV can infect imany tissues, the two major targets
of HIV infection are the imnune systen and the central
Viral Replication
 nervous system. The effects of HIV infection on each of
Once internalized, the RNA genoime of the virus undergoes 
these two systems are discussed separately.
 reverse transcription, leading to the synthesis of double-
Profound immune deficiency, primarily affecting cell-
stranded compleimentary DNA (cDNA; proviral DNA)
mediated immunity, is the hallmark of AIDS. This results
(see Fig. 5.38). In quiescent T cells, HIV cDNA may remain
chiefly from infection and subsequent loss of CD4+ T cells
in the cytoplasm in a linear episomal form. In dividing T
as well as impaired function of surviving helper T cells and
cells, the cDNA circularizes, enters the nucleus, and is then
other imunune cells. We first describe the mechanisims
integrated into the host genome. After integration, the pro-
involved in viral entry into T cells and macrophages and
virus may be silent for months or years, a forim of latert
the replicative cycle of the virus within cells. This is fol-
infection. Alternatively, proviral DNA may be transcribed,
lowed by a more detailed review of the interaction between
leading to the expression of viral proteins that are required
HIV and its cellular targets.
for the forimation of complete viral particles. HIV infects
memory cells and activated T cells but is inefficient at pro-
Life Cycle of HIV
ductively infecting naive (resting) T cells.
The life cycle of HIV consists of infection of cells, inte-
Completion of the viral life cycle in latently infected
gration of the provirus into the host cell genome, activa-
cells occurs only after cell activation, and in the case of
tion of viral replication, and production and release of
most CD4+ T cells, virus activation results in death of the
infectious virus (Fig. 5.38). The molecules and mecha-
infected cells. Activation of T cells by antigens or cyto-
nisims of each of these steps are understood in considerable
detail.
NF-kB, which moves from the cytosol into the nucleus. In
http://ebooksmedicine.net
176
CHAPTER５
Diseases of the Immune System
VIRUS
gp120
Conformational
gp120, CD4
 gp41 membrane
Fusion of HIV membrane
CD4 binding
change
bind CCR-5
 penetration
with host cell membrane:
Membrane
 entry of viral genome 
fusion
into cytoplasm
rgp41
gp120
VIRUS ENTRY
 Cytokine
ISs
Cytokine
receptor
CD4  Chemokine
HIV RNA genome
receptor
Reverse transcriptase-mediated synthesis of proviral DNA
Cytokine activation
of cell; transcription 
of HIv genome;
transport of viral
VIRUS
RNAs to cytoplasm
Integration of provirus 
 REPLICATION
 into host cell genome
 Synthesis of HIV proteins:
 assembly of virion core
structure
HIV DNA
HIV core
HIV RNA
provirus
structure
 transcript
Nucleus
VIRUS
RELEASE
New HIV
virion
 Budding and release
 of mature virion
   a      s s   n    s         
two. Nature 384:117, 1996.)
the nucleus, NF-kB binds to regulatory sequences within
for recurrent infections, which leads to increased lympho-
cyte activation and production of proinflamnatory cyto-
immune mediators, promoting their transcription. The
kines. These, in turn, stimulate more HIV production, loss
 long-terminal-repeat sequences that flank the HIV genome
of additional CD4+ T cells, and more infections. Thus, it is
also contain NF-kB-binding sites, so binding of the tran-
easy to see how HIV infection sets up a vicious cycle that
scription factor activates viral gene expression. Iimagine
culiminates in inexorable destruction of the immune
now a latently infected CD4+ cell that encounters an envi-
systeim.
ronmental antigen. Induction of NF-kB in such a cell (a
physiologic response) activates the transcription of HIV
Mechanism ofTCell Depletion in HIV Infection
proviral DNA (a pathologic outcome) and leads ultimately
Loss of CD4+ T cells is mainly caused by the direct cyto-
to the production of virions and to cell death. Further-
 pathic effects of the replicating virus. In infected indi-
more, TNF and other cytokines produced by activated
viduals, approximately 100 billion new viral particles are
 macrophages also stimulate NF-kB activity and thus lead
produced and 1 to 2 billion CD4+ T cells die each day.
to production of HIV RNA. Thus, it seeins that HIV thrives
Death of these cells is a major cause of the relentless, and
when the host T cells and macrophages are physiologically
 eventually profound, T cell immunodeficiency. Up to a
activated, a situation that can be described as "subversion
 point, the imnune system can replace the dying T cells, but
from within." Such activation in vivo may result from anti-
as the disease progresses, renewal of CD4+ T cells cannot
r unau no aq ro as A q uos 
keep up with their loss. Possible mechanisims by which
organisims. HIV-positive individuals are at increased risk
the virus directly kills infected cells include increased
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
177
plasima menbrane permeability associated with budding
 decline greatly, macrophages may be an inportant site of
-s sis ad u sa  sa s j
continued viral replication.
ming fron interference by viral proteins involved in viral
replication.
Dendritic Cells. Mucosal DCs may be infected by the
In addition to direct killing of cells by the virus, other
virus and transport it to regional lymph nodes, where
 mechanisms may contribute to the loss or functional
the virus is transimitted to CD4+ T cells. Follicular DCs in
impairment of T cells. These include:
the germinal centers of lymph nodes also are potential
Chronic activation of uninfected cells, responding to
reservoirs of HIV. Although some follicular DCs may be
HIV itself or to infections that are comnon in individu-
susceptible to HIV infection, most virus particles are found 
als with AIDS, leading to apoptosis of these cells.
 on the surface of their dendritic processes.
●HIV infection of cells inlymphoid organs (spleen, lyimph
nodes, tonsils) causing progressive destruction of the
B Cell Function in HIV Infection. Although B cellscannot
architecture and cellular composition of lymphoid
 be infected by HIV, they may show profound abnorimali-
tissues.
ties. Paradoxically, there is spontaneous B-cell activation
● Fusion of infected and uninfected cells, leading to for-
and  hypergammaglobulineimia in  association with  an
Imation of syncytia (giant cells). In tissue culture the
inability to imount antibody responses to newly encoun-
 s  d  ssa 
tered antigens. The defective antibody responses may be
to CD4 molecules on uninfected T cells, followed
due to lack of T-cell help as well as acquired defects in B
by cell fusion. Fused cells usually die within a few
cells.
hours.
Qualitative defects in T cell function. Even in asymp-
Pathogenesis of Central Nervous System Involvement
tomatic HIV-infected individuals, defects have been
Like the lymphoid system, the nervous system is a target
reported, including a reduction in antigen-induced T
of HIV infection. Macrophages and microglia, cells in the
cell proliferation, a decrease in T1-type responses rela-
CNS that belong to the macrophage lineage, are the pre-
tive to the Th2 type, defects in intracellular signaling.
dominant cell types in the brain that are infected with HIV.
and many more. The loss of Tl responses results in a
It is believed that HIV is carried into the brain by infected
profound deficiency in cell-mediated imnunity. There
monocytes. In keeping with this, the HIV isolates from the
also is a selective loss of the meimory subset of CD4+
brain are almost exclusively M-tropic. The mechanisim of
helper T cells early in the course of disease, which
HIV-induced damage of the brain, however, remains
explains poor recall responses to previously encoun-
obscure. Because neurons are not infected and the extent
tered antigens.
a n  ss o si s o g
Low-level chronic or latent infection of T cells is an
clinicians believe that the neurologic deficit is caused indi-
important feature of HIV infection. Integrated provi-
rectly by viral products and by soluble factors produced
rus, without viral gene expression (latent infection), can
 by infected microglia, such as the cytokines IL-1, TNF, and
persist in cells for months or years. Even with potent anti-
IL-6.
viral therapy, which practically sterilizes the peripheral
blood, latent virus lurks within CD4+ cells (both T cells
 and imnacrophages) in lymph nodes. According to some
SUMMARY
estimates, 0.05% of CD4+ T cells in the lymph nodes are
latently infected. Because most of these CD4+ T cells are
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCYVIRUS LIFE CYCLE 
meinory cells, they are long-lived, with a life span of
AND THE PATHOGENESIS OF AIDS
Jo alasan juaisisad e apraond sn pue siean o suuou 
+ Virus entry into celis: Requires CD4 and coreceptors, which are
virus.
receptors for chemokines; involves binding of viral gpl20 and
fusion with the cell mediated by viral gp4l protein; main cel-
HIV infection of Non-T immune Cells
lular targets: CD4+ helper T cells, macrophages, DCs
 In addition to infection and loss of CD4+ T cells, infection
· Virai replication: Integration of provirus genome into host cell
of macrophages and DCs also is important in the patho-
DNA; triggering of viral gene expression by stimuli that acti-
 genesis of HIV infection.
vate infected cells (e.g., infectious microbes, cytokines pro-
duced during normal immune responses)
Macrophages. Similar to T cells, most macrophages
 infected by HIV are found in tissues, and in certain tissues,
+ Progression of infection: Acute infection of mucosal T cells and 
DCs; viremia with dissemination of virus; latent infection of
such as the lungs and brain, as 1many as 10% to 50% of
macrophages are infected.  Although cell division 
cells in lymphoid tissue; continuing viral replication and pro-
lis
gressive loss of CD4+ T cells
required for nuclear entry and replication of most retrovi-
+ Mechanisms of irmmune deficiency:
ruses, HIV-1 can infect and multiply in terminally differ-
+ Loss of CD4+T cells:T cell death during viral replication and
budding (similar to other cytopathic infections); apoptosis
large numbers of virus particles. Even though macro-
occurring as a result of chronic stimulation; decreased thymic
phages allow viral replication, they are quite resistant to
output; functional defects
the cytopathic effects of HIV, in contrast to CD4+ T cells.
+ Defective macrophage and DC functions
Thus, macrophages may be reservoirs of infection, and in
+ Destruction of architecture of lymphoid tissues (late)
late stages of HIV infection, when CD4+ T-cell numbers
http://ebooksmedicine.net
78
CHAPTER５[
 Diseases of the Immune System
Natural History and Course of HlV Infection
HIV disease begins with acute infection, which is only
partly controlled by the host immune response, and
Infection of
advances to chronic progressive infection of peripheral
lymphoid tissues (Figs. 5.39 and 5.40).
mucosal tissues
· Acute phase. Virus typically enters through mucosal
surfaces, and acute (early) infection is characterized by
infection of memory CD4+ T cells (which express
CD4+
Dendritic
CCR5) in mucosal lymphoid tissues, and the death of
T cell
cell {
 many of these infected cells. Because the mucosal
tissues are the largest reservoir of T cells in the body,
 and a major site of residence of memory T cells, this
Death of mucosal
memory CD4+
local loss results in considerable depletion of lympho-
T cells
cytes. At this stage, few infected cells are detectable in
Virus transported
the blood and other tissues.
to lymph nodes
 Mucosal infection is followed by dissemination of
the virus and the development of host immune
responses. DCs in epithelia at sites of virus entry capture
Infection established
the virus and then imigrate into the lymph nodes. Once
 in lymphoid tissues,
in lyimphoid tissues, DCs pass HIV on to CD4+ T cells
e.g., lymph node
through direct cell-cell contact. Within days after the
first exposure to HIV, viral replication can be detected
in lyimph nodes. This replication leads to viremia, during
which high numbers of HIV particles are present in the
 Spread of infection 
throughout the body
Viremia
patient's blood. The virus disseminates throughout the
body and infects helper T cells, macrophages, and DCs
in peripheral lymphoid tissues.
Within 3 to 6 weeks after initial infection, 40% to 90%
Immune 
of infected individuals develop an acute HIV syndrome,
response
Anti-HIV
HIV-specific
which is triggered by the initial spread of the virus and
antibodies
CTLS
the host response. This phase is associated with a self-
 Partial control of viral replication 
limited acute illness with nonspecific symptoims, includ-
ing sore throat, myalgias, fever, weight loss, and fatigue,
率
reseimbling a flulike syndrome. Rash, lymphadenopa-
thy, diarrhea, and voiniting also may occur. This typi-
Establishment of chronic 
cally resolves spontaneously in 2 to 4 weeks.
 Clinical 
infection; virus concentrated
latency
 in lymphoid tissues:
As the infection spreads, the individual mounts anti-
viral humoral and cell-imediated imimune responses.
 low-level virus production
These responses are evidenced by seroconversion
 Other microbial infections; cytokines 
(usually within 3 to 7 weeks of presumed exposure) and
by the appearance of virus-specific CD8+ cytotoxic T
cells. HIV-specific CD8+ T cells are detected in the blood
Increased viral replication
at about the time viral titers begin to fall and are most
likely responsible for the initial containment of HIV
 infection. These immune responses partially control the
 Destruction of lymphoid tissues:
AIDS
infection and viral production, and such control is
 depletion of CD4+ T cells
aap q mon o ea u do e a pai
levels by about 12 weeks after the primary exposure.
mucosal tissues, involving mainly memory CD4+ T cells and dendritic cells,
 Chroric phase. In the next, chronic phase of the disease,
and spreads to lymph nodes.Viral replication leads to viremia and widespread
lymph nodes and the spleen are sites of continuous
seeding of lymphoid tissue. The viremia is controlled by the host immune
HIV replication and cell destruction. During this
response, and the patient then enters a phase of dinical atency. During this
period of the disease, few or no clinical nanifestations
phase, viral replication in both T cells and macrophages continues unabated,
 of the HIV infection are present. Therefore, this phase
but there is some immune containment of virus (not shown). A gradual
of HIV disease is called the clinical latency period.
erosion of CD4+ cells continues, and, ultirmately, CD4+ T-cell numbers
Although few peripheral blood T cells harbor the virus,
decline and the patient develops dinical symptoms of full-blown AIDs. CTL,
destruction of CD4+ T cells within lyimphoid tissues (up
Cytotoxic T ymphocyte.
to 10% of which may be infected) continues during this
phase, and the number of circulating blood CD4+ T cells
steadily declines. Eventually, over a period of years, the
continuous cycle of virus infection, T-cell death, and
new infection leads to a steady decline in the nuimber of 
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
179
ACUTE
CHRONIC
CRISIS
Primary infection 
Anti-envelope
1200-
108
antibody
Acute HIV syndrome 
lues
1100
Wide dissemination of virus
Deatr
LSeeding of lymphoid organs
A
1000
107
Opportunistio
trary
900
Anti-p24
diseases
(arbit
800
Clinical latency
106
antibody
700-
600
Constituti onal
105
symptoms
resp
500
400
104
百
 CTLs specific
300-
AIH
for HIv peptides 
Viral
200-
103
-particles
in plasma
100
10
36
12
3456
7891011
6
912
34
567891011
Weeks
Years
Weeks
Years
A
B
Fig. 5.40 Clinical course of HIV infection. (A) During the early period after primary infection, there is dissemination of virus, development of an immune
response to HIV, and often an acute viral syndrome. During the period of clinical latency, viral replication continues and the CD4+ T-cell count gradually
 decreases, until it reaches a critical level below which there is a substantial risk for AIDS-associated diseases.(B) Immune response to HIV infection.A cyto-
toxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) response to HIV is detectable by 2 to 3 weeks after the initial infection, and it peaks by 9 to I2 weeks. Marked expansion of
virus-specific CD8+ T-cell clones occurs during this time, and up to I0% of a patient's CTLs may be HIV specific at I2 weeks.The humoral irmmune response
to HIV peaks at about I2 weeks. (A, Redrawn from Fouci AS, Lane HC: Human immunodeficiency vinus disease: AIDS and related conditions. in Fauci AS, et al, editors:
Harrison's principles of internal medicine, ed 14, New York, 1 997, McGrow-Hil, p I 791.)
CD4+ T cells in the lyimphoid tissues and the
10 years or more, with stable CD4+ T cell counts and low
circulation.
levels of plasima viremia (usually <500 viral RNA copies/
· AIDS. The final phase is progression to AIDS, charac-
 mL). Remarkably, about 1% of infected individuals have
terized by a breakdown of host defense, a dramatic
undetectable plasima virus (<50 to 75 RNA copies/mL);
 increase in plasma virus, and severe, life-threatening
these have been called elite controllers. Individuals with
clinical disease. Typically the patient presents with
such an uncommon clinical course have attracted great
long-lasting fever (>1 month), fatigue, weight loss, and
attention in the hope that studying them may shed light on
diarrhea. After a variable period, serious opportunistic
host and viral factors that influence disease progression.
infections, secondary neoplasims, or clinical neurologic
Studies thus far indicate that this group is heterogeneous
disease (grouped under the rubric AIDS indicator dis-
with respect to the variables that influence the course of
cases or AIDS-defining illnesses, discussed later) emerge,
the disease. In most cases, the viral isolates do not show
and the patient is said to have developed AIDS.
qualitative abnormalities, suggesting that the uneventful
course cannot be atributed to a “wimpy" virus. In all
The extent of viremia, measured as HIV-1 RNA levels
cases, there is evidence of a vigorous anti-HIV immune
 in the blood, is a useful marker of HIV disease progres-
 sion and is of value in the management of HIV-infected
individuals. The viral load at the end of the acute phase
Table 5.15 CDC Classification Categories of HIV Infection
reflects the equilibrium reached between the virus and the
CD4+ TCell Categories
host response, and in a given patient it may reimain fairly
2
3
stable for several years. This level of steady-state vireimia,
≥500
200-499
<200
called the viral set point, is a predictor of the rate of decline
Clinical Categories
Cells/μL
Cells/μL
Cells/μL
 of CD4+ T cells and, therefore, progression of HIV disease.
Because the loss of immune containment is associated
A. Asymptomatic: acute
AI
A2
A3
with declining CD4+ T cell counts, the Centers for Disease
(primary) HIV, or
Control and Prevention (CDC) classification of HIV infec-
 persistent generalized
lymphadenopathy
tion stratifies patients into three groups based on CD4+ cell
counts:_ greater than or equal to 500 cells/μL, 200 to 499
 B. Symptomatic: no A or 
BI
B2
B3
C conditions
cells/μL, and fewer than 200 cells/μL (Table 5.15).
 In the absence of treatnent, most patients with HIV
C. AIDS indicator
 conditions: including 
infection progress to AIDS after a chronic phase lasting
 constitutional disease,
from 7 to 10 years, but there are exceptions. In rapid progres-
 neurologic disease, or
sors, the middle, chronic phase is telescoped to 2 to 3 years
neoplasm
 after primary infection. About 5% to 15% of infected indi-
Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: I 993 revised classification
viduals are long-term ronprogressors, defined as untreated
system and expanded surveillance definition for AIDS among adolescents an d adulcs.
HIV-1-infected individuals who renain asymptomatic for
AMWMWR 41(RR-17):1, 1992.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
80
CHAPTER5D
 Diseases of the Immune System
response, but the imumune correlates of protection are still
cation remains uncoimmon in the United States. Both
unknown. Some of these individuals have high levels of
reactivation of latent pulimonary disease and new
HIV-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses, and these
priimary infection contribute to this toll. As with tuber-
levels are maintained over the course of infection. The
culosis in other settings, the infection may be confined
inheritance of particular HLA alleles seems to correlate
to lungs or may involve multiple organs. Most worri-
with resistance to disease progression, perhaps reflecting
some are reports indicating that a growing number of
the ability to mount anti-viral T cell responses.
 isolates are resistant to multiple anti-imycobacterial
drugs.
Clinical Features of AlDS
Cryptococcosis occurs in about 10% of AIDS patients. As
suuau ssaddnsounl m shuas rao u
 In the following section, we summarize the clinical imani-
is the major clinical manifestation of cryptococcosis.
festations of the teriminal phase of the disease, full-blown
Toxoplasma gondi, another frequent invader of the CNS
AIDS.
 in AIDS, causes encephalitis and is responsible for 50%
 In the United States, the typical adult patient with AIDS
of all mass lesions in the CNS.
presents with fever, weight loss, diarrhea, generalized
 JC virus, a human papovavirus, is another important
lymphadenopathy, multiple opportunistic infections, neu-
cause of CNS infections in HIV-infected patients. It
rologic disease, and, in many cases, secondary neoplasims.
causes progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(Chapter 23). Herpes simplex virus infection is manifested
Opportunistic Infections
by mucocutaneous ulcerations involving the mouth,
Opportunistic infections account for the majority of
 esophagus, external genitalia, and perianal region. Per-
deaths in untreated patients with AIDS. Many of these
sistent diarrhea, which is comumon in untreated patients
infections represent reactivation of latent infections, which
with advanced AIDS, is often caused by infections with
are normally kept in check by a robust imimune system but
protozoans or enteric bacteria.
are not completely eradicated because the infectious agents
have evolved to coexist with their hosts. The actual fre-
Tumors
quency of infections varies in different regions of the
Patients with AIDS have a high incidence of certain
world, and has been markedly reduced by the advent of
tumors, notably Kaposi sarcoma, B cell lymphoma, cervi-
highly active anti-retroviral therapy (called HAART or
cal cancer in women, and anal cancer in men. These
ART), which relies on a combination of three or four drugs
tumors are often considered AIDS-defining malignancies. It
that block different steps of the HIV life cycle.
is estimated that 25% to 40% of untreated HIV-infected
· Approximately 15% to 30% of untreated HIV-infected
 individuals will eventually develop a malignancy. Many
individuals develop pneumonia caused by the fungus
of these tuimors are caused by oncogeric DNA viruses,
Pneumocystis jiroveci at some time during the course of
including Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (Kaposi sarcoma),
the disease. Before the advent of HAART, this infection
EBV (B cell lyimphoma), and human papillomavirus (cervi-
was the presenting feature in about 20% of cases, but
cal and anal carcinoma). These viruses establish latent
the incidence is much less in patients who respond to
infections that are kept in check in healthy individuals by
HAART.
 Candidiasis is the most comnon fungal infection in
nancy in AIDS patients exists mainly because of failure to
 patients with AIDS, and infection of the oral cavity,
contain the infection following reactivation of the viruses
vagina, and esophagus are its most comnon clinical
and decreased cellular imnunity against virally infected
manifestations. In HIV-infected individuals, oral candi-
cells undergoing malignant transforimation. The incidence
diasis is a sign of imnunologic decompensation, and
of many of these tumors, especially Kaposi sarcoma, is
often heralds the transition to AIDS. Invasive candidia-
decreasing as treatiment has improved and patients have
sis is infrequent in patients with AIDS, and it usually
less imumune compromise. Nevertheless, HIV-infected
 occurs when there is drug-induced neutropenia or use
individuals remain more susceptible to tumors that occur
of indwelling catheters.
in the general population, such as lung and skin cancers
 Cytomegalovirus (CMV) may cause disseminated disease,
and certain forms of lymphoma.
but imore coimunonly affects the eye and gastrointestinal
tract. Chorioretinitis used to be seen in approximately
Kaposi Sarcoma. Kaposi sarcoma (KS), a vascular tumor
25% of patients, but has decreased draimatically after the
that is otherwise rare in the United States, is considered an
initiation of HAART. CMV retinitis occurs alimost exclu-
AIDS-defining malignancy. The morphology of KS and its
  ss so   t m sad u a
occurrence in patients not infected with HIV are discussed
per imicroliter. Gastrointestinal CMV infection, seen in
in Chapter 10. At the onset of the AIDS epidemic, up to
5% to 10% of cases, manifests as esophagitis and colitis,
30% of infected hoimosexual or bisexual men had KS, but
the latter associated with multiple mucosal ulcerations.
with use of HAART there has been a dramatic decline in
·Disseiminated bacterial infection with rontuberculous, 0r
its incidence in recent years. In contrast, in areas of sub-
atypical, mycobacteria (Inainly Mycobacterium avium-
 Saharan Africa where HIV infection is both frequent and
intracellulare) also occurs late, in the setting of severe
largely untreated, Kaposi sarcoima is one of the most
imnunosuppression. Coincident with the AIDS epi-
common tumors.
demic, the incidence of tuberculosis has risen dramati-
The lesions of KS are characterized by a proliferation of
cally. Worldwide, almost one third of all deaths in AIDS
spindle-shaped cells that express markers of both endothe-
patients are attributable to tuberculosis, but this compli-
lial cells (vascular or lymphatic) and smooth muscle cells.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
181
In addition, KS lesions contain chronic inflammatory cell
increased risk for lymphoma in these patients may be
 infiltrates. Many of the features of KS suggest that it is not
related to the profound germinal center B cell hyperpla-
a malignant tumor (despite its ominous name).
sia that occurs in HIV infection. The high level of pro-
There is compelling evidence that KS is caused by the
liferation and somatic mutations that occur in germinal
KS herpesvirus (KSHV), also called human herpesvirus 8
center B cells set the stage for chromosoimal transloca-
(HHV8). Exactly how KSHV infection leads to KS is still
tions and mutations involving tumor-causing genes. In
unclear. Like other herpesviruses, KSHV establishes latent
fact, the aggressive B-cell tumors that arise outside the
infection, during which several proteins are produced with
setting of severe T cell depletion in HIV-infected indi-
potential roles in stimulating spindle cell proliferation and
viduals, such as Burkitt lymphoma and diffuse large B
preventing apoptosis. These include a viral homologue of
cell lymphoma, often are associated with mutations in
as p (ao )   i a n a
oncogenes such as MYC and BCL6 that bear the imolecu-
Jo yoq "(aua rossaiddns roun Aax e) cgd jo sionau
lar hallimarks of "mistakes" during the attempted diver-
p ro u u  a 
sification of imnunoglobulin genes in geriminal center
(Chapter 6). The spindle cells produce proinflamimatory
B cells.
and angiogenic factors, which recruit the inflammatory
Several other EBV-related proliferations also merit
 and neovascular coimponents of the lesion, and the latter
mention. Hodgkir lymphoma, an unusual B-cell tumor
components supply signals that aid in spindle cell survival
associated  with  a pronounced tissue inflammatory
and growth. However, KSHV infection, while necessary
response (Chapter 12), also occurs at increased fre-
for KS development, is not sufficient, and additional cofac-
quency in HIV-infected individuals. In virtually all
tors are needed. In the AIDS-related form, that cofactor is
instances of HIV-associated Hodgkin lymphoma, the
clearly HIV. HIV-mediated immune suppression may aid
characteristic tumor cells (Reed-Sternberg cells) are
in widespread disseimination of KSHV in the host.
infected with EBV. Many (but not all) HIV patients with
Clinically, AIDS-associated KS is quite different from
Hodgkin lymphoma have low CD4 counts at the time
the sporadic form (Chapter 10). In HIV-infected individu-
of disease presentation. EBV infection also is responsible
als, the tumor is usually widespread, affecting the skin,
for oral hairy leukoplakia (white projections on the
 mucous membranes, gastrointestinal tract, lyinph nodes,
tongue), which results from EBV-driven squamous cell
and lungs. These tumors also tend to be more aggressive
proliferation of the oral mucosa (Chapter 15).
than sporadic KS.
Other Tumors. In addition to KS and lyimphoimas,
Lymphomas. Lymphoma occurs at a markedly increased
 patients with AIDS also have an increased occurrence of
rate in individuals with AIDS, making it another AIDS-
arcinoma of the uterine cervix and of anal cancer.Both of
defining tumor. Roughly 5% of AIDS patients present with
these tumors are highly associated with human papilloma
-l donaaap %g aoue Aandde pue 'oq
virus infection, which is poorly controlled in the setting of
phoma during their subsequent course. Even in the era of
imnunosuppression.
anti-retroviral therapy, lymphoma continues to occur in
HIV-infected individuals at an incidence that is at least
Central Nervous System Disease
10-fold greater than the population average. Based on
Involvement of the CNS is a common and important mani-
molecular characterization of HIV-associated lymphomas
festation of AIDS. Ninety percent of patients demonstrate
and the epideimiologic considerations above, at least two
some forim of neurologic involvement at autopsy, and 40%
Imechanisms appear to underlie the increased risk for B-cell
to 60% have clinically apparent neurologic dysfunction.
tumors in HIV-infected individuals.
Importantly, in some patients, neurologic manifestations
 Tumors Intduced by Oncogeric Viruses. T-cell imununity is
Imay be the sole or earliest presenting feature of HIV infec-
required to restrain the proliferation of B cells latently
tion. Lesions include a self-limited presumed viral menin-
 infected with oncogenic viruses such as EBV and KSHV.
goencephalitis or aseptic meningitis, vacuolar myelopathy,
With the appearance of severe T-cell depletion in the
peripheral neuropathies, and, most comnonly, a progres-
course of HIV infection, this control is lost, and the
sive encephalopathy called HIV-associated neurocognitive
infected B cells undergo unchecked proliferation that
disorder (Chapter 23).
predispose to mutations and the development of B-cell
Effect of Anti-Retroviral Drug Therapy on
tumors. As a result, AIDS patients are at high risk for
developing aggressive B-cell lymphomas coinposed of
the Course of HiV Infection
tumor cells infected by oncogenic viruses, particularly
The advent of new drugs that target the viral reverse tran-
EBV. The tumors often occur in extranodal sites, such as
scriptase, protease, and integrase enzymes has changed the
the CNS, gut, orbit, and lungs, and elsewhere. AIDS
clinical face of AIDS. When a combination of at least three
patients also are prone to rare lymphomas that present
effective drugs is used in a motivated, compliant patient,
as malignant effusions (so-called "primary effusion
HIV replication is reduced to below the threshold of detec-
lyimphoma"), which are renarkable in that the tumor
tion (<50 RNA copies/mL) and remains there as long as
cells are usually coinfected by both EBV and KSHV, a
the patient adheres to therapy. Once the virus is sup-
highly unusual example of cooperativity between two
pressed, the progressive loss of CD4+ T cells is halted, and
 oncogenic viruses.
the peripheral CD4+ T-cell count slowly increases, often
Germinal Center B-Cell Hyperplasia. The majority of the
returning to a normal level. With the use of these drugs,
 lyimphomas that arise in patients with preserved CD4
the annual death rate from AIDS in the United States has
T-cell counts are not associated with EBV or KSHV. The
decreased from a peak of 16 to 18 per 100,000 individuals
http://ebooksmedicine.net
182
CHAPTER5D
Diseases of the Immune Systerm
in 1995-1996 to less than 4 per 100,000. Many AIDS
associated disorders, such as opportunistic infections with
evoke granuloma formation because CD4+ cells are deficient,
 and the presence of these and other infectious agents may not 
P. jiroveci and Kaposi sarcoma, now are uncoimmon. Effec-
 be apparent without special stains.As might be expected, lym-
tive anti-retroviral therapy also has reduced the transimis-
sion of the virus, especially from infected mothers to
phoid involution is not confined to the nodes; in later stages of
AIDS, the spleen and thymus also are converted to "wastelands"
newborns.
 that are virtually devoid of lymphocytes.
Despite these dramatic improveiments, several new
complications associated with HIV infection  and  its
treatiment have emerged. Some patients with advanced
disease who are given anti-retroviral therapy develop a
Despite impressive advances in our understanding and
paradoxical clinical deterioration during the period of
 treatiment of HIV infection, the long-terin prognosis of
recovery of the iimimune system despite increasing CD4+
patients with AIDS remains a concern. Although with
T-cell counts and decreasing viral load. This disorder,
effective drug therapy the mortality rate has declined in
called the immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome,
the United States, the treated patients still carry viral
is not understood but is postulated to be a poorly regu-
DNA in their lynphoid tissues. Truly curative therapy
lated host response to the high antigenic burden of per-
remains elusive. Similarly, although considerable effort
sistent microbes. Perhaps a more important complication
has been imounted to develop a protective vaccine, imany
of long-terim anti-retroviral therapy pertains to adverse
hurdles remain before this becomes a reality. Molecular
side effects of the drugs. These include lipoatrophy (loss
analyses have revealed an alariming degree of variation in
of facial fat), lipoaccumulation (excess fat deposition cen-
viral isolates froim patients; this renders the task of pro-
trally), elevated lipids, insulin resistance, peripheral neu-
ducing a vaccine extremely difficult. Recent efforts have
ropathy, and premature cardiovascular, kidney, and liver
focused on producing broadly neutralizing antibodies
disease. Finally, non-AIDS morbidity is far more common
than classic AIDS-related morbidity in long-terim HAART-
 present, therefore, prevention, public health imeasures,
treated patients. Major causes of morbidity are cancer and
and anti-retroviral drugs remain the mainstays in the
accelerated cardiovascular disease. The mechanism for
fight against AIDS.
these non-AIDS-related complications is not known, but
persistent inflammation and T-cell dysfunction may have
a role.
SUMMARY
CLINICAL COURSE AND COMPLICATIONS OF
HIV INFECTION 
+ Progression of disease. HIV infection progresses through phases.
MORPHOLOGY
+ Acute HIV infection. Manifestations of acute viral illness
+ Chronic (fatent) phase. Dissemination of virus, host immune
Changes in the tissues (with the exception of the brain) are
response, progressive destruction of immune cells.
neither specific nor diagnostic. Common pathologic features of
+AIDs. Severe immune deficiency.
AIDS include opportunistic infections, Kaposi sarcoma, and B-cell 
· Clinicai features. Full-blown AIDS manifests with several com-
lymphomas. Most of these lesions are discussed elsewhere,
plications, mostly resulting from immune deficiency.
because they also occur in individuals who do not have HIV
+ Opportunistic infections
infection. Lesions in the central nervous system are described in
+ Tumors, especially tumors caused by oncogenic viruses
Chapter 23.
+ Neurologic complications of unknown pathogenesis
 Biopsy specimens from enlarged lymph nodes in the early
· Antiretroviral therapy has greatly decreased the incidence of
stages of HIV infection reveal a marked hyperplasia of B-cell fol-
opportunistic infections and tumors but also has numerous
licles, which often take on unusual, serpiginous shapes. The
complications.
mantle zones that surround the follicles are attenuated, and the
 germinal centers impinge on interfollicular T cell areas. This
hyperplasia of B cells is the morphologic reflection of the poly-
 clonal B cel activation and hypergammaglobulinemia seen in
AMYLOIDOSIS
HIV-infected individuals.
With disease progression, the frenzy of B cel proliferation 
Amyloidosis is a condition associated with a number of
subsides and gives way to a pattern of severe lymphoid involution.
disorders in which extracellular deposits of fibrillar pro-
The lymph nodes are depleted of lymphocytes, and the organized 
teins are responsible for tissue damage and functional
network of follicular dendritic cells is disrupted. The germinal
compromise. These abnormal fibrils are produced by the
centers may even become hyalinized. During this advanced stage,
aggregation of inproperly folded proteins (which are
viral burden in the nodes is reduced, in part because of the
soluble in their norimal folded configuration). The fibrillar
disruption of the follicular dendritic cells. These "burnt-out"
deposits bind a wide variety of proteoglycans and glycos-
lymph nodes are atrophic and small and may harbor numerous
 s rs p u m sao
 opportunistic pathogens, often within macrophages. Because of
give the deposits staining characteristics thought to reseim-
profound immunosuppression, the inflammatory response to
infections both in the lymph nodes and at extranodal sites may
ble those of starch (amylose). Therefore, the deposits were
called amyloid, a name that is firmly entrenched despite the
be sparse or atypical. For example, mycobacteria often fail to
realization that the deposits are unrelated to starch.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Amyloidosis
183
Pathogenesis of Amyloid Deposition
Many other proteins also can deposit as aimyloid in a
variety of clinical seings. Some of the most clinically
Anyloid deposits can occur in a variety of conditions, in
inportant exaimples are mentioned in the following section.
each of which the protein composition is different.
Although aimyloid always has the saime morphologic
Classification of Amyloidosis and Mechanisms of
appearance, it is biochemically heterogeneous. In fact, at
Amyloid Formation
least 30 different proteins can aggregate to form fibrils with
the appearance of aimyloid. Regardless of their derivation,
Amyloidosis results from abnormal folding of proteins,
all amyloid deposits are composed of nonbranching fibrils,
which assume a β pleated sheet conformation, aggregate,
paed d e u sapndadanod paumaui jo paog a
and deposit as fibrils in extracellular tissues. Normally,
sheet conformation (Fig. 5.41). Approximately 95% of the
intracellular misfolded proteins are degraded in protea-
 anyloid material consists of fibril proteins, the remaining
dn uaxi are saieaie uaoid rennasenxa pue saos
 5% being various glycoproteins.
and degraded by macrophages. In amyloidosis, these
The three most common forms of amyloid are the
quality control mechanisims fail and fibrillar proteins accu-
following:
mulate outside of cells. The proteins that form amyloid
·AL (amyloid light chain) amyloitd is made up of complete
fall into two general categories (Fig. 5.42): (1) normal
imnunoglobulin light chains, the aimino-terminal frag-
proteins that have an inherent tendency to associate and
ments of light chains, or both.
forim fibrils, particularly when produced in increased
AA (amyloit-associated) amyloit is composed of an 8500
anounts; and (2) mutant proteins that are prone to mis-
dalton protein derived by proteolysis from a larger
folding and aggregation. The mechanisms of deposition of
precursor in the blood called SAA (serum amyloid-
im Suoe ixau passnssi are proure jo sadk juara
associated) protein, which is synthesized in the liver.
dlassification.
βamyloid protein (Aβ) is a 4000-dalton peptide that is
 Because a given form of aimyloid (e.g., AA) may be
-auiuen raren ynui e uong sisioaond Aq paanan
associated with diverse clinical settings, we will follow a
brane glycoprotein, called amyloid precursor protein.
dlassification that takes into account clinical and biocheimi-
cal features (Table 5.16). Amyloid may be systeimic (gener-
alized), involving several organ systens, or it may be
localized to a single organ, such as the heart. On clinical
Ard ou asens s uad sss a s
amyloidosis when it is associated with a clonal plasima cell
 proliferation, or secondary aimyloidosis when it occurs as
a complication of an underlying chronic inflammatory or
tissue-destructive process. Hereditary or familial amyloi-
dosis constitutes a separate, heterogeneous group with
several distinctive patterns of organ involveiment.
Primary Amyloidosis: Plasma Cell Proliferations Asso-
ciated With Amyloidosis. Anyloid in this category is of 
the AL type and is usually systemic in distribution. This is
Congo
the most comunon forn of ainyloidosis, with approxi-
red
mately 2000 to 3000 new cases each year in the United
 States. It is caused by a clonal proliferation of plasma cells
that synthesize abnormal Ig imolecules. The AL type of
systeinic amyloidosis 0ccurs in 5% to 15% of individuals
with multiple myeloma, a plasima-cell tuimor characterized
by excessive production of free immunoglobulin light
chains (Chapter 12). The free, unpaired K or A light chains
(referred to as Bence Jones protein) are prone to aggregating
and depositing in tissues as amyloid. Since the majority of
 myeloma patients do not develop aimyloidosis, however, it
is clear that not all free light chains are equally likely to
 produce ainyloid. For unknown reasons, A light chains are
than kK light chains.
C
Most persons with AL aimyloid do not have multiple
myeloma or any other overt B cell neoplasim; such cases
Fig. 5.4l Structure of armyloid.(A) A schematic diagram of an amyloid fiber
have been traditionally classified as primary amyloidosis,
unoe punom (iaq yoea u xis se Aew se aq ueo auau) sqy anoy umous
one another with regularly spaced binding ofthe Congo red dye.(B) Congo
because their clinical features derive solely from the effects
of amyloid deposition rather than formation of tumor
red staining shows apple-green birefringence under polarized light, a diag-
nostic feature of amyloid. (C) Electron micrograph of 7.5- to I0-nm armyloid
masses. In virtually all such cases, however, monoclonal
filbrils. (From Mertini G, Bellotti V: Molecular mechonisms of amyloidosis. N Engl J
immunoglobulins or free light chains, or both, can be found
Med 349:583-596,2003.)
in the blood or urine. Most of these patients also have a
http://ebooksmedicine.net
84
CHAPTER5
Diseases of the Immune System
PRODUCTION OF ABNORMAL
PRODUCTION OF NORMAL
AMOUNTS OF PROTEIN
AMOUNTS OF MUTANT
PROTEIN (e.g., transthyretin)
Native folded
Acquired
Chronic inflammation 
Inherited mutations
protein
mutations
Macrophage
Monoclonal
 activation
B-lymphocyte
 proliferation 
Amyloidogenic intermediate
Interleukins 1 and 6
(e.g., misfolded protein)
Plasma
Liver
cells
cells
Monomers assemble to
Immunoglobulin 
SAA Protein
Mutant
form β-sheet structure
light chains
transthyretin
Limited
Limited
Aggregation
proteolysis
proteolysis
FIBRIL
AL PROTEIN
AA PROTEIN
ATTR PROTEIN
B
Fig. 5.42 Pathogenesis of amyloidosis.(A) General mechanism of formation of armyloid fibrils.(B) Formation of amyloid from excessive production of proteins
prone to misfolding. (C) Formation of armyloid from mutant protein.
 modest increase in the number of plasima cells in the bone
associated inflammatory condition. At one time, tubercu-
marrow, which presumably secrete the precursors of AL
losis, bronchiectasis, and chronic osteomyelitis were the
 protein.
most important underlying conditions, but currently, these
conditions frequently resolve with antibiotic treatiment and
Reactive Systemic Amyloidosis. The amyloid deposits
less often lead to ainyloidosis. More coimunonly now, reac-
in this pattern are systemic in distribution and are com-
tive systemic aimyloidosis complicates rheumatoid arthri-
posed of AA protein. This category was previously referred
tis, other connective tissue disorders such as ankylosing
to as secondary aimyloidosis because it is secondary to an
spondylitis, and inflammatory bowel disease, particularly
Table 5.16 Classification of Amyloidosis
Major Fibril
Chemically Related
Clinicopathologic Category
Associated Diseases
Protein
Precursor Protein
 Systemic (Generalized) Amyloidosis
 Plasma cell proliferations with 
 Multiple myeloma and other monoclonal
AL
Immunoglobulin light chains, 
amyloidosis (primary amyloidosis)
plasma cell proliferations 
chiefly  type 
 Reactive systemic amyloidosis
 Chronic inflammatory conditions
AA
SAA
(secondary amyloidosis)
 Hemodialysis-associated amyloidosis 
Chronic renal failure
Aβm
β-microglobulin
 Hereditary Amyloidosis
 Familial Mediterranean fever
AA
SAA
 Familial amyloidotic neuropathies 
ATTR
Transthyretin
(several types)
 Systemic senile armyloidosis
ATTR
Transthyretin
Localized Amyloidosis
 Senile cerebral
Alzheimer disease
Aβ
APP
Endocrine
Type 2 diabetes
 Medullary carcinoma of thyroid
A Cal
Calcitonin
 Islets of Langerhans
AIAPP
Islet amyloid peptide 
 Isolated atrial amyloidosis
AANF
 Atrial natriuretic factor
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Amyloidosis
185
Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis. Among these, the
incidence of this complication has decreased substantially.
most frequent associated condition is rheuumatoid arthritis.
The classical features of this form of aimyloidosis are the
Amyloidosis is reported to occur in approximately 3% of
triad of scapulohumeral periarthritis, carpal tunnel syn-
patients with rheumatoid arthritis and is clinically signifi-
drome, and flexor tenosynovitis of the hand.
cant in one half of those affected. Heroin abusers who inject
the drug subcutaneously also have a high occurrence rate
Localized Amyloidosis. Sometimes, amyloid deposits
of generalized AA aimyloidosis. The chronic skin infec-
are limited to a single organ or tissue without involvement
 of any other site in the body. The deposits may produce
injection of narcotics, seeim to be responsible for the amy-
grossly detectable nodular masses or be evident only on
loidosis. Reactive systeimic amyloidosis also may occur in
microscopic exaimination. Nodular deposits of amyloid are
association with certain cancers, the most coimunon being
most often encountered in the lung, larynx, skin, urinary
renal cell carcinoma and Hodgkin lymphoma.
bladder, tongue, and the region about the eye. Frequently,
 In AA aimyloidosis, SAA synthesis by liver cells is stim-
there are infiltrates of lymphocytes and plasima cells associ-
ulated by cytokines such as IL-6 and IL-1 that are produced
ated with these aimyloid masses. At least in some cases, the
during inflammation; thus, long-standing inflamnation
anyloid consists of AL protein and may therefore repre-
leads to a sustained elevation of SAA levels. While SAA
sent a localized form of plasma cell-derived amyloid.
levels are increased in all cases of inflaimnation, only a
simall subset get aimyloidosis. It seems that in soime patients
Endocrine Amyloid. Microscopic deposits of localized
SAA breakdown produces intermediates that are prone to
anyloid may be found in certain endocrine tumors, such
forming fibrils.
as medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland, islet tumors
of the pancreas, pheochromocytomas, and undifferentiated
Heredofamilial Amyloidosis. A variety of familial forms
carcinoimas of the stomach, and in the islets of Langerhans
 of amyloidosis have been described. Most are rare and
in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. In these set-
occur in limited geographic areas. The most common and
tings, the amyloidogenic proteins seeim to be derived either
best studied is an autosomal recessive condition called
froim polypeptide hormones (e.g., medullary carcinoima) or
familial Mediterranean fever, which is encountered largely in
from unique proteins (e.g., islet amyloid polypeptide).
individuals of Armenian, Sephardic Jewish, and Arabic
origins. This is an "autoinflamnatory" syndrome associ-
Amyloid of Aging. Several well-documented forms of
ated with excessive production of the cytokine IL-1 in
anyloid deposition occur with aging. Senile systemic amy-
response to inflanimatory stimuli. It is characterized by
loidosis refers to the systeimic deposition of aimyloid in
attacks of fever accoimpanied by inflaimimnation of serosal
elderly patients (usually in their seventies and eighties).
surfaces that manifests as peritonitis, pleuritis, and syno-
Because of the dominant involveiment and related dysfunc-
vitis. The gene for familial Mediterranean fever encodes a
tion of the heart, this forim was previously called serile
protein called pyrin that is important in dampening the
Qardiac amyloidosis. Those who are syimptoimatic present
response of innate immune cells, particularly neutrophils,
with a restrictive cardiomyopathy and arrhythimias
to inflammatory mediators. The amyloid seen in this dis-
(Chapter 11). The amyloid in this form, in contrast to famil-
order is of the AA type, suggesting that it is related to the
ial forms, is derived from normal TTR.
recurrent bouts of inflamnation.
 In contrast to familial Mediterranean fever, a group
of autosomal dominant familial disorders is character-
ized by deposition of aimyloid made up of fibrils derived
from mutant transthyretin (TTR). TTR is a transporter
MORPHOLOGY
of the hormone thyroxine. Remarkably, specific TTR
There are no consistent or distinctive patterns of organ or tissue
mutant polypeptides tend to form amyloid in different
distribution of amyloid deposits in any of the categories cited,
 organs; thus, in soime families, deposits are seen mainly
but a few generalizations can be made. In AA amyloidosis second-
 in peripheral nerves (familial amyloidotic polyneuropa-
thies), whereas in others cardiac deposits predoiminate.
ary to chronic inflammatory disorders, kidneys, liver, spleen,
lymph nodes, adrenal glands, thyroid glands, and many other
The mutated forim of the TTR gene that leads to cardiac
tissues are typically affected. Although AL amyloidosis associated
 a jo % adde q pas si sisoru
population in the United States, and cardiomyopathy has
with plasma cell proliferations cannot reliably be distinguished
from the AA form by its organ distribution,it more often involves
been identified in both homozygous and heterozygous
the heart, gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, peripheral
patients. The precise prevalence of patients with this muta-
nerves, skin, and tongue. The localization of amyloid deposits in
tion who develop clinically manifest cardiac disease is
the hereditary syndromes is varied. In familial Mediterranean
not known.
fever, the amyloidosis is of the AA type and accordingly may be
widespread, involving the kidneys, blood vessels, spleen, respira-
Hemodialysis-Associated Amyloidosis. Patients
on
tory tract, and (rarely) liver.
long-terim hemodialysis for renal failure can develop
Amyloid may be appreciated macroscopically when it accu-
anyloid deposits derived from Bz-microglobulin. This
mulates in large amounts.The organ is frequently enlarged, and
protein is present in high concentrations in the serum of
the tissue appears gray and has a waxy, firm consistency. Histo-
individuals with renal disease, and in the past it was
logically, the amyloid deposition is always extracellular and begins
retained in the circulation because it could not be filtered
between cells, often closely adjacent to basement membranes
through dialysis meimbranes. With new dialysis filters, the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
186
CHAPTER5
 Diseases of the Immune System
(Fig. 5.43A). As the amyloid accumulates, it encroaches on the
 Spleen. Amyloidosis of the spleen may be inapparent grossly
cells, in time surrounding and destroying them. In the form asso-
 or may cause moderate to marked splenomegaly (up to 800 g).
ciated with plasma cell proliferation, perivascular and vascular
 For mysterious reasons, two distinct patterns of deposition are
deposits are common.
 seen. In one, the deposits are largely limited to the splenic fol-
The diagnosis of amyloidosis is based on histopathol-
 licles, producing tapioca-like granules on gross inspection, desig-
ogy. With the light microscope and hematoxylin and eosin stains,
 nated sago spieen. In the other pattern, the amyloid involves the
amyloid appears as an amorphous, eosinophilic, hyaline, extracel-
 walls of the splenic sinuses and connective tissue framework in
lular substance. To differentiate amyloid from other hyaline mate-
the red pulp. Fusion of the early deposits gives rise to large,
rials (e.g, collgen, fibrin), a variety of histochemical stains are
 maplike areas of amyloidosis, creating what has been designated
used. The most widely used is the Congo red stain, which under
lardaceous spleen.
ordinary light gives a pink or red color to tissue deposits, but
Liver. The deposits may be inapparent grossly or may cause
far more striking and specific is the green birefringence of the
 moderate to marked hepatomegaly. Amyloid appears first in the 
stained amyloid when observed by polarizing microscopy (Fig.
huaseipe uo saureousua kaaissauaoid uaun pue assia jo aoeds 
5.43B). This staining reaction is shared by all forms of amyloid
 hepatic parenchymal cells and sinusoids. In time, deformity, pres-
and is imparted by the crossed β-pleated sheet configuration of 
 sure atrophy, and disappearance of hepatocytes occur, causing
amyloid fibrils. Confirmation can be obtained by electron 
 total replacement of large areas of liver parenchyma. Vascular
microscopy, which reveals amorphous nonoriented thin fibrils.
involvement and deposits in Kupffer cells are frequent. Liver
Subtyping of amyloid is most reliably done by mass spectroscopy.
 function is usually preserved despite sometimes quite extensive
 as immunohistochemical stains are not entirely sensitive or
involvement.
specific.
Heart. Amyloidosis of the heart (Chapter Il) may occur in
The pattern of organ involvement in different forms of amy.
 any form of systemic amyloidosis. It also is the major organ
loidosis is variable.
 involved in senile systemic amyloidosis.The heart may be enlarged
Kidney. Amyloidosis of the kidney is the most common and
 and firm, but more often it shows no appreciable change on gross
 potentially the most serious form of organ involvement. Grossly,
 inspection. Histologically the deposits begin as focal subendocar-
the kidneys may be of normal size and color, or in advanced
dial accumulations and within the myocardium between the
cases they may be shrunken because of ischemia caused by
 muscle fibers. Expansion of these myocardial deposits eventually
vascular narrowing induced by the deposition of amyloid within
causes pressure atrophy of myocardial fibers. When the amyloid
 arterial and arteriolar walls. Histologically, the amyloid is depos-
 deposits are subendocardial, the conduction system may be
ited primarily in the glomeruli, but the interstitial peritubular
damaged, accounting for the electrocardiographic abnormalities
tissue, arteries, and arterioles are also affected. The glomerular
 noted in some patients.
deposits first appear as subtle thickenings of the mesangial
Other Organs. Nodular depositions in the tongue may
matrix, accompanied usually by uneven widening of the base-
 cause macroglossia, giving rise to the designation tumor-forming
ment membranes of the glomerular capillaries. In time, deposits
 amyloid of the tongue. The respiratory tract may be involved
in the mesangium and along the basement membranes cause
focally or diffusely from the larynx down to the smallest bron-
capillary narrowing and distortion of the glomerular vascular
chioles. A distinct form of amyloid is found in the brains of
tuft. With progression of the glomerular amyloidosis, the capil-
 patients with Alzheimer disease. lt may be present in so-called
lary lumens are obliterated and the obsolescent glomerulus is 
"plaques" as well as blood vessels (Chapter 23). Amyloidosis of
replaced by confluent masses or interlacing broad ribbons of 
 peripheral and autonomic nerves is a feature of several familial
amyloid.
 amyloidotic neuropathies.
A
B
Fig. 5.43 Amyloidosis.(A) A section of liver stained with Congo red reveals pink-red deposits of armyloid in the walls of blood vessels and along sinusoids
(B) Note the yellow-green birefringence of the deposits when observed by a polarizing microscope. (B, Courtesy of Dr. Trace Worrell and Sondy Hinton, Depart-
ment of Pathofogy, University of Texas Southwestem Medical School, Dallas, Texos.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Amyloidosis
187
Clinical Features
correcting protein misfolding and inhibiting fibrillogenesis
Amyloidosis may be found as an unsuspected anatomic
are being developed.
 may cause serious clinical problems and even death. The
syimptoms depend on the magnitude of the deposits and
SUMMARY
 on the sites or organs affected. Clinical manifestations at
AMYLOIDOSIS
first are often entirely nonspecific, such as weakness,
weight loss, lightheadedness, or syncope. Somewhat more
· Amyloidosis is a disorder characterized by the extracellular
e s  eade suas
deposits of proteins that are prone to aggregate and form
cardiac, and gastrointestinal involvement.
insoluble fibrils.
Renal involvement gives rise to proteinuria that may be
+ The deposition of these proteins may result from: excessive
severe enough to cause the nephrotic syndrome (Chapter
production of proteins that are prone to aggregation; muta-
14). Progressive obliteration of glomeruli in advanced
tions that produce proteins that cannot fold properly and tend 
cases ultimately leads to renal failure and uremia. Renal
to aggregate; defective or incomplete proteolytic degradation
failure is a common cause of death. Cardiac amyloidosis
of extracellular proteins.
a aingeg jreaq aansauos se Aisnoipisun juasand Au
+ Amyloidosis may be localized or systemic. It is seen in associa-
most serious aspects of cardiac amyloidosis are conduction
tion with a variety of primary disorders, including monoclonal 
disturbances and arrhythimias, which may prove fatal.
B-cell proliferations (in which the amyloid deposits consist of 
Orcasionally, cardiac amyloidosis produces a restrictive
immunoglobulin light chains); chronic inflammatory diseases
 pattern of cardiomyopathy and masquerades as chronic
such as rheumatoid arthritis (deposits of amyloid A protein,
constrictive pericarditis (Chapter 
11).(
Gastrointestinal
derived from an acute-phase protein produced in inflamma-
amyloidosis may be asymptoimatic, or it may present in a
tion);Alzheimer disease (amyloid β protein); familial conditions
variety of ways. Anyloidosis of the tongue inay cause suf-
in which the amyloid deposits consist of mutated proteins (e.g..
ficient enlargement and inelasticity to hamper speech and
transthyretin in familial amyloid polyneuropathies); and hemo-
swallowing. Depositions in the stomach and intestine may
dialysis (deposits of βz-microglobulin, whose clearance is
lead to malabsorption, diarrhea, and disturbances in diges-
defective).
tion. Vascular aimyloidosis causes vascular fragility that
+ Amyloid deposits cause tissue injury and impair normal func-
may lead to bleeding, sometimes massive, that can occur
 tion by causing pressure on cells and tissues.They do not evoke
spontaneously or following seemingly trivial trauma.
 an inflammatory response.
Additionally, in some cases AL amyloid binds and inacti-
vates factor X, a critical coagulation factor, leading to a
life-threatening bleeding disorder.
SUGGESTED READINGS
The diagnosis of amyloidosis depends on the histologic
demonstration of amyloid deposits in tissues. The most
 Bonnelykke K, Sparks R, Waage J, et al: Genetics of allergy and aller-
common sites biopsied are the kidney, when renal mani-
gic sensitization: common variants, rare mutations, Curr Opin
festations are present, or rectal or gingival tissues in
Immunol 36:115, 2015. [An update on the genes associated zwith allergic
patients suspected of having systemic aimyloidosis. Exaimi-
diseases.!
 Broderick L, De Nardo D, Franklin BS, et al: The inflammasomes and 
nation of abdominal fat aspirates stained with Congo red
autoinflammatory syndromes, Annu Reo Pathol 10:395, 2015. [A dis-
can also be used for the diagnosis of systeimic aimyloidosis.
Cussion of the inflammasome and its role in inflammatory diseases.
The test is quite specific, but its sensitivity is low. In sus-
pected cases of AL amyloidosis, serum and urine protein
of environmental cues by regulatory T cells, J Clin fnvest 123:939-
electrophoresis and immunoelectrophoresis should be per-
forimed. Bone marrow aspirates in such cases often show a
inflammatory responses and maintain homeostasis in theimmune system.
monoclonal population of plasima cells, even in the absence
       
 of overt muliple myeloma. Scintigraphy with radiolabeled
Immunol30:393-427,2012.fAn excellenf review of autoimmune sym-
serum amyloid P (SAP) component is a rapid and specific
dromes caused by single-gene mutations, and what they teach us abouf
pathwoays ofimmunotogic tolerance.
test, since SAP binds to the aimyloid deposits and reveals
Conley ME, Casanova JL: Discovery of single-gene inborn errors of
their presence. It also gives a measure of the extent of
Zio jouuu udo an guuanbas uoneauasixauAq imm
 amyloidosis and can be used to follow patients undergoing
2014. IA review of modern approaches for identifying the genetic basis of
treatiment. Mass spectroscopy is a useful tool for identifica-
immunodeficiency diseases.
-lad aq ue l proue jo juauoduos uaond au jo uog
Craft JE: Follicular helper T cells in immunity and systemic autoim-
formed on paraffin embedded tissues.
munity, Nat Reo Rheumatol 8:337-347, 2012. [A discussion of fthe prop-
The prognosis for individuals with generalized amyloi-
erties and generation offollicutarhelperTcels and theirrolesinantibody
 dosis is poor. Those with AL ainyloidosis (not including
productionand autoimmunity.!
multiple myeloma) have a median survival of 2 years after
Douek DC, Roederer M, Koup RA: Emerging concepts in the immu-
nopathogenesis of AIDS, Annu Rev Med 60:471, 2009. fA balanced
diagnosis. Individuals with myeloma-associated amyloi-
 dosis have an even poorer prognosis. The outlook for indi-
discussion of the pathogenesis of AiDS, and the stit unresolved issues.!
Galli SJ: The development of allergic inflammation, Nature 454:445,
viduals with reactive systemic amyloidosis is somewhat
2008.Anexcellent reviewof the mechanismsof inflammationinallergic
better and depends to some extent on the control of the
diseases.!
underlying condition. Resorption of aimyloid after treat-
Galli SJ: The mast cell-IgE paradox: from homeostasis to anaphylaxis,
Iment of the associated condition has been reported, but this
Am J Pathol 186:212, 2016. [A fascinating discussion of the eoolufion of
is a rare occurrence. New therapeutic strategies aimed at
mast cell responses and their roles in host defense and disease.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
88
CHAPTER５[
 Diseases of the Immune System
Goodnow CC: Multistep pathogenesis of autoimmune disease, Cel
  N ee A a ro   rax a a
130:25, 2007. {An excellent discussion of the checkpoints that prevent
Med 363:1451, 2010. A good review of the mechanisms of recognition and
autoimmunity and zwhy these mightfail.!
rejection of allografts and the development of new strategies for Ereating
Holgate ST: Innate and adaptive immune responses in asthma, Naf
rejection.!
Med 18:673-683, 2012. [A comprehensive discussion of the roles of T2
cells,ytokines,and othercells of the immune system in the development
plasticity of helper CD4+ T cells, Srience 327:1098, 2010. JA excellenf
and resotution of asthma.
review of the development and funcfions of helper T cell subsets,and he
 Jancar S, Sanchez Crespo M: Immune complex-mediated tissue injury:
uncertainties in thefield.!
a multistep paradigm, Trends Immunot 26:48, 2005. [A summary of the
Ohkura N, Kitagawa Y, Sakaguchi S: Development and maintenance
mechanismsof immune complex-mediated tissue injury.!
of regulatory T cells, rmmumity 38:414-423, 2013. JAn excellent review
 Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Hu P, et al: Pathogenesis of antineutrophil cyto-
of the molerutar mechanisms underlying the generation,maintenance,and
 plasmic autoantibody-associated small-vessel vasculitis, Annu Reo
stability of regulatory T cels.
Pathol 8:139-160, 2013. [A comprehensive review of the clinical and
Pattanaik D, Brown M, Postlethwaite BC, et al: Pathogenesis of sys-
pathotogic features and pathogenesis of small-vessel vasculitis.
temic sclerosis, Fronf fmunol 6:272, 2015. fA discussion of current
 Pandey S, Kawai T, Akira S: Microbial sensing by Toll-like receptors
concepts of the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis.
Parvaneh N, Casanova JL, Notarangelo LD, et al: Primary immuno-
7:a016246, 2014. {An excellent review of the receptors used by the innate
deficiencies: a rapidly evolving story, ↓ Allergy Clin fmmunol
immune systerm to sense microbes.
131:314-323,2013. fAn excellent review of nezotly described primary
Klein L, Kyewski B, Allen PM, et al: Positive and negative selection
immunodeficiency syndromes.!
of the T cell repertoire: what thymocytes see (and don't see), Nat
Schwartz RH: Historical overview of immunological tolerance, Cold 
Rev Immunol 14:377, 2014. {A discussion of the mechanisms of T cell
Spring Harb Perspert Biol 4:a006908, 2012. [A thoughtfut summary of
maturation and centrat tolerance induced in the thymus.
themechanisms of tolerance,the experimental studies behind the elucida-
Lamkanfi M, Dixit VM: Mechanisms and functions of inflammasomes,
tion of these mechanisms,and how they may be disrupted to give rise to
Cell 157:1013, 2014. [An excellent update on the inflammasome and its
fhgunuuognn
role in inflammation and host defense.
od jo supuisianum mau e-sndni suntei y uospiaea 'Z ni
2011.fAn exceltent review of the clinical features and pathogenesis of
genesis is leading to clinical advances, Nat Med 18:871-882, 2012.
upus.!
[An excellenf review of recent adoances in understanding the genetics
Westermark GT, Fandrich M, Westermark P: AA amyloidosis: patho-
oftupus and the roles ofinnate andadaptive immune responses in the
genesis and targeted therapies, Annu Rev Pathol 10:321, 2015. {Ar
disease,and how these adoances are shaping the development of novel
excellent review of the pathogenesis and clinicat features of a major form
therapies.!
ofamytoidosis.!
Mahajan VS, Mattoo H, Deshpande V, et al: IgG4-related disease,
Victora GD, Nussenzweig MC: Germinal centers, Arru Reo Immunol
Annu Rev Pathol 9:315, 2014. ↓A comprehensive discussion of the features
30:429-457,2012. fAn excellent review of the properties and formation of
and likely pathogenesis of this recentty recognized entity.!
germinal centers and their roles in antibody responses and autoimmune
Mathis D, Benoist C: Microbiota and autoimmune disease: the
diseases.!
hosted self, Cell Host Microbe 10:297-301, 2011. ↓A review of the
Voight BF, Cotsapas C: Human genetics offers an emerging picture of
evidence that fhe microbiome influences immune actioation and auto-
common pathways and mechanisms in autoimmunity, Curr Opin
immunity.and thereleoance of these findings to human autoimmune
Immunol 24:552-557, 2012. fA discussion of the genetic associations zuith
diseases.!
autoimmune diseases and the implications forunderstanding pathruays of
Mavragani CP, Moustsopoulos HM: Sjogren's syndrome, Annu Rev
autoimmunity.
Pathol 9:273, 2014. [A review of the pathogenesis and ctinical features of
Weaver CT, Elson CO, Fouser LA, et al: The Tμ17 pathway and
Sjogren's syndrome.!
inflammatory diseases of the intestines, lungs, and skin, Annu Re?
Mitchell RN: Graft vascular disease: immune response meets the
Pathol 8:477,2013.fAn excellent review of the development and lineage
vessel wall, Annu Rev Pathol 4:19, 2009. IA review of the mechanisms
relationshipsofT17cellsand their roles in autoimmuneandotherinflam-
that tead to vascular disease in chronic graff rejection.!
matory diseases.
 Moir S, Chun TW, Fauci AS: Pathogenic mechanisms of HIV disease,
Zenewicz L, Abraham C, Flavell RA, et al: Unraveling the genetics of
autoimmunity, Cell 140:791, 2010. [An update on suscepfibility genes
mechanisms by zwhich Hi V causes immunodeficiency.!
for autoimmune diseases,how theseare identified,and their significance.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
俄
See Targeted Therapy available online at studentconsult.com
CHAPTER
sia
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Nomenclature 190
Cancer Genes 200
Tumor-Promoting inflammation os an Enabier of
Benign Tumors 190
Genetic Lesions in Cancer 20I
Malignancy 228
Malignant Tumors 190
Driver and Passenger Mutations 201
Etiology of Cancer: Carcinogenic
 Characteristics of Benign and Malignant
Epigenetic Modifications and Cancer 203
Agents 228
Neoplasms 192
Carcinogenesis:A Multistep Process 204
Chemical Carcinogens 228
Differentiation and Anapiasig 192
Hallmarks of Cancer 204
Radiation Carcinogenesis 231
Local invasion 1 94
Self-Sufficiency in Growth Signals 205
Viral and Microbiai Oncogenesis 231
Metastasis 195
Insensitivty to Growth inhibitory Signais: Tumor
Clinical Aspects of Neoplasia 235
Epidemiology 196
Supbressor Genes 208
Effects of Tumor on Host 235
Cancer incidence 197
 Altered Cellular Metabolism 21 4
Grading ond Stoging of Cancer 236
Environmental Factors 197
Evasion of Cell Deeth 217
Laboratory Diggnosis of Cancer 237
Age and Cancer 199
Limitiess Replicative Potential (immortality) 218
Acquired Predisposing Conditions 199
Sustained Angiogenesis 219
Interactions Between Environmental and Genetic
Invasion and Metastasis 220
Factors 200
Evasion of Immune Surveillance 223
Cancer is the second leading cause of death in the United
changes, such as focal increases in DNA methylation
States; only cardiovascular diseases exact a higher toll.
and alterations in histone modifications, which may
Even more agonizing than the associated mortality is the
 themselves stem from acquired mutations in genes that
eimotional and physical suffering inflicted by neoplasims.
regulate such modifications. These genetic and epigen-
Patients and the public often ask, "When will there be a
etic changes alter the expresion or function of key
cure for cancer?" The answer to this simple question is
 genes that regulate fundamental cellular processes, such
difficult, because cancer is not one disease but rather many
as growth, survival, and senescence.
disorders that share a profound growth dysregulation.
Genetic alterations in cancer cells are heritable, being
Some cancers, such as Hodgkin lymphoma, are highly
 passed to daughter cells upon cell division. As a result,
curable, whereas others, such as cancer of the pancreas, are
cells harboring these alterations are subject to Dar-
virtually always fatal. The only hope for controlling cancer
winian selection (survival of the fittest, arguably the
lies in learning more about its pathogenesis, and great
most important scientific concept in biology). Cells
strides have been made in understanding the molecular
bearing mutations that provide a growth or survival
basis of cancer. This chapter deals with the basic biology
advantage outcompete their neighbors and thus come
of neoplasia- the nature of benign and malignant neo-
to dominate the population. At the time of tumor ini-
plasims and the molecular basis of neoplastic transforma-
tiation, these selective advantages are conferred on a
tion. The host response to tumors and the clinical features 
single cell, and as a result all tumors are cloral (ie., the
of neoplasia also are discussed.
progeny of one cell). However, even beyond the point
Before we discuss the features of cancer cells and
of initiation, Darwinian selection continues to shape
the mechanisms of carcinogenesis, it is useful to sum-
the evolution of cancers by favoring the einergence
marize the fundainental and shared characteristics of
 of genetically distinct subclones with more aggressive
cancers:
characteristics, an important concept referred to as
Cancer is a genetic disorder caused by DNA muta-
progressior and discussed in more detail later in this
tions. Most pathogenic mutations are either induced by
chapter.
Jo jred se Aisnoauejuods inoso io suabeinu ot ainsodxa
 Mutations and epigenetic alterations impart to cancer
aging. In addition, cancers frequently show epigenetic
cells a set of properties that are referred to collectively
189
http://ebooksmedicine.net
190
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
as cancer hallmarks. These properties produce the cel-
cells. Although the biologic behavior of tumors largely
lular phenotypes that dictate the natural history of
reflects the behavior of the parenchyimal cells, there has
cancers as well as their response to various therapies.
been a growing realization that stromal cells and neoplas-
 The molecular underpinnings of each hallmark of cancer
tic cells carry on a two-way conversation that influences
are discussed in later sections.
the growth of the tumor.
Basic research has elucidated many of the cellular and
Benign Tumors
molecular abnorimalities that give rise to cancer and govern
its pernicious behavior. These insights are in turn leading
 In general, benign tumors are designated by attaching the
to a revolution in the diagnosis and treatiment of cancer, an
suffix -oma to the cell type from which the tumor arises.
emerging triumph of bioinedical science.
For example, a benign tumor arising in fibrous tissue is a
fibroma; a benign cartilaginous tumor is a chondroma. More
varied and coimplex nomenclature is applied to benign
epithelial tumors. The term adenoma is generally applied
NOMENCLATURE
not only to benign epithelial neoplasims that produce
glandlike structures, but also to benign epithelial neo-
Neoplasia literally means “new growth." Neoplastic cells
plasins that are derived from glands but lack a glandular
are said to be transforimed because they continue to repli-
growth pattern. Thus, a benign epithelial neoplasm arising
cate, apparently oblivious to the regulatory influences that
from renal tubule cells and growing in a glandlike pattern
control normal cells. Neoplasims therefore enjoy a degree
is termed an adenoma, as is a mass of benign epithelial cells
of autonoimy and tend to increase in size regardless of their
that produces no glandular patterns but has its origin in
 s ou Aq si A n aa l
the adrenal cortex. Papillomus are benign epithelial neo-
plete, however. All neoplasims depend on the host for their
iossorr anpod i aens e uo urmo sused
nutrition and blood supply. Neoplasins derived from
or macroscopic fingerlike fronds. A polyp is a mass that
hormone responsive tissues often also require endocrine
projects above a mucosal surface, as in the gut, to form a
support, and such dependencies sometimes can be
macroscopically visible structure (Fig. 6.1). Although this
exploited therapeutically.
terim commonly is used for benign tumors, soime malignant
 In common medical usage, a neoplasm often is referred 
tumors also may grow as polyps, whereas other polyps
to as a tumor, and the study of tunors is called oncology
Arr nq snsdoau jou ae (sdod iesu se yns)
Suourv (jo Apns, solo pue rou, ‘souo uo)
in origin. Cystadenomas are hollow cystic masses that typi-
tumors, the division of neoplasins into benign and malig-
cally arise in the ovary.
nant categories is based on a judgiment of a tumor's poten-
tial clinical behavior.
Malignant Tumors
· A tumor is said to be benign when its microscopic
 and gross characteristics are considered to be rela-
The nomenclature of malignant tumors essentially follows
tively innocent, implying that it will remain localized
that of benign tumors, with certain additions and
and is amenable to local surgical removal. Affected
exceptions.
patients generally survive. Of note, however, benign
● Malignant neoplasims arising in "solid" mesenchymal
tumors can produce more than localized lumps, and
tissues or its derivatives are called sarcomas, whereas
sometimes they produce significant morbidity or are
those arising from the mesenchyimal cells of the blood
even lethal.
are called leukemias or lymphoimas. Sarcomas are des-
 Malignant, as applied to a neoplasm, implies that the
ignated based on their cell-type composition, which
lesion can invade and destroy adjacent structures and
presumably reflects their cell of origin. Thus, a malig-
spread to distant sites (metastasize) to cause death.
nant neoplasm comprised of fat-like cells is a liposar-
Malignant tumors are collectively referred to as cncers,
coma, and
1 a malignant neoplasim  composed 
lof
derived from the Latin word for "crab"- that is, they
chondrocyte-like cells is a chordrosarcoma.
adhere to any part that they seize in an obstinate manner,
While the epithelia of the body are derived froim all
similar to a crab's behavior. Not all cancers pursue so
three gerim cell layers, malignant neoplasims of epithelial
 deadly a course. The most aggressive are also soime of
cells are called carcinomas regardless of the tissue of
the most curable, but the designation maligrart consti-
origin. Thus, malignant neoplasims arising in the renal
tutes a red flag.
tubular epithelium (1mesoderm), the skin (ectoderm),
and lining epithelium of the gut (endoderm) are all con-
All tumors, benign and malignant, have two basic
sidered carcinomas. Furtherimore, 1mesoderim may give
components: (1) the parenchyma, made up of transforimed
rise to carcinoimas (epithelial), sarcoimas (imesenchy-
or neoplastic cells, and (2) the supporting, host-derived,
 mal), and heinatolyimphoid tumors (leukemias and
non-neoplastic stroma, made up of connective tissue,
lymphomas).
blood vessels, and host-derived inflaimmatory cells. The
 Carcinomas are subdivided further. Carcinomas that
parenchyma of the neoplasim largely deterimines its bio-
grow in a glandular pattern are called adenocarcinomas,
logic behavior, and it is this component from which the
and those that produce squamous cells are called squa-
tumor derives its name. The stroma is crucial to the
mous cell carcinomas. Sometimes the tissue or organ of
growth of the neoplasm, since it carries the blood supply
 origin can be identified, as in the designation of renal
and provides support for the growth of parenchyimal
cell adenocarcinoma, but it is not uncomnon for tumors
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Nomenclature
161
and that are soimetimes abnorimnally present in midline
eimbryonic rests. Gerim cells have the capacity to differenti-
ate into any of the cell types found in the adult body; not
surprisingly, therefore, they imay give rise to neoplasms
that contain eleiments resembling bone, epithelium, muscle,
fat, nerve, and other tissues, all thrown together in a helter-
skelter fashion.
The specific naimes of the more coimmon neoplasims are
presented in Table 6.1. Some glaring inconsistencies may
be noted. For example, the terms lymphoma, mesothelioma,
melaroma, and seminoma are used for malignant neoplasims.
Unfortunately for students, these exceptions are firimly
entrenched in medical terminology.
There also are other instances of confusing teriminology:
Hamartoma is a imass of disorganized tissue indigenous
to the particular site, such as the lung or the liver.
While traditionally considered developimental malfor-
mations, many hamartomas have clonal chromosomal
aberrations that are acquired through somatic muta-
tions and on this basis are now considered to be
neoplastic.
 Choristoma is a congenital anomaly consisting of a het-
erotopic nest of cells. For example, a small nodule of
well-developed  and  norimally organized  pancreatic
tissue may be found in the subimucosa of the stomach,
duodenum, or simall intestine. The designation -oma,
connoting a neoplasm, imparts to these lesions an
Fig. 6.l Colonic poyp. This glandular tumor is seen projecting into the
undeserved gravity, as they are usually of trivial
colonic lumen. The polyp is attached to the mucosa by a distinct stalk.
significance.
Although the teriminology of neoplasims is regrettably
complex, an understanding of the nomenclature is impor-
to show little or no differentiation. Such tumors are
tant because it is the language by which a tumor's nature
referred to as poorly differentiated or undifferentiated
and significance is comnunicated among physicians in dif-
arcinoma.
ferent disciplines involved in cancer care.
The transforimed cells in a neoplasin, whether benign or
malignant, usually resemble each other, consistent with
 their origin froim a single transformed progenitor cell. In
soime unusual instances, however, the tumor cells undergo
divergent   differentiation,
creating so-called “mixed
tumors". Mixed tumors are still of monoclonal origin, but
the progenitor cell in such tumors has the capacity to dif-
ferentiate down more than one lineage. The best exaimple
a snoi asaui puel Arnes jo ro paxu si
obvious epithelial components dispersed throughout a
fibromyxoid stroma, soimetimes harboring islands of carti-
lage or bone (Fig. 6.2). All of these diverse eleiments are
thought to derive from a single transforimed epithelial pro-
genitor cell, and the preferred designation for these neo-
 plasims is pleomorphic adenoma. Fibroadenoima of the feimale
breast is another comnon mixed tunor. This benign tumor
contains a mixture of proliferating ductal elements
(adenoma) embedded in loose fibrous tissue (fibroma).
Unlike pleomorphic adenoma, only the fibrous coimponent
is neoplastic, but the term fibroaderoma reimains in comunon
usage.
 Teratoma is a special type of mixed tumor that contains
recognizable mature or immature cells or tissues derived
Fig. 6.2 Mixed tumor of the parotid gland.Small nests of epithelial cells and
froim more than one germ cell layer, and soimetimes all
myxoid stroma forming cartilage and bone (an unusual feature) are present
three. Teratomas originate from totipotential germ cells
in this field. (Courtesy of Dr. Vicky Jo, Department of Pathology, Brigham ond
such as those that norimally reside in the ovary and testis
Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
192
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
Table 6.l Nomenclature ofTumors
 Tissue of Origin
Benign
Malignant
 One Parenchymal Cell Type
 Connective tissue and derivatives
Fibroma
Fibrosarcoma
Lipoma
Liposarcoma
Chondroma
Chondrosarcoma
Osteoma
Osteogenic sarcoma
Endothelium and related cell types
Blood vessels
Hemangioma
Angiosarcoma
Lymph vessels
 Lymphangioma
Lymphangiosarcoma
 Mesothelium
Mesothelioma
Brain coverings
Meningioma
 Invasive meningioma
 Blood cells and related cell types
Hematopoietic cells
Leukemias
 Lymphoid tissue
Lymphomas
 Muscle
 Smooth
Leiomyoma
Leiomyosarcoma
 Striated
Rhabdomyoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma
 Skin
 Stratified squamous
 Squamous cell papilloma
 Squamous cell or epidermoid carcinoma
Basal cells of skin or adnexa
Basal cell carcinoma
Tumors of melanocytes
Nevus
 Malignant melanoma
Epithelial lining of glands or ducts
Adenoma
Adenocarcinoma
 Papilloma
 Papillary carcinomas
Cystadenoma
Cystadenocarcinoma
Lung
Bronchial adenoma
Bronchogenic carcinoma
Kidney
 Renal tubular adenoma 
 Renal cell carcinoma
Liver
Liver cell adenoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Bladder
Urothelial papilloma
Urothelial carcinoma
 Placenta
 Hydatidiform mole 
Choriocarcinoma
Testicle
 Seminoma 
Embryonal carcinoma
More Than One Neoplastic Cell Type--Mixed Tumors, Usually Derived From One Germ Cell Layer
Salivary glands
 Pleomorphic adenoma (mixed tumor of salivary gland)
pue Kees jo owm paxw suen m
Renal anlage
Wilms tumor
 More Than One Neoplastic Cell Type Derived From More Than One Germ Cell Layer--Teratogenous 
 Totipotential cells in gonads or in embryonic
 Mature teratoma, dermoid cyst
Immature teratoma, teratocarcinoma
rests
CHARACTERISTICS OF BENIGN AND
Differentiation and Anaplasia
MALIGNANT NEOPLASMS
Differentiation refers to the extent to which neoplasms
resemble their parenchymal cells of origin, both morpho-
There are three fundamental features by which most
logically and functionally; lack of differentiation is called
benign and malignant tumors can be distinguished: dif-
anaplasia. In general, benign neoplasims are composed of
ferentiation and anaplasia, local invasion, and metasta-
well-differentiated cells that closely reseimble their norimal
sis. In general, rapid growth also signifies malignancy, but
counterparts. A lipoma is made up of mature fat cells laden
with cytoplasimic lipid vacuoles, and a chondroina is made
growth rate is not a reliable discriminator between good
up of mature cartilage cells that synthesize their usual car-
and bad actors. Nothing is more important to the patient
tilaginous matrix-evidence of morphologic and func-
with a tumor than being told: "It is benign." Although
 tional differentiation. In well-differentiated benign tumors,
soime neoplasims defy easy characterization, in most
mitoses are usually rare and are of norimal configuration.
instances the deterimination of benign versus malignant is
By contrast, while malignant neoplasims exhibit a wide
made with remarkable accuracy using long-established
range of parenchymal cell differentiation, imost exhibit
clinical and anatomic criteria.
 morphologic alterations that betray their malignant nature.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Characteristics of Benign and Malignant Neoplasms
93
Fig. 6.4 Pleomorphic malignant tumor (rhabdormyosarcoma). Note the
Fig. 6.3 Well-diferentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the skin.The tumor
marked variation in cell and nuclear sizes, the hyperchromatic nuclei,and the
cells are strikingly similar to normal squamous epithelial cells, with intercel-
presence of tumor giant cells. (Courtesy of Dr Trace Worrell, Department of
lular bridges and nests of keratin (arrow). (Courtesy of Dr. Trace Worrel, Depart-
Pathology,University ofTexas Southwestem Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
ment of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestem Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
In well-differentiated cancers, these features may be quite
structures, such as glands or stratified squaimous
subtle (Fig. 6.3). For example, well-differentiated adenocar-
architecture.
cinoma of the thyroid gland may contain norimal-appearing
follicles, its malignant potential being only revealed by
Well-differentiated tumor cells are likely to retain the
invasion into adjacent tissues or metastasis. The stroma
functional capabilities  of  their  norimal  counterparts,
carrying the blood supply iscrucial to the growth of tumors
whereas anaplastic tumor cells are much less likely to
jueueu uog uuaq jo uogeiedas au ut pe jou saop ing
 have specialized functional activities. For example, benign
ones. The amount of stroimal connective tissue does,
neoplasms and even well-differentiated cancers of endo-
however, deterimine the consistency of a neoplasim. Certain
crine glands frequently elaborate the horimones character-
cancers induce a dense, abundant fibrous stroma (desimo-
istic of their cell of origin. Similarly, well-differentiated
plasia), making thein hard, so-called "scirrhous tumors".
squamous cell carcinomas produce keratin (see Fig. 6.3),
Tumors composed of undifferentiated cells are said to
just as  well-differentiated  hepatocellular  carcinomas
be anaplastic, a feature that is a reliable indicator of
secrete bile. In other instances, unanticipated functions 
-d pou suaod ran ssardxa A sau ao aaa
forimation"-implying dedifferentiation, or loss of the
duced by coimparable cells in the adult. Cancers of nonen-
structural and functional differentiation of normal cells. It 
docrine origin may produce so-called "ectopic horimones.
is now known, however, that at least some cancers arise
 For exaimple, certain lung carcinoimas may produce adre-
from stem cells in tissues; in these tumors, failure of dif-
nocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), parathyroid hormone-
ferentiation of transformed stem cells, rather than dedif-
like hormone, insulin, glucagon, and others. More is said
ferentiation of specialized cells, accounts for their anaplastic
about these so-called "paraneoplastic" phenomena later.
appearance. Recent studies also indicate that in some cases,
Also of relevance in the discussion of differentiation and
dedifferentiation of apparently mature cells occurs during
anaplasia is tysplasia, referring to disorderly proliferation.
carcinogenesis. Anaplastic celis often display the following
morphologic features:
 Pleomorphism (i.e., variation in size and shape) (Fig. 6.4)
 Nuclear abnormalities, consisting of extreme hyperchro-
matism (dark-staining), variation in nuclear size and
shape, or unusually prominent single or multiple nucle-
oli. Enlargeiment of nuclei may result in an increased
nuclear-to-cytoplasimic ratio that approaches 1 : 1 instead
of the norimal 1:4 or 1:6. Nucleoli may attain astound-
ing sizes, sometimes approaching the diaimeter of
normal lymphocytes.
Tumor giant cells imay be forimed. These are considerably
larger than neighboring cells and may possess either
 one enorinous nucleus or several nuclei
Atypical mitoses, which may be numerous. Anarchic
multiple spindles may produce tripolar or quadripolar
mitotic figures (Fig. 6.5).
Loss of polarity, such that anaplastic cells lack recogniz-
able patterns of orientation to one another. Such cells
and nuclear variation in size and shape.The prominent cellin the center field
may grow in sheets, with total loss of coimnunal
has an abnormal tripolar spindle.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
194
CHAPTER 6
Neoplasia
Fig. 6.6 Carcinoma in situ.(A) Low-power view shows that the entire thickness of the epithelium is replaced by atypical dysplastic cells.There is no orderly
differentiation of squarmous cells.The basement membrane is intact, and there is no tumor in the subepithelial stroma.(B) High-power view of another region
shows failure of normal differentiation, marked nuclear and cellular pleomorphism, and numerous mitotic figures extending toward the surface. The intact
basement membrane (below) is not seen in this section.
Dysplastic epithelium is recognized by a loss in the
uniformity of individual cells and in their architectural
orientation. Dysplastic cells exhibit considerable pleomor-
phism and often possess abnormally large, hyperchroimatic
nuclei. Mitotic figures are more abundant than usual and
frequently appear in abnorimal locations within the epithe-
lium. In dysplastic stratified squamous epithelium, mitoses
are not confined to the basal layers, where they norimally
ipe un ida ar inoqnorr uas aq Aeur iq 'r
tion, there is considerable architectural anarchy. For
example, the usual progressive maturation of tall cells in
the basal layer to flattened squaimes on the surface may be
lost and replaced by a disordered hodgepodge of dark
basal-appearing cells. When dysplastic changes are severe
and involve the entire thickness of the epitheliun, the
lesion is referred to as carcinoma in situ, a preinvasive stage
Fig. 6.7 Fibroadenoma of the breast. The tan-colored, encapsulated small
tumor is sharply dermarcated from the whiter breast tissue.
of cancer (Fig. 6.6).
It is important to appreciate that dysplasia is not syn-
 onymous with cancer. Mild to moderate dysplasias that do
not involve the entire thickness of the epithelium some-
 times regress completely, particularly if inciting causes are
removed. However, dysplasia is often noted adjacent to
frankly malignant neoplasims (e.g, in cigarette simokers
with lung cancer), and in general the presence of dysplasia
marks a tissue as being at increased risk for developing an
invasive cancer.
Local Invasion
The growth of cancers is accompanied by progressive
infiltration, invasion, and destruction of surrounding
tissues, whereas most benign tumors grow as cohesive
expansile masses that remain localized to their sites of
origin. Because benign tumors grow and expand slowly,
they usually develop a rim of coimpressed fibrous tissue
(Figs. 6.7 and 6.8). This capsule consists largely of extracel-
lular matrix that is deposited by stromal cells such as fibro-
to
Fig. 6.8 Microscopic view of fibroadenoma of the breast seen in Fig. 6.7.
parenchymal cells resulting froim coimpression by the
The fibrous capsule (right) sharply delimits the tumor from the surrounding
expanding tumor. Encapsulation creates a tissue plane that
tissue. (Courtesy of Dr. Trace Worrel, Departrment of Pathofogy, University of Texas
makes the tumor discrete, moveable (non-fixed), and
Southwestem Medicat Schoot, Dallas, Texas.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Characteristics of Benign and Malignant Neoplasms
195
Fig. 6.9 Cut section of invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast.The lesion
Fig. 6.10 Microscopic view of breast carcinoma seen in Fig. 6.9 illustrates
the invasion of breast stroma and fat by nests and cords of tumor cells
on palpation.
(compare with Fig. 6.8). Note the absence of a well-defined capsule. (Courtesy
of Dr. Suson Lester, Brigham and Wormens Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.)
readily excisable by surgical enucleation. However, it is
important to recognize that not all benign neoplasms are
encapsulated. For example, the leiomyoma of the uterus is
clinically evident metastases. An additional 20% have
discretely demarcated from the surrounding simooth
 occult (hidden) metastases at the time of diagnosis.
muscle by a zone of compressed and attenuated norimal
 In general, the more anaplastic and the larger the
myometrium, but lacks a capsule. A few benign tumors are
primary neoplasm, the more likely is metastatic spread, but
neither encapsulated nor discretely defined; lack of demar-
as with most rules there are exceptions. Extreimely simall
cation is particularly likely in benign vascular neoplasms
cancers have been known to metastasize; conversely, some
such as hemangiomas, which understandably may be dif-
 [e am jou Ae suoisl Suool-snouo pue ao1e
ficult to excise. These exceptions are pointed out only to
 malignant tuimors can metastasize, some do so very infre-
emphasize that although encapsulation is therule in benign
quently. For example, basal cell carcinomas of the skin and
tunors, the lack of a capsule does not mean that a tunor is
most primary tumors of the central nervous system are
malignant. Sadly, because of their uncivilized nature, tumor
highly locally invasive but rarely metastasize. It is evident
cells sometimes do not follow the rules set by humans. We
then that the properties oflocal invasion and metastasis are
will see such deviations many times in this chapter.
 soimetimes separable.
Next to the development of metastases, invasiveness
A special circumstance involves so-called "blood
 is the feature that most reliably distinguishes cancers
cancers", the leukeimias and lymphomas. These tumors are
from benign tumors (Figs. 6.9 and 6.10). Cancers lack well-
derived from blood-foriming cells that norimally have the
defined capsules. There are instances in which a slowly
capacity to enter the bloodstreain and travel to distant
growing malignant tumor deceptively appears to be
sites; as a result, with only rare exceptions, leukemias and
encased by the stroma of the surrounding host tissue, but
 lyimphomas are taken to be disseininated diseases at diag.
 microscopic exaimination reveals tiny crablike feet pene-
nosis and are always considered to be malignant.
trating the margin and infiltrating adjacent structures. This
Malignant neoplasms disseminate by one of three
infiltrative mode of growth makes it necessary to remove
pathways: (1) seeding within body cavities, (2) lymphatic
a wide margin of surrounding normal tissue when surgical
excision of a malignant tumor is atteimpted. Surgical
pathologists carefully exaimine the margins of resected
tumors to ensure that they are devoid of cancer cells (clear
margins).
Metastasis
Metastasis is defined by the spread of a tumor to sites
that are physically discontinuous with the primary tumor
and unequivocally marks a tumor as malignant, as by
definition benign neoplasms do not metastasize. The
invasiveness of cancers perimits theim to penetrate into
blood vessels, lymphatics, and body cavities, providing
30% of patients with newly diagnosed solid tumors (exclud-
ing skin cancers other than melanoimas) present with
Fig. 6.lI A liver studded with metastatic cancer.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
96
CHAPTER6 
Neoplasia
spread, or (3) hematogenous spread. Spread by seeding
Certain carcinoimas have a propensity to grow within
occurs when neoplasims invade a natural body cavity. This
veins. Renal cell carcinoima often invades the renal vein to
mode of dissemination is particularly characteristic of
grow in a snakelike fashion up theinferior vena cava, some-
cancers of the ovary, which often cover the peritoneal sur-
times reaching the right side of the heart. Hepatocellular
faces widely. The implants literally may glaze all perito-
carcinomas often penetrate and grow within the radicles of
 neal surfaces and yet not invade the underlying tissues.
portal and hepatic veins, eventually reaching the main
Here is an instance where the ability to reimplant and grow
venous channels. Remarkably, such intravenous growth
at sites distant froin the primary tumor seeins to be sepa-
rable froim the capacity to invade. Neoplasims of the central
Many observations suggest that the anatoimic localiza-
tion of a neoplasm and its venous drainage cannot wholly
 moma, imay penetrate the cerebral ventricles and be carried
explain the systeimic distributions of metastases. For
by the cerebrospinal fluid to reimplant on the meningeal
example, prostatic carcinoma preferentially spreads to
surfaces, either within the brain or in the spinal cord.
bone, bronchogenic carcinoima tends to involve the adrenal
Lymphatic spread is more typical of carcinomas,
 glands and the brain, and neuroblastoma spreads to the
whereas hematogenous spread is favored by sarcomas.
liver and bones. Conversely, skeletal muscles, although
There are numerous interconnections, however, between
rich in capillaries, are rarely sites of tumor metastases. The
the lymphatic and vascular systems, so all forms of cancer
molecular basis of such tissue-specific hoiming of tumor
may disseininate through either or both
1 systems. The
cells is discussed later.
pattern of lyimph node involvement depends principally on
Thus, numerous features of tumors (Fig. 6.12) usually
the site of the primary neoplasim and the natural pathways
perimit the (
differentiation of benign and malignant
of local lymphatic drainage. Lung carcinoimas arising in the
neoplasims.
chial lymph nodes and then to the tracheobronchial and
hilar nodes. Carcinoma of the breast usually arises in the
SUMMARY
upper outer quadrant and first spreads to the axillary nodes.
CHARACTERISTICS OF BENIGN AND
However, medial breast lesions may drain through the
MALIGNANT TUMORS 
chest wall to the nodes along the internal maimunary artery.
● Benign and malignant tumors can be distinguished from one
Thereafter, in both instances, the supraclavicular and infra-
clavicular nodes may be seeded. In some cases, the cancer
another based on the degree of differentiation, rate of growth,
cells seeim to travel in lyimphatic channels within the imme-
local invasiveness, and distant spread.
diately proxiimate nodes to be trapped in subsequent lyimph
 Benign tumors resemble the tissue of origin and are well dif-
ferentiated; malignant tumors are poorly or completely undif-
 a saseisena ds, pa-os unnd sapou
ferentiated (anaplastic).
may traverse all of the lymph nodes ultimately to reach the
+ Benign tumors tend to be slow growing, whereas malignant
vascular compartinent by way of the thoracic duct.
 A "sentinel lymph node" is the first regional lymph
tumors generally grow faster.
· Benign tumors are well circumscribed and have a capsule;
node that receives lymph flow from a primary tumor. It
paaqeoipen no sap ania jo uonoau Aq pauapi aq ue
malignant tumors are poorly circumscribed and invade the 
tracers near the primary tumor. Biopsy of sentinel lymph
surrounding normal tissues.
+ Benign tumors remain localized to the site of origin, whereas
nodes allows deterimination of the extent of spread of
tumor and can be used to plan treatiment.
 Of note, although enlargement of nodes near a primary
sites.
neoplasim should arouse concern for metastatic spread, it
does not always iimply cancerous involveiment. The necrotic
products of the neoplasim and tumor antigens often evoke
EPIDEMIOLOGY
immunologic responses in the nodes, such as hyperplasia
of the follicles (lymphadenitis) and proliferation of macro-
Study of cancer occurrence in populations has contributed
phages in the subcapsular sinuses (sinus histiocytosis)
substantially to knowledge about its origins. The now well-
Thus, histopathologic verification of tumor within an
established concept that cigarette simoking is causally asso-
enlarged lymph node is required.
While heimatogenous spread is the favored pathway for
studies. A coimparison of the incidence rates for colon
sarcomas, carcinoimas use it as well. As might be expected,
cancer and dietary patterns in the Western world and in
 arteries are penetrated less readily than are veins. With
Africa led to the recognition that dietary fat and fiber
venous invasion, the bloodborne cells follow the venous
content may figure importantly in the causation of this
flow draining the site of the neoplasm, with tumor cells
cancer. Major insights into the causes of cancer can be
often stopping in the first capillary bed they encounter.
 obtained by epideimiologic studies that relate particular
Since all portal area drainage flows to the liver, and all caval
blood flows to the lungs, the liver and lungs are the most
influences to the occurrence of specific neoplasims. Certain
frequently involved secondary sites in hematogenous dis-
 diseases associated with an increased risk for developing
semination. Cancers arising near the vertebral coluumn often
cancer also provide clues to the pathogenesis of cancer. The
eimbolize through the paravertebral plexus; this pathway
following discussion first sumumarizes the overall incidence
 probably is involved in the frequent vertebral netastases of
 of cancer to provide insight into the magnitude of the
carcinoimas of the thyroid and prostate glands.
cancer problein and then reviews factors relating to the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Epidemiology
197
Endometrium
Fallopian tube
Tumor
Ovary
Vein
BENIGN
MALIGNANT
(Leiomyoma)
(Leiomyosarcoma)
Small
Noninvasive
Large
Locally invasive
Well demarcated
Nonmetastatic
 Poorly demarcated 
Metastatic
Slow growing
 Well differentiated
Rapidly growing with
 Poorly differentiated
 hemorrhage and necrosis
Fig. 6.12 Comparison between a benign tumor of the myometrium (leiomyoma) and a malignant tumor of similar origin (leiomyosarcoma)
patient and the environment that influence the predisposi-
The last half-century has also seen a sharp decline in
tion to cancer.
death rates from cervical cancer and gastric cancer in the
United States. The decrease in cervical cancer is directly
Cancer Incidence
attributable to widespread use of the Papanicolaou (PAP)
sinear test for early detection of this tumor and its precur-
For the year 2012, the World Health Organization (WHO)
sor lesions. The deployment of the human papillomavirus
estimated that there were about 14.1 million new cancer
(HPV) vaccine may nearly eliminate this cancer in coiming
cases worldwide, leading to 8.2 million deaths (approxi-
years. The cause of the decline in death rates for cancers of
 mately 22,500 deaths per day). Moreover, due to increasing
the stomach is obscure; it may be related to decreasing
population size, by the year 2035 the WHO projects that
 exposure to unknown dietary carcinogens.
the numbers of cancer cases and deaths worldwide will
increase to 24 million and 14.6 million, respectively (based
Environmental Factors
likelihood of developing a specific forim of cancer can be
Environmental exposures appear to be the dominant risk
gained from national incidence and mortality data. In the
United States, it is estimated that the year 2016 will be
fraction of cancers are potentially preventable. This notion
Imarked by approximately 1.69 million new cases of cancer
is supported by the geographic variation in death rates from
and 595,000 cancer deaths. Incidence data for the most
specific forims of cancer, which is thought to sten mainly
comumon forms of cancer, with the major killers identified,
from differences in environmental exposures. For instance,
 are presented in Fig. 6.13.
death rates from breast cancer are about four to five times
Over several decades, the death rates for many forims of
higher in the United States and Europe than in Japan. Con-
cancer have changed. Since 1995, the incidence of cancer in
versely, the death rate for stomach carcinoma in men and
Imen and woimen in the United States has been roughly
women is about seven times higher in Japan than in the
stable, but the cancer death rate has decreased by roughly
United States. Liver cell carcinoma is relatively infrequent
20% in men and 10% in women. Among men, 80% of the
in the United States but is the most lethal cancer ainong
decrease is accounted for by lower death rates for cancers
 many African populations. Nearly all the evidence indicates
 of the lung prostate, and colon; aimong women, nearly 60%
that these geographic differences have environmental
of the decrease is due to reductions in death rates from
rather than genetic origins. For exaimple, Nisei (second-
breast and colorectal cancers. Decreased use of tobacco
 generation Japanese living in the United States) have mor-
products is responsible for the reduction in lung cancer
tality rates for certain forms of cancer that are interimediate
deaths, while improved detection and treatiment are
 between those in natives of Japan and in Aimericans who
responsible for the decrease in death rates for colorectal,
 have lived in the United States for many generations. The
feimale breast, and prostate cancers.
two rates come closer with each passing generation.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
198
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
A 2016 ESTIMATED CANCER INCIDENCE BY SITE AND SEX*
B 2016 ESTIMATED CANCER DEATHS BY SITE AND SEX
Men 841,390
Women 843,820
Men 314,290
Women 281,400
Melanoma 6% ~
3%
Melanoma
Brain3%~
of thie skin
2%Brain
of the skin
Oral cavity 4% -
6%
Thyroid
Lung and 27% 
bronchus
26% Lung and 
Lung and 
14%
- 13% Lung and 
bronchus
bronchus
Esophagus
bronchus
4%
14%Breast
Kidney  5% 
Liver 6%-
29% Breast
3%Liver
Liver 3% 
3%
Kidney
Pancreas
7%
7%
Pancreas
3% Pancreas
Colon and
Colon and 8%
8%
8%
 Colon and
rectum
8%
Colon and
rectum
rectum
rectum
Urinary
Urinary 
7%
4%
4%
Uterine corpus
 Uterine corpus
bladder
 bladder 
7%
Prostate
5%
Ovary
8%
Prostate 21%
Leukemia
4%
Leukemia
Leukemia 4%
3% Leukemia
Non-Hodgkin  5%
4% Non-Hodgkin
Non-Hodgkin 
4%
3%
Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
lymphoma
 lymphoma
lymphoma
All other sites 23%
 21% All other sites
All other sites 25%
 24% All other sites
Fig. 6.13 Estirmated cancer incidence and mortality by site and sex in the United States. Excludes basal cell and squarmous cell skin cancers and in situ
carcinomas, except urinary bladder. (Adapted from Cancer facts & figures 20l6. Americon Concer Society. www.cancer.org/research/cancer-focts-statistics/al-concer-
focts-figures/concer-focts-figures-20 1 6.html.)
There is no paucity of environimental factors that con-
with a modestly increased risk for developing many
tribute to cancer. They lurk in the ambient environment, in
different cancers.
the workplace, in food, and in personal practices. They can
 Smoking. Smoking, particularly of cigarettes, has been
be as universal as sunlight or be largely restricted to urban
inplicated in cancer of the mouth, pharynx, larynx,
settings (e.g, asbestos) or particular occupations (Table
esophagus, pancreas, bladder, and, most significantly,
6.2). The most important environmental exposures linked
the lung, as 90% of lung cancer deaths are related to
 to cancer include the following:
simoking.
 Diet. Certain features of diet have been implicated as
 Alcohol corsumption. Alcohol abuse is an independent
predisposing influences. More broadly, obesity, cur-
risk factor for cancers of the oropharynx, larynx, esoph-
rently epideimic in the United States, is associated
agus, and (due to alcoholic cirrhosis) liver. Moreover,
Table 6.2 Occupational Cancers
Human Cancers for
 Agents or Groups
Which Reasonable
of Agents
Evidence Is Available
Typical Use or Occurrence
 Arsenic and arsenic
 Lung carcinoma, skin carcinoma 
By-product of metal smelting; component of alloys, electrical and semiconductor devices,
compounds
medications and herbicides, fungicides, and animal dips
Asbestos
Lung, esophageal, gastric, and
Formerly used for many applications because of fire, heat, and friction resistance; still 
colon carcinoma;
 found in existing construction as well as fire-resistant textiles, friction materials (i.e.,
mesothelioma
brake linings), underlayment and roofing papers, and floor tiles 
Benzene
Acute rmyeloid leukermia
Principal component of light oil; despite known risk, many applications exist in printing 
and ithography, paint, rubber, dry cleaning, adhesives and coatings, and detergents;, 
formerly widely used as solvent and fumigant
 Beryllium and beryllium 
 Lung carcinoma
 Missle fuel and space vehicles; hardener for ightweight metal alloys, particularly in
 compounds
 aerospace applications and nuclear reactors
 Cadmium and cadmium 
Prostate carcinoma
Uses include yellow pigments and phosphors; found in solders; used in batteries and as
compounds
 alloy and in metal platings and coatings
 Chromium compounds 
 Lung carcinoma
 Component of rmetal alloys, paints, pigments, and preservatives 
 Nickel compounds
 Lung and oropharyngeal 
 Nickel plating; component of ferrous alloys, ceramics, and batteries; by-product of
 carcinoma
 stainless-steel arc welding
Radon and its decay
Lung carcinoma
 From decay of minerals containing uranium; potentially serious hazard in quarries and
products
underground mines 
Vinyl chloride
Hepatic angiosarcoma
Refrigerant; monomer for vinyl polymers; adhesive for plastics; formerly inert aerosol
 propellant in pressurized containers
Modified from Scellman JM, Sctellman SD: Cancer and the workplace, CA Cancer J Clin 46:70-92, I996, with permission from Lippincoct Wiliams & Wilkins.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Epidemiology
199
Table 6.3 Chronic Inflammatory States and Cancer
the risk for developing cancers of the upper airways and
Pathologic
Associated
upper digestive tract.
 Condition
Neoplasm(s)
EtiologicAgent
 Reproductive history. There is strong evidence that life-
 Asbestosis, silicosis 
Mesothelioma, lung 
Asbestos fibers, silica
long cumulative exposure to estrogen stimulation, par-
ticularly if unopposed by progesterone, increases the
carcin oma
 particles
 Inflammatory bowel
Colorectal carcinoma 
risk for developing cancers of the endometrium and
breast, both of which are estrogen-responsive tissues.
disease
Lichen sclerosis
Vulvar squamous cell
cause approximately 15% of cancers worldwide.
carcinoma
Pancreatitis
 Pancreatic carcinoma 
Alcoholism, germ
Thus, there is no escape: it seems that everything people
line mutations 
(e.g., in the
 do to earn a livelihood, to subsist, or to enjoy life turns out
trypsinogen gene)
to be illegal, imnoral, or fattening, or - imost disturbing-
 Chronic cholecystitis
Gallbladder cancer
 Bile acids, bacteria,
possibly carcinogenic!
 gallbladder stones 
 Reflux esophagitis,
Esophageal
Gastric acid
Age and Cancer
Barrett esophagus
carcinoma
Sjogren syndrome,
 MALT lymphoma 
 In general, the frequency of cancer increases with age. Most
Hashimoto
cancer deaths occur between 55 and 75 years of age; the
thyroiditis
rate declines, along with the population base, after 75 years
Opisthor chis,
Cholangiocarcinoma,
Liver flukes
of age. The rising incidence with age may be explained by
 cholangitis
 colon carcinoma 
(Opisthorchis
 the accunulation of somatic mutations that drive the emer-
viverrinij
 gence of malignant neoplasims (discussed later). The
Gastritis/ulcers
Gastric
Helicobacter pylori
 decline in imnune competence that accompanies aging
adenocarcinoma,
also may be a factor.
MALT lymphoma
Although cancer preferentially affects older adults, it
Hepatitis
Hepatocellular
 Hepatitis B and/or C
also is responsible for slightly more than 10% of all deaths
carcinoma
virus
( adey) ae jo sieaa gt ue nauoa uaipiyo buoue
Osteomyelitis
Carcinoma in
 Bacterial infection
The major lethal cancers in children are leukemias, tumors
 draining sinuses
of the central nervous system, lymphomas, and soft-tissue
 Chronic cervicitis
 Cervical carcinoma
Human
and bone sarcomas. As discussed later, study of several
papillomavirus
 childhood tumors, such as retinoblastoina, has provided
Chronic cystitis
Bladder carcinoma
Schistosomiasis
fundainental insights into the pathogenesis of malignant
Adapced from Tlsty TD, Coussens LM: Tumor stroma and regulation of cancer
transformation.
development, An Rev Pathor Mech Dis I:119, 2006.
Acquired Predisposing Conditions
Acquired conditions that predispose to cancer include
disorders associated with chronic inflammation, immu-
Squamous metaplasia and ctysplasia of bronchial mucosa,
nodeficiency states, and precursor lesions. Many chronic
 seen in in habitual simokers - a risk factor for lung car-
inflaimumatory conditions create a fertile "soil" for the devel-
cinoma (Chapter 13)
opment of malignant tumors (Table 6.3). Tumors arising in
Endometrial hyperplasia and dysplasia, seen in women
the context of chronic inflammation are mostly carcino-
with unopposed estrogenic stimulation-a risk factor
mas, but also include mesothelioma and several kinds of
for endometrial carcinoma (Chapter 19)
lymphoma. By contrast, immunodeficiency states mainly
Leukoplakia of the oral cavity,vulua,and penis, which may
predispose to virus-induced cancers, including specific
 progress to squamous cell carcinoma (Chapters 15, 18,
types of lymphoma and carcinoma and some sarcoina-like
and 19)
proliferations.
Villous adenoma of the colon, associated with a high risk
 Precursor lesiors are localized disturbances of epithelial
for progression to colorectal carcinoma (Chapter 15)
differentiation that are associated with an elevated risk for
developing carcinoima. They may arise secondary
In this context it also may be asked, "What is the risk
chronic inflamnation  or
hormonal(
disturbances
(in
ps 'r -sedu uuaq e u a jr rog
endocrine-sensitive tissues), or may occur spontaneously.
a u sauad sr uuaq ar, uaa
Molecular analyses have shown that precursor
lesions
the answer is no, but inevitably there are exceptions,
often possess some of the genetic lesions found in their
uuaq jo ad yoea jey Aes ot raaq st ll sdeuad pue
 associated cancers (discussed later). However, progression
tumor is associated with a particular level of risk, ranging
to cancer is not inevitable, and it is important to recognize
from high to virtually nonexistent. As cited earlier, ade-
precursor lesions because their removal or reversal lowers
 noimas of the colon as they enlarge can undergo malig-
cancer risk.
nant transforimation in up to 50% of cases; by contrast,
 Many different precursor lesions have been described;
 malignant change is extreimely rare in leioimyoimas of
 anong the most coimmon are the following:
the uterus.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
200
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
Interactions Between Environmental and
disease caused by mutations that alter the function of of a
Genetic Factors
finite subset of the 20,000 or so human genes. For simplic-
ity, we will refer to these genes as cancer genes. Cancer
Cancer behaves like an inherited trait in some faimilies,
genes can be defined as genes that are recurrently affected
usually due to germ line mutations that affect the function
by genetic aberrations in cancers, presumably because they
of a gene that suppresses cancer (a so-called "tumor
contribute directly to the malignant behavior of cancer
s a     ss arsss
cells. Causative mutations that give rise to cancer genes
about the influence of heredity on sporadic malignant neo-
may be acquired by the action of environmental agents,
plasims, which constitute roughly 95% of the cancers in the
such as cheinicals, radiation, or viruses, may occur spon-
United States?
taneously, or may be inherited in the gerim line. If such
While the evidence suggests that sporadic cancers can
mutations drive carcinogenesis, a key prediction is that
largely be attributed to environmental factors or acquired
 each cell in an individual tumor should share mutations
predisposing conditions, lack of faimily history does not
that were present in the founding cell at the time of trans-
preclude an inherited component. It may in fact be difficult
forimation. This expectation has been realized in all tumors
 a  s  a 
these factors often interact. Such interactions may be par-
sisaoday au rog joddns Suons Supiaond Suouanbas
ticularly complex when tumor developiment is affected by
 that cancer is at its root a genetic disease.
 Cancer genes number in the hundreds and new ones are
genetic factors may alter the risk for developing environ-
still being discovered. Not only are these genes numerous,
mentally induced cancers. Instances where this holds true
but many have unpronounceable acronyms for names that
often involve inherited variation in enzymes such as coim-
are difficult to remeimber, even for the aficionado. One way
 ponents of the cytochroime P-450 systeim that metabolize
to try to simplify this complexity is to consider that cancer
procarcinogens to active carcinogens. Conversely, environ-
genes fall into one of four major functional classes:
 mental factors can influence the risk for developing cancer,
Oncogenes are genes that induce a transforimed pheno-
even in individuals who inherit well-defined “cancer
a pasau od aqsas u passdxa umad
genes." For instance, breast cancer risk in feimales who
growth. A major discovery in cancer was the realization
inherit imutated copies of the BRCA1 or BRCA2 tumor sup-
that oncogenes are mutated or overexpressed versions of
pressor genes (discussed later) is almost three-fold higher
 normal cellular genes, which are called proto-oncogenes.
for woimen born after 1940 than for woimen born before that
Most oncogenes encode transcription factors, factors
year, perhaps because of changes in reproductive behavior
that participate in pro-growth signaling pathways, or
or increases in obesity in more recent times.
factors that enhance cell survival. They are considered
dominant genes because a mutation involving a single
allele is sufficient to produce a pro-oncogenic effect.
SUMMARY
Tumor suppressor genes are genes that norimally prevent
 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CANCER
uncontrolled growth and, when mutated or lost from a
cell, allow the transforimed phenotype to develop. Often
+ The incidence of cancer varies with age, geographic factors,
both norimal alleles of tumor suppressor genes imust be
and genetic background. The geographic variation in cancer
damaged for transformation to occur. Tumor suppressor
incidence results mostly from different environmental expo-
,soaaos,'sdnois geauat oml ou paoed aq ues sauas
 sures. Cancer can ocur at any age, but is most common in
that act as important brakes on cellular proliferation, and
older adults.
"guardians" that are responsible for sensing genomic
· Environmental factors implicated in carcinogenesis include
damage. Some guardian genes initiate and choreograph
infectious agents, smoking, alcohol, diet, obesity, reproductive
a ot speat ie asuodsan ponuos aeurep, xanduros e
history, and exposure to carcinogens.
cessation of proliferation or, if the daimage is too great to
+ Cancer risk rises in certain tissues in the setting of increased
be repaired, or induce apoptosis.
cellular proliferation caused by chronic inflammation or hor-
Suua Aq ioe Ared sisdode au  sou .
monal stimulation.
cell survival, rather than stimulating proliferation per se.
+ Epithelial cell linings may develop morphologic changes that
Understandably, genes of this class that protect against
signify an increased risk for developing cancer; such lesions are
apoptosis are often overexpressed in cancer cells,
referred to as precursor lesions.
whereas those that promote apoptosis tend to be under-
· The risk for developing cancer is modifed by interactions
 between environmental exposures and genetic variants.
 To this list may now be added genes that regulate interac-
tions between tumor cells and host cells, as these genes are
also recurrently mutated or functionally altered in
certain cancers. Particularly important are genes that
CANCER GENES
a aq s so jo o  o an
host imnune systein.
It could be argued that the proliferation of literature on the
 molecular basis of cancer has outpaced the growth of even
 In most instances, the mutations that give rise to cancer
the most malignant of tumors. Researchers and students
genes are acquired during life and are confined to the
alike can easily get lost in the growing forest of informa-
cancer cells. However, causative mutations sometimes are
tion. But it has become eiminently clear that cancer is a
inherited in the germ line and are therefore present in
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Genetic Lesions in Cancer
201
Table 6.4 Inherited Predisposition to Cancer
cancer genes and thereby directly contribute to the devel-
 Inherited Predisposition
Gene(s)
opment or progression of a given cancer. They are usually
 Autosomal Dominant Cancer Syndromes
acquired, but as mentioned earlier, occasionally inherited.
 By contrast, passenger mutations are acquired mutations
 Retinoblastoma
RB
that are neutral in terms of fitness and do not affect cellu-
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (various
TP53
lar behavior; they just come along for the proverbial ride.
tumors)
Because they occur at randoin, passenger mutations are
 Melanoma
CDKN2A
sprinkled throughout the genome, whereas driver muta-
 Familial adenomatous polyposis/colon 
APC
tions tend to be tightly clustered within cancer genes. It is
cancer
se 
 Neurofibromatosis I and 2
NF1, NF2
 Breast and ovarian tumors
BRCA1, BRCA2
lung cancer, passenger mutations greatly outnumber driver
Multiple endocrine neoplasia I and 2 
MENI, RET
mutations.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer
 Despite their apparently innocuous nature, passenger
MSH2,MLHI,MSH6
mutations have nevertheless proven to be iimportant in
 Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome
PTCH1
several ways:
 Autosomal Recessive Syndromes of Defective DNA
·In carcinogen-associated cancers, mutational analysis has
Repair
provided definitive evicdence that most genomic damage is
 Xeroderma pigmentosum 
 Diverse genes involved in
directly caused by the carcinogen in question. For exainple,
 nucleotide excision repair
before sequencing of melanoma genoimes, the causative
 Ataxia-telangiectasia
ATM
 role of sun exposure in this cancer was debated. This is
Bloom syndrome
BLM
no longer so, as most melanomas have thousands of
 Diverse genes involved in
 mutations of a type that is specifically linked to daimage
 Fanconi anemia
repair of DNA cross-links
caused by ultraviolet light.
·A second, more nefarious effect of passenger mutations is
that they create genetic variants that,while initially neutral,
may provide tumor cells with a selective advantage in the
every cell in the body, placing the affected individual at
setting of therapy. The evidence for this comes from DNA
high risk for developing cancer. Understandably, in fami-
sequence analyses of tumors at the time of recurrence
lies in which these gerim line mutations are passed from
 after drug therapy; in many instances, mutations that
generation to generation, cancer behaves like an inherited
lead directly to drug resistance are found in inost tumor
trait (Table 6.4). We will touch on important familial cancer
cells. Generally, the same resistance mutations can also
syndromes and associated genes and cancers later in this
be found before therapy, but only in a very simall frac-
chapter.
tion of cells. In such instances, it appears that the selec-
Presented next is a discussion of the varied genetic
 lesions that underlie altered cancer gene expression and
mutation into a driver mutation, to the benefit of the
function.
tumor and the detriment of the patient.
GENETIC LESIONS IN CANCER
Point Mutations
Point mutations can either activate or inactivate the protein
The genetic changes found in cancers vary from point
 products of the affected genes depending on their precise
 mtations involving single nucleotides to abnormalities
position and consequence. Point mutations that convert
aosoo ui saue sso apond o qnoua ar
- e anpoid eaua sauaosuo our sauasoouo-oond
structure. In certain neoplasims, genetic abnorimalities are
up e ui sanpisan pion ouure suae Aq uonouny-jo
nonrandom and highly characteristic. Specific chromo-
that norimally holds the protein's activity in check. A car-
somal abnormalities have been identified in most leuke-
 dinal example is point mutations that convert the RA S gene
mias and lymphomas and in an increasing number of
into a cancer gene, one of the most comment events in
nonhematopoietic tumors, while other tumors are charac-
human cancers. By contrast, point mutations (as well as
terized by particular point mutations. It is believed that all
larger aberrations, such as insertions and deletions) in
 recurrent genetic changes alter the activity of one or more
 tumor suppressor genes reduce or disable the function of
cancer genes in a fashion that gives the affected cells a
the encoded protein. The tumor suppressor gene that is
selective advantage, presumably by contributing to one or
most commonly affected by point mutations in cancer is
more of the hallmarks of cancer.
lossaiddns rou adki ,uesprens, [edkjoioid e 'csdl
 gene (discussed later).
Driver and Passenger Mutations
Gene Rearrangements
In the following sections, we briefly review the types of
Gene rearrangements may be produced by chroimosoimal
mutations that are commonly found in cancers. Before
translocations or inversions. Specific chromosomal trans-
doing so, however, we must first touch on the important
locations and inversions are highly associated with
concept of driver mutations and passenger mutations.
 certain malignancies, particularly neoplasims derived from
Driver mutations are mutations that alter the function of
hematopoietic cells and other kinds of mesenchyimal cells.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
202
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
 These rearrangeiments can activate proto-oncogenes in two
is the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome in chronic myeloid
ways:
leukemia, consisting of a balanced reciprocal transloca-
 Some gene rearrangements result in overexpression
tion between chromosomes 9 and 22 (see Fig. 6.14). As
 of proto-oncogenes by removing them from their
a consequence, the derivative chroimosoime 22 (the Phil-
normal regulatory elements and placing them under
adelphia chroimosome) appears simaller than norimal.
This cytogenetic change is seen in more than 90% of
enhancer. Two different kinds of B cell lymphona
cases of chronic myeloid leukeinia and results in the
provide illustrative examples of this mechanism. In
fusion of portions of the BCR gene on chroimosoime 22
more than 90% of cases of Burkitt lymphoma, the cells
and the ABL gene on chroimosome 9. The few Philadel-
have a translocation, usually between chromosomes 8
phia chromosome-negative cases harbor a cryptic (cyto-
and 14, that leads to overexpression of the MYC gene
genetically silent) BCR-ABL fusion gene, the presence of
on chromosome 8 by juxtaposition with immunoglobu-
which is the sire qua ron of chronic myeloid leukemia.
lin heavy chain gene regulatory eleiments on chromo-
As discussed later, the BCR-ABL fusion gene encodes
some 14 (Fig. 6.14). In follicular lymphoma, a reciprocal
a novel tyrosine kinase with potent transforiming
translocation between chromosomes 14 and 18 leads to
activity.
 overexpression of the anti-apoptotic gene, BCL2, on
 chromosoime 18, also driven by immunoglobulin gene
Lyimphoid tumors are most coimmonly associated with
regulatory elements.
recurrent gene rearrangeinents. This relationship exists
because norimal lymphocytes express special enzymes that
 genes encoding novel chimeric proteins. Most notable
 purposefully introduce DNA breaks during the processes
of immunoglobulin or T cell receptor gene recombination.
 Repair of these DNA breaks is error-prone, and the result-
ing mistakes sometimes result in gene rearrangeiments that
activate proto-oncogenes. Two other types of mesenchy-
CHRONIC
NORMAL
 mal tumors, myeloid neoplasms (acute inyeloid leukemias
MYELOID
CHROMOSOMES
LEUKEMIA
and myeloproliferative disorders) and sarcomas, also fre-
9
22
9
22
quently possess gene rearrangeiments. Unlike lymphoid
neoplasims, the cause of the DNA breaks that lead to gene
rearrangeinents in myeloid neoplasins and sarcoinas is
BCR
unknown. In general, the rearrangeiments that are seen in
BCR
locus
locus
ABL-BCR
myeloid neoplasims and sarcoimas create fusion genes that
hybrid gene
encode either hyperactive tyrosine kinases (akin to BCR-
ABL
ABL) or novel oncogenic transcription factors. A well-
oncogene
characterized example of the latter is the (11;22)(q24;q12)
translocation in Ewing sarcoma. This rearrangement
Tyrosine
kinase·
Tyrosine
creates a fusion gene encoding a chimeric oncoprotein
inhibitor
kinase
composed of portions of two different transcription factors
called EWS and FLI1.
ABL
Activation of
 Identification of pathogenic gene rearrangements in car-
oncogene
growth factor
 signaling
locations and inversions (which point to the location of
pathways
 important oncogenes) are rare in carcinomas. However,
advances in DNA sequencing have revealed recurrent
NORMAL
BURKITT
cryptic pathogenic gene rearrangements in carcinomas as
CHROMOSOMES
LYMPHOMA
well. As with hematologic malignancies and sarcoimas,
8
14
8
14
gene rearrangeiments in solid tumors can contribute to car-
?
or by generation of a novel fusion gene. Examples wil be
discussed along with specific cancers in other chapters. As
with a fusion gene such as BCR-ABL, some of the fusion
genes in solid tumors also provide drug targets (e.g-)
EML-ALK in lung cancer; Chapter 13).
IG
IGgene
Increased
gene
Deletions
MYC
 protein 
Deletions are another prevalent abnormality in tumor
oncogene
 cells. Deletion of specific regions of chromosomes may
MYC
 result in the loss of particular tumor suppressor genes.
oncogene
Increased
Tumor suppressors generally require inactivation of both
expression of
 sis  an o a rg apo ui sa
pro-growth genes
common mechanisim for this is an inactivating point muta-
Fig. 6.l4 The chromosomal translocations and associated oncogenes in
tion in one allele, followed by deletion of the other, non-
chronic myelogenous leukemia and Burkitt lymphoma.
mutated allele. As discussed later, deletions involving
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Genetic Lesions in Cancer
203
13q14, the site of the RB gene, are associated with
retinoblastoima, and deletion of 17p is associated with loss
 of TP53, arguably the most important tumor suppressor
 gene.
HSR
Gene Amplifications
 Proto-oncogenes may be converted to oncogenes by gene
NMYC
amplification,  with consequent overexpression and
hyperactivity of otherwise normal proteins. Such anpli-
fication may produce several hundred copies of the gene,
Aq paioaiap Apea aq us je raquu Ados ui auer e
 soime cases, the aimplified genes produce chromosoimal
changes that can be identified microscopically. Two mutu-
ally exclusive patterns are seen: multiple simall, extrachro-
mosoimal structurescalled double minutes; and homogeneously
Q
stainirg regiors. The latter derive from the insertion of the
Double
may be distant froin the norimal location of the involved
minutes
 genes; because regions containing amplified genes lack a
norimal banding pattern, they appear homogeneous in a
G-banded karyotype. Two clinically important examples
of aimplification involve the NMYC gene in neuroblastoma
Fig. 6.15 Amplification of the NMYC gene in human neuroblastoma. The
and the HER2 gene in breast cancers. NMYC is amplified
NM YC gene, present normaly on chromosome 2p, becomes amplified and
in 25% to 30% of neuroblastomas, and the ainplification
is seen either as extrachromosomal double minutes or as a chromosomally
is associated with poor prognosis (Fig. 6.15). HER2 (also
integrated homogeneous-staining region (HSR). The integration involves
other autosomes, such as 4, 9, or I3. (Modified from Brodeur GM, Seeger RC,
known as ERBB2) amplification occurs in about 20% of
SatherHttCnicmlictionsfngeetivtionnhmnbt
breast cancers, and antibody therapy directed against the
mas. Cancer 58:541, 1986. Reprinted by permission ofWiley-Liss,Inc, α subsidiary
receptor encoded by the HER2 gene has proved effective
of John Wiley & Sons, inc.)
in this subset of tuinors.
Aneuploidy
MicroRNAs and Cancer
Aneuploidy is defined as a number of chromosoimes that
 As discussed in Chapter 1, microRNAs (1miRNAs) are non-
is not a multiple of the haploid state; for humans, that
coding, single-stranded RNAs, approximately 22 nucle-
is a chromosome number that is not a multiple of 23.
otides in length, that function as negative regulators of
Aneuploidy is reimarkably common in cancers, particu-
d sa a   s
larly carcinoimas, and was proposed as a cause of carci-
by repressing translation or, in some cases, by messenger
nogenesis over 100 years ago. Aneuploidy frequently
RNA (mRNA) cleavage. In view of their important func-
results froin errors of the mitotic checkpoint, the major
tions in control of cell growth, differentiation, and survival,
cell cycle control mechanism that acts to prevent mistakes
it is not surprising that accumulating evidence indicates
in chromosoime segregation. The mitotic checkpoint pre-
that miRNAs also can contribute to carcinogenesis. Specifi-
vents aneuploidy by inhibiting the irreversible transition
cally, if the target of a imiRNA is a tumor suppressor gene,
to anaphase until all of the replicated chromosomes have
then overactivity of the miRNA can reduce the tumor sup-
made productive attachments to spindle microtubules.
pressor protein. Such miRNAs are sometimes referred to as
 Coimplete absence of the mitotic checkpoint leads to rapid
oncomIRs. Conversely, if an miRNA inhibits the translation
cell death as a consequence of abnorimal chromosome
of an oncogene, a reduction in the quantity or function of
segregation.
that miRNA will lead to overproduction of the oncogene
 Mechanistic data establishing aneuploidy as a cause of
product. Such relationships have already been established
carcinogenesis, rather than a consequence, have been dif-
by miRNA profiling of several human tumors. For exaimple,
ficult to generate. However, statistical approaches made
downregulation or deletion of certain miRNAs in soime leu-
possible by detailed analysis of cancer cells suggest (as
kenias and lymphomas results in increased expression of
imight be expected) that aneuploidy tends to increase the
 BCL2, an anti-apoptotic gene. Thus, by negatively regulat-
copy number of key oncogenes and decrease the copy
ing BCL2, such imiRNAs behave as tumor suppressor genes.
number of potent tumor suppressors. For exaimple, chro-
Dysregulation of other miRNAs that control the expression
mosome 8, which almost never is lost and often is present
of the RAS and MYC oncogenes also has been detected in
 in increased copies in tuimor cells, is where the MYC onco-
 lung tumors and in certain B-cell leukemias, respectively.
gene is located. By contrast, portions of chroimosome 17,
where the TP53 gene is located, are often lost and are infre-
Epigenetic Modifications and Cancer
quently gained. Thus, tumor developiment and progression
may be molded by changes in chromosome numbers that
You will recall froim Chapter 1 that epigenetics refers to
enhance the dosage of oncogenes while restricting the
 reversible, heritable changes in gene expression that occur
activity of tumor suppressor genes.
without mutation. Such changes involve posttranslational
http://ebooksmedicine.net
204
CHAPTER 6 
Neoplasia
modifications of histones and DNA methylation, both of
CARCINOGENESIS:A MULTISTEP
which affect gene expression. In normal, differentiated
cells, the major portion of the genome is not expressed.
PROCESS
These regions of the genome are silenced by DNA methyla-
tion and histone modifications. On the other hand, cancer
Fortunately, in most if not all instances, no single mutation
cells are characterized by a global DNA hypomethylation
is sufficient to transform a norimal cell into a cancer cell.
and
 Carcinogenesis is thus a mulistep process resulting from
Indeed, it has becoime evident during the past several years
the accumulation of multiple genetic alterations that col-
that tumor suppressor genes are soimetimes silenced by
lectively give rise to the transformed phenotype and all of
its associated hallimarks, discussed later. As mentioned
mutation. In addition, genome-wide hypomethylation has
earlier, the presence of driver mutations in some non-
been shown to cause chromosomal instability and can
 neoplastic precursor lesions suggest the need for additional
induce tumors in mice. Thus, epigenetic changes may influ-
mutations for transition to a full blown cancer and thus
ence carcinogenesis in many ways. As an added wrinkle,
 support this model.
deep sequencing of cancer genomes has identified muta-
 Beyond tumor initiation from a single founding cell,
tions in genes that regulate epigenetic modifications in
it is important to recognize that cancers continue to
 many cancers. Thus, certain genetic changes in cancers may
undergo Darwinian selection and therefore continue to
evolve (Fig. 6.16). It is well established that during their
enome" that favor cancer growth and survival.
course cancers generally becoime imore aggressive and
 The epigenetic state of particular cell types- a feature
acquire greater malignant potential, a phenomenon
described as the epigenetic context- also dictates their
referred to as tumor progressior. At the molecular level,
response to signals that control growth and differentiation.
As mentioned earlier, epigenetic modifications regulate
accumulate independently in different cells. Some of these
gene expression, allowing cells with the same genetic
mutations may be lethal, but others may affect the function
 Imakeup (e.g-, a neuron and a keratinocyte) to have coim-
of cancer genes, thereby making the affected cells more
pletely different appearances and functions. In some
adept at growth, survival, invasion, metastasis, or imimune
instances, the epigenetic state of a cell draimatically affects
evasion. Due to this selective advantage, subclones that
its response to otherwise identical signals. For example, the
acquire these mutations may come to dominate one area of
NOTCH1 gene has an oncogenic role in T-celleukemia, yet
a tumor, either at the primary site or at sites of metastasis.
acts as a tumor suppressor in squamous cell carcinoimas.
As a result of continuing mutation and Darwinian selec-
As would be expected, this dichotomy exists because acti-
tion, even though malignant tumors are monoclonal in
vated NOTCH1 turns on pro-growth genes in T-cell pro-
origin they are typically genetically heterogeneous by the
 genitors and tumor suppressor genes in keratinocytes.
time of their clinical presentation. In advanced tumors
exhibiting genetic instability, the extent of genetic hetero-
 geneity may be enormous.
SUMMARY
Genetic evolution shaped by darwinian selection can
GENETIC LESIONS IN CANCER
explain the two most pernicious properties of cancers: the
+ Mutations in cancer cells fall into two major classes, driver
tendency over time for cancers to become both more
aggressive and less responsive to therapy. Thus, genetic
(pathogenic) mutations and passenger (neutral) mutations.
heterogeneity has implications not only for cancer progres-
+ Passenger mutations may become driver mutations if selective
sion but also for its response to therapy. Experience has
pressure on the tumor changes, for example, in the setting of
treatment with an effective therapeutic drug.
shown that when tumors recur after cheimotherapy, the
recurrent tumor is almost always resistant to the original
+ Tumor cells may acquire driver mutations through several
drug regimen if it is given again. Experimental data suggest
means, including point mutations and nonrandom chromo-
somal abnormalities that contribute to malignancy; these
that this acquired resistance stems from the outgrowth of
subclones that have, by chance, mutations (or epigenetic
include gene rearrangements, deletions, and amplifications.
alterations) that impart drug resistance.
+ Gene rearrangements (usually caused by translocations, but 
sometimes by inversions of other more complex events) con-
tribute to carcinogenesis by overexpression of oncogenes or
HALLMARKS OF CANCER
 generation of novel fusion proteins with altered signaling
capacity.
This overview serves as background for a more detailed
+ Deletions frequently affect tumor suppressor genes, whereas
consideration of the molecular pathogenesis of cancer. As
 gene amplification increases the expression of oncogenes.
+ Overexpression of miRNAs can contribute to carcinogenesis
mentioned earlier, bora fide cancer genes number in the
hundreds, at a minimum. While it is traditional to describe
by reducing the expression of tumor suppressors, while dele-
tion or loss of expression of miRNAs can lead to overexpres-
the function of cancer genes one gene at a time, the blizzard
of mutated genes eimerging from the sequencing of cancer
 sion of proto-oncogenes.
genoimes has blanketed the landscape and revealed the
+ Tumor suppressor genes and DNA repair genes also may be
limitations of trying to grasp the fundaimental properties
silenced by epigenetic changes, which involve reversible, heri-
 of cancer, gene by gene. A much more tractable and con-
table changes in gene expression that occur not by mutation
Jo Aoonq a noe u on Am Suses Ad
but by methylation of the promoter.
cancer is to consider the coimunon phenotypic and
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
205
 Accumulation of driver and
 pa ssenger mutations
Carcinogen-induced 
Additional driver
 Additional mutations,
mutation
mutations
 Emergence of subclones
Diagnosis
Normal
Initiated precursor with 
Founding.
cell
stem cell-like properties
cancer cell
Genetically
heterogeneous
cancer
hitiating mutation
Acquisition of
Further genetic
cancer hallmarks
evolution
Fig. 6.16 Development of cancer through stepwise accumulation of complementary driver mutations.The order in which various driver mutations occur is
usualy unknown and may vary from tumor to tumor.
le ieu sieadde il shas raoues jo sagradoid iesiono
Mutations in genes that regulate some or all of these
cancers display eight fundamental changes in cell physi-
cellular traits are seen in every cancer; accordingly, these
ology, which are considered the hallmarks of cancer.
traits forin the basis of the following discussion of the
 These changes are illustrated in Fig. 6.17 and consist of the
 molecular origins of cancer. Of note, by convention, gene
following:
symbols are italicized but their protein products are not
·Self-sufficiency in growth signals
(e.g, RB gene and RB protein, TP53 and p53, MYC and
Insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals
MYC).
Altered cellular metabolism
Euasion of apoptosis
Self-Sufficiency in Growth Signals
Limitless replicative potential (immortality)
Sustained angiogenesis
The self-sufficiency in growth that characterizes cancer
Inuasion and metastasis
cells generally stems from gain-of-function mutations
·1
Euasion of immune surveillance
that convert proto-oncogenes to oncogenes. Oncogenes
encode proteins called oncoproteins that proimote cell
 The acquisition of the genetic and epigenetic alterations
growth, even in the absence of norimal growth-promoting
that confer these hallimarks may be accelerated by cancer-
signals. To appreciate how oncogenes drive inappropriate
promoting inflammation and by genomic instability. These
cell growth, it is helpful to review briefly the sequence of
are
 considered enabling characteristics because they
events that characterize norimal cell proliferation (intro-
 promote cellular transformation and subsequent tumor
duced in Chapter 1). Under physiologic conditions, cell
progression.
 proliferation can be readily resolved into the following
steps:
Avoiding immune
 Evading growth
1. Binding of a growth factor to its specific receptor on the
destruction
suppressors
cell meimbrane
 2. Transient and limited activation of the growth factor
Sustaining
Enabling 
receptor, which in turn activates several signal-
proliferative
replicative
 transducing proteins on the inner leaflet of the plasima
 signaling 
immortality
membrane
 3. Transimission of the transduced signal across the cytosol
Deregulating
to the nucleus by second messengers or a cascade of
Tumor-
cellular
promoting 
signal transduction molecules
energetics
inflammation
4. Induction and activation of nuclear regulatory factors
that initiate and regulate DNA transcription and the
biosynthesis of other cellular coimponents that are
Activating
 needed for cell division, such as organelles, meimbrane
Resisting
cell death
invasion and
 coimponents, and ribosomes
metastasis
5. Entry and progression of the cell into the cell cycle,
Genomic instability
resulting ultimately in cell division
Inducing
angiogenesis
(mutator phenotype)
The mechanisims that endow cancer cells with the ability
Fig. 6.17 Eight cancer hallmarks and two enabling factors (genomic instabil-
to proliferate can be grouped according to their role in the
ity and tumor-promoting inflammation). Most cancer cells acquire these
properties during their development, typically due to mutations in critical
growth factor-induced signal transduction cascade and
genes. (From Hanahan D, Weinberg RA: Hallmarks of concer: the next generation.
cell cycle regulation. Indeed, each one of the listed steps is
Cell 144:646,2011.)
susceptible to corruption in cancer cells.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
206
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
of signaling pathways downstream of growth factor
Growth Factors
receptors. The signaling proteins that couple growth factor
Cancers may secrete their own growth factors or induce
receptors to their nuclear targets are activated by ligand
stromal celis to produce growth factors in the tumor
binding to growth factor receptors. The signals are trasn-
microenvironment. Most soluble growth factors are made
mitted to the nucleus through various signal transduction
 by one cell type and act on a neighboring cell to stimulate
 molecules. Two important oncoproteins in the category of
proliferation (paracrine action). Norimally, cells that
signaling molecules are RAS and ABL. Each of these is
produce the growth factor do not express the cognate
discussed briefly next.
receptor, preventing the forimation of positive feedback
loops within the same cell. This "rule" may be broken by
RAS
cancer cells in several different ways.
 RAS is the most commonly mutated oncogene in human
· Some cancer cells acquire growth self-sufficiency by
tumors. Approximately 30% of all human tumors contain
acquiring the ability to synthesize the saime growth
 mutated RAS genes, and the frequency is even higher in
factors to which they are responsive. For exaimple, many
soime specific cancers (e.g pancreatic adenocarcinoima).
glioblastoimas secrete platelet-derived growth factor
 RAS is a meimber of a family of simall G proteins that bind
(PDGF) and express the PDGF receptor, and many sar-
guanosine nucleotides (guanosine triphosphate [GTP] and
comas make both transforming growth factor-α (TGF-α)
guanosine diphosphate [GDP]). Signaling by RAS involves
and its receptor. Similar autocrine loops are fairly
the following sequential steps:
coimnon in many types of cancer.
·NormallyRASflipsbackandforthbetweenanexcited signal
· Another mechanisin by which cancer cells acquire
transmitting state and a quiescent state. RAS is inactive
growth self-sufficiency is by interaction with stroma. In
when bound to GDP; stimulation of cells by growth
some cases, tumor cells send signals to activate norimal
factors such as EGF and PDGF leads to exchange of
cells in the supporting stroma, which in turn produce 
GDP for GTP and subsequent conforimational changes
growth factors that promote tumor growth.
Growth factor
Growth Factor Receptors
Growth factor receptor
 The next group in the sequence of signal transduction is
Farnesyl
growth factor receptors. Some growth factor receptors
membrane anchor 
have an intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity that is activated
by growth factor binding, while others signal by stimulat-
ing the activity of downstream proteins. Many of the
Inactive
Active
myriad growth factor receptors function as oncoproteins
RAS
Activation
RAS
when they are mutated or if they overexpressed. The best-
documented examples of overexpression involve the epi-
Bridging protein 
Activates
GDP
GTP
dermal growth factor (EGF) receptor family. ERBBl, the
EGF receptor, is overexpressed in 80% of squamous cell
 Inactivation by -
hydrolysis of GTP
carcinoimas of the lung, 50% or more of glioblastoimas, and
80% to 100% of epithelial tumors of the head and neck. As
Active RAS
mentioned earlier, the gene encoding a related receptor,
HER2 (ERBB2), is amplified in approximately 20% of breast
cancers and in a simaller fraction of adenocarcinoimas of the
 PI3K
RAF
lung, ovary, stomach, and salivary glands. These tumors
are exquisitely sensitive to the mitogenic effects of simall
amounts of growth factors. The significance of HER2 in the
AKT
pathogenesis of breast cancers is illustrated dramatically
by the clinical benefit derived from blocking the extracel-
lular domain of this receptor with anti-HER2 antibodies,
mTOR
MAPK
an elegant exaimple of "bench to bedside” medicine. In
other instances, tyrosine kinase activity is stimulated by
 Activation +
point mutations or sinall indels that lead to subtle but
 of transcription
NNN
gene rearrangements that create fusion genes encoding chi-
MYC protein
meric receptors. In each of these cases, the mutated recep-
 tors are constitutively active, delivering mitogenic signals
to cells even in the absence of growth factors. These types
 Cell cycle progression
 of mutations are most comnon in leukeimias, lymphomas,
 and certain forims of sarcoima.
Fig. 6.18 Model for action of RAS.when a normal cellis stimulated through
a growth factor receptor, inactive (GDP-bound) RAS is activated to a GTP-
bound state.Activated RAS transduces proliferative signals to the nucleus
Downstream Signal-Transducing Proteins
 e d ss dad, Palos p sed oa e
 Cancer cells often acquire growth autonomy as a result
P3 kinase/AKT pathway. GDP, Guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphos.
f1
 mutations in genes that encode 
e  components
phate; MAP, mitogen-activated protein; PI3, phosphatidylinositol-3.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
207
that generate active RAS (Fig. 6.18). This excited signal-
The crucial role of BCR-ABL in cancer has been con-
einitting state is short-lived, however, because the
firmed by the dramatic clinical response of patients with
intrinsic guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity of
chronic myeloid leukemia to BCR-ABL kinase inhibitors.
RAS hydrolyzes GTP to GDP, releasing a phosphate
asa q np no pu s jo adnd au
group and returning the protein to its quiescent GDP-
(Gleevec), galvanized interest in design of drugs that target
bound state. The GTPase activity of activated RAS is
specific imolecular lesions found in various cancers
 magnified dramatically by a family of GTPase-activating
(so-called " targeted therapy"). BCR-ABL also is an example
proteins (GAPs), which act as molecular brakes that
of the concept of oncogene addiction, wherein a tumor is
prevent uncontrolled RAS activation by favoring hydro-
profoundly dependent on a single signaling molecule.
lysis of GTP to GDP.
BCR-ABL fusion gene formation is an early, perhaps initiat-
·Activated RAS stimulates downstream regutators of prolif-
ing, event that drives leukemogenesis. Development of
leukemia probably requires other collaborating mutations,
the nucleus and alter the expression of genes that regulate
but the transformed cell continues to depend on BCR-ABL
growth, such as MYC. While details of the signaling cas-
for signals that mediate growth and survival. BCR-ABL
cades (some of which are illustrated in Fig. 6.18) down-
signaling can be seen as the central lodgepole around
noun ue aran pasns iou ane s jo weans
which the transformed state is "built". If the lodgepole is
 point is that mutational activation of these signaling.
removed by inhibition of the BCR-ABL kinase, the struc-
interimediates mimics the growth promoting effects of
ture collapses. In view of this level of dependency, it is not
activated RAS. For example, BRAF, which lies in the
surprising that acquired resistance of tumors to BCR-ABL
so-called "RAF/ERK/MAPkinase pathway" is mutated
inhibitors often is due to the outgrowth of a subclone with
in more than 60% of melanomas and is associated with
a mutation in BCR-ABL that prevents binding of the drug
unregulated cell proliferation. Mutations of phospha-
to the BCR-ABL protein.
tidly inositol-3 kinase (PI3 kinase) in the PI3K/AKT
 aos u a qr m ro ose md
Nuclear Transcription Factors
types, with similary consequences.
The ultimate consequence of signaling through oncopro-
teins such as RAS or ABL is inappropriate and continu-
RAS most commonly is activated by point mutations
ous stimulation of nuclear transcription factors that drive
in amino acid residues that are either within the GTP-
the expression of growth-promoting genes. Growth
binding pocket or in the enzymatic region that carries
autonomy may thus be a consequence of mutations affect-
out GTP hydrolysis. Both kinds of mutations interfere
ing genes that regulate DNA transcription. A host of onco-
with breakdown of GTP, which is essential to inactivate
proteins, including products of the MYC, MYB, JUIN, FOS,
RAS. RAS is thus trapped in its activated, GTP-bound
and REL oncogenes, function as transcription factors that
form, and the cell is forced into a continuously proliferat-
regulate the expression of growth-proimoting genes, such
ing state. It follows froim this scenario that the consequences
as cyclins. Of these, MYC is involved most comumonly in
of activating mutations in RAS should be minicked by loss-of-
human tumors.
function mutations in GAPs, which would lead to a failure
 Dysregulation of MYC promotes tumorigenesis by
to simulate GTP hydrolysis and thereby restrain RAS.
simultaneously
y promoting the progression of cells
Indeed, the GAP neurofibromin-1 (NFl) is mutated in the
through the cell cycle and enhancing alterations in metab-
cancer-prone familial disorder neurofibromatosis type 1
olism that support cell growth. MYC primarily functions
(Chapter 22) and is a bona fide tumor suppressor. Simi-
by activating the transcription of other genes. Genes acti-
Nid ns rossanddns rou suodur raoue e
vated by MYC include several growth-promoting genes,
is a negative inhibitor of PI3 kinase and is frequently
 including cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), whose prod-
mutated in carcinomas, certain leukeimias, and other
ucts drive cells into the cell cycle (discussed next), and
cancers as well.
genes that control pathways that produce the building
blocks (e.g, amino acids, lipids, nucleotides) that are
ABL
needed for cell growth and division. As mentioned earlier
Several non-receptor tyrosine kinases function as signal
(see Fig. 6.14), dysregulation of MYC results from a (8;14)
transduction molecules. In this group, ABL is the best
translocation in Burkitt lyimphoma, a highly aggressive
defined with respect to carcinogenesis.
B-cell tunor. MYC also is amplified in breast, colon, lung.
The ABL proto-oncoprotein has tyrosine kinase activity
and many other cancers, while the related NMYC and
that is dampened by internal negative regulatory domains.
LMYC genes are amplified in neuroblastoimas and simall
As discussed earlier (see Fig. 6.14), in chronic imyeloid leu-
cell cancers of lung, respectively.
kemia and certain acute leukemias, a part of the ABL gene
is translocated from its normal abode on chromosome 9 to
Cyclins and Cyclin-Dependent Kinases
chromosome 22, where it fuses with part of the breakpoint
As mentioned in Chapter l, growth factors transduce
cluster region (BCR) gene. This fusion gene encodes as
BCR-ABL hybrid protein that contains the ABL tyrosine
through the various phases of the cell cycle, the process by
kinase domain and a BCR domain that self-associates, an
which cells replicate their DNA in preparation for cell divi-
event that unleashes a constitutive tyrosine kinase activity.
sion. You will recall that progression of cells through the
Of interest, the BCR-ABL protein activates all of the signals
cell cycle is orchestrated by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs),
 that are downstreaim of RAS, making it a potent stimulator
which are activated by binding to cyclins, so called because
of cell growth.
of the cyclic nature of their production and degradation.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
208
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
The CDK-cyclin complexes phosphorylate crucial target
proteins that drive cells forward through the cell cycle.
· Oncoproteins promote uncontrolled cell proliferation by
While cyclins arouse the CDKs, CDK inhibitors (CDKIs), of
several mechanisms:
which there are many, silence the CDKs and exert negative
+ Stimulus-independent expression of growth factor and its
receptor, setting up an autocrine loop of cell proliferation
control over the cell cycle. Expression of these inhibitors is
downregulated by imitogenic signaling pathways, thus
(e.g, PDGF-PDGF receptor in brain tumors)
+ Mutations in genes encoding growth factor receptors or
promoting the progression of the cell cycle.
tyrosine kinases leading to constitutive signaling
There are two main cell cycle checkpoints, one at the
· Amplification of EGF receptor family genes such as HER2 in
G1/S transition and the other at the G2/M transition, each
of which is tightly regulated by a balance of growth-
breast cancer
+ Fusion of portions of the ABL tyrosine kinase gene and the 
promoting and growth-suppressing factors, as well as by
BCR protein gene, creating a BCR-ABL fusion gene encoding
a ae  ( aidey) ap Na  srss
 DNA-damage sensors transimit signals that arrest cell cycle
a constitutively active tyrosine kinase, in certain leukemias 
progression and, if cell damage cannot be repaired, initiate
+ Mutations in genes encoding signaling molecules
+ RAS commonly is mutated in human cancers and normally
apoptosis. Once cells pass through the G/S checkpoint,
flips between resting GDP-bound state and active GTP-
they are committed to undergo cell division. Understand-
ably, then, defects in the G/S checkpoint are particularly
bound state; mutations block hydrolysis of GTP to GDP,
leading to unchecked signaling
important in cancer, since these lead directly to increased
+ Overproduction or unregulated activity of transcription
cell division. Indeed, all cancers appear to have genetic
lesions that disable the G/S checkpoint, causing cells to
factors
+ Translocation of MYC in some lymphomas leads to overex-
continually reenter the S phase. For unclear reasons, par-
pression and unregulated expression of its target genes con-
types, but they fall into two major categories.
trolling cell cycling and survival
· Mutations that activate cyclin genes or inactivate negative
Gain-of-function mutations invotuing CDK4 or D cyclins.
Mishaps increasing the expression of cyclin D or CDK4
regulators of cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases
 Complexes of cyclins with CDKs drive the cell cycle by phos-
are common events in neoplastic transformation. The
phorylating various substrates and normally are controlled by
cyclin D genes are overexpressed in many cancers,
CDK inhibitors. Mutations in genes encoding cyclins, CDKs,
including those affecting the breast, esophagus, liver,
 and CDK inhibitors result in uncontrolled cell cycle progres-
and a subset of lymphomas and plasima cell tumors.
Amplification of the CDK4 gene occurs in melanoimas,
sion and are found in a wide variety of cancers including mela-
 sarcoimas, and glioblastoimas. Mutations affecting cyclins
nomas and brain, lung, and pancreatic cancers.
B and E and other CDKs also occur, but they are much
less frequent than those affecting cyclin D and CDK4.
Insensitivity to Growth Inhibitory Signals: Tumor
Loss-of-function mutations inuoluing CDKIs. CDKIs fre-
Suppressor Genes
u suuas aal no uonnu q paqesp are auanb
Imany human malignancies. For example, germline
 Isaac Newton theorized that every action has an equal and
mutations of CDKN2A, a gene that encodes the CDK
opposite reaction. Although Newton was not a cancer
inhibitor pl6, are present in 25% of melanoma-prone
biologist, his formulation holds true for cell growth.
kindreds, and acquired deletion or inactivation of
Whereas oncogenes encode proteins that promote cell
CDKN2A is seen in 75% of pancreatic carcinomas, 40%
 growth, the products of tumor suppressor genes apply
to 70% of glioblastomas, 50% of esophageal cancers and
brakes to cell proliferation. Disruption of such genes
certain leukemias, and 20% of non-small cell lung car-
renders cells refractory to growth inhibition and mimics
cinomas, soft-tissue sarcoimas, and bladder cancers.
the growth-proimoting effects of oncogenes. The following
discussion describes tumor suppressor genes, their prod-
A final consideration of importance in a discussion of
ucts, and possible inechanisns by which loss of their func-
growth-proimoting signals is that the increased production
tion contributes to unregulated cell growth.
of oncoproteins does not by itself lead to sustained prolif-
 In principle, anti-growth signals can prevent cell prolif-
eration of cancer cells. There are two built-in mechanisms,
eration by several complementary mechanisims. The signal
cell senescence and apoptosis, that oppose oncogene-
 may cause dividing cells to enter Go (quiescence), where
mediated cell growth. As discussed later, genes that regu-
they reimain until external cues prod their reentry into the
proliferative pool. Alternatively, the cells may enter a post-
allow the action of oncogenes to proceed unopposed.
imitotic, differentiated pool and lose replicative potential.
Nonreplicative senescence, alluded to earlier, is another
mechanisim of escape from sustained cell growth. And, as
SUMMARY
a last-ditch effort, the cells may be prograimmed for death
SELF-SUFFICIENCY IN GROWTH SIGNALS 
by apoptosis. As we will see, tumor suppressor genes have
all these "tricks" in their toolbox designed to halt wayward
+ Proto-oncogenes: normal cellular genes whose products promote
cell proliferation
cells from becoming malignant.
+ Oncogenes: mutant or overexpressed versions of proto-
RB: Governor of the Cell Cycle
oncogenes that function autonomously without a requirement
 RB, a key negative regulator of the cell cycle, is directly or
for normal growth-promoting signals
indirectly inactivated in most human cancers. The
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
209
retinoblastoima gene (R B) was the first tumor suppressor
Retinoblastoma develops when the norinal RB gene is
gene to be discovered and is now considered the prototype
lost in retinoblasts as a result of somatic mutation.
of this family of cancer genes. As with many advances in
Because in retinoblastoma families a single gerim line
Imedicine, the discovery of tumor suppressor genes was
mutation is sufficient to transimit disease risk, the trait
accomplished by the study of a rare disease- in this case,
has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.
retinoblastoima, an uncoiminon childhood tumor. Approxi-
 In sporadic cases, both norimal RB alleles are lost by
mately 60% of retinoblastomas are sporadic, while the
somatic mutation in one of the retinoblasts. The end
reimaining ones are familial, the predisposition to develop
result is the saime: a retinal cell that has lost both of the
the tumor being transmitted as an autosomal dominant
norimal copies of the RB gene becoimes cancerous.
trait. To account for the sporadic and faimilial occurrence of
an identical tumor, Knudson, in 1974, proposed his now
From the above, it is evident that although the risk for
famous two-hit hypothesis, which in molecular terms can
developing retinoblastoma in retinoblastoma families is
be stated as follows:
inherited as a dominant trait, at the level of the cell, one
· Two mutations (hits) are required to produce retinoblas-
intact RB gene is all that is needed for norimal function.
toma. These involve the RB gene, which has been
Although the loss of norimal RB genes initially was dis-
 mapped to chroimosoimal locus 13q14. Both of the norimal
 covered in retinoblastoimas, it is now evident that biallelic
alleles of the RB locus must be inactivated (hence
loss of this gene is a fairly coimunon feature of several
the two hits) for the development of retinoblastoma
tumors, including breast cancer, simall cell cancer of the
(Fig. 6.19).
 lung, and bladder cancer. Patients with familial retinoblas-
In familial cases, children inherit one defective copy of
 toma also are at greatly increased risk for developing
the RB gene in the gerim line; the other copy is norimnal.
 osteosarcoimas and soime soft-tissue sarcomas.
 PATHOGENESIS OF RETINOBLASTOMA
B
8888
SPORADIC FORM
Mutation
十
Somatic cells 
Germ cells 
Zygote
 Somatic cells of child 
 Retinal cells 
Retinoblastoma
 of parents 
CB
 FAMILIAL FORM
Mutation
+
B
Normal
Mutant
gene
RB gene
Fig. 6.19 Pathogenesis of retinoblastoma. Two mutations of the R8 chromosomal locus, on I3ql4, lead to neoplastic proliferation of the retinal cells. In the
sporadic form, both R& mutations in the tumor-founding retinal cell are acquired. In the familial form, all somatic cells inherit one mutant R& gene from a
carrier parent, and as a result only one additional R& mutation in a retinal cell is required for complete loss of RB function.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
210
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
The function of the RB protein is to regulate the G1/S
GROWTH INHIBITORS
GROWTH FACTORS
checkpoint, the portal through which cells must pass
(TGF-β, p53, others)
(EGF, PDGF)
before DNA replication commences. Although each phase
 of the cell cycle circuitry is monitored carefully, the transi-
Stimulate
tion from G, to S is an extremely important checkpoint in
the cell cycle "clock." In the G phase, diverse signals are
integrated to deterimine whether the cell should progress
CDK Inhibitors
Activate
through the cell cycle, or exit the cell cycle and differenti-
p16
ate. The RB gene product, RB, is a DNA-binding protein
that serves as a point of integration for these diverse
Inactivate
signals, which ultimately act by altering the phosphoryla-
tion state of RB. Specifically, signals that promote cell cycle
Cyclins D/CDK4,6
Cyclins D/CDK4,6
progression lead to the phosphorylation and inactivation
Cyclin E/CDK2
Cyclin E/CDK2
 of RB, while those that block cell cycle progression act by
maintaining RB in an active hypophosphorylated state.
To appreciate this crucial role of RB in the cell cycle, it
is helpful to review the mechanisims that enforce the G/S
Hypophosphorylated
Hyperphosphorylated
ransition.
RB
RB
· The initiation of DNA replication (S phase) requires the
activity of cyclin E/CDK2 complexes, and expression of
E2F
cyclin E is dependent on the E2F faimily of transcription
factors. Early in G, RB is in its hypophosphorylated
active form, and it binds to and inhibits the E2F family
E2F
of transcription factors, preventing transcription of
cyclin E. Hypophosphorylated RB blocks E2F-mediated
Histone
Histone
transcription in at least two ways (Fig. 6.20). First, it
methyl-
-deacetylase
transferase
sequesters E2F, preventing it from interacting with
other transcriptional activators. Second, RB recruits
 chromatin reinodeling proteins, such as histone deacet-
ylases and histone methyltransferases, which bind to
E2F
S phase
E2F
S phase
the proimoters of E2F-responsive genes such as cyclin E.
site
genes
site
genes
These enzymes modify chromatin at the promoters to
11
make DNA insensitive to transcription factors.
Transcriptional
Transcriptional
 This situation is changed on mitogenic signaling-
block
activation
Growth factor signaling leads to cyclin D expression
and activation of cyclin D-CDK4/6 coimplexes. The
Fig. 6.20 The role of RB in regulating the GI-S checkpoint of the cell cycle.
Hypophosphorylated RB in complex with the E2F transcription factors binds 
level of cyclin D-CDK4/6 activity is teinpered by antag-
to DNA, recruits chromatin remodeling factors (histone deacetylases and
onists such as pl6, which is itself subject to regulation
histone methyltransferases), and inhibits transcription of genes whose prod-
by growth inhibitors such as TGFβ that serve to set a
ucts are required for the S phase of the cell cycle.When RB is phosphory-
threshold for mitogenic responses. If the stimulus is suf-
ated by the cyclin D-CDK4,cyclin D-CDK6, and cyclin E-CDK2 complexes,
ficently strong, cyclin D-CDK4/6 coimplexes phosphor-
it releases E2F.The latter then activates transcription of S-phase genes. The
ylate RB, inactivating the protein and releasing E2F to
phosphorylation of RB is inhibited by CDKIs, because they inactivate cyclin-
CDK complexes. Virtually all cancer cells show dysregulation of the GI-S
a   uo s s sa a a
checkpoint as a result of mutation in one of four genes that regulate the
complexes then stimulate DNA replication and progres-
phosphorylation of RB;these genes are RB, CDK4, cyclin D, ond CDKN2A [p16].
sion through the cell cycle. When the cells enter S phase,
EGF, Epidermal growth factor; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor.
they are coimnitted to divide without additional growth
factor stimulation. During the ensuing M phase, the
phosphate groups are reimoved froim RB by cellular
RB phosphorylation can mimic the effect of RB loss and
phosphatases, regenerating the hypophosphorylated
are commonly found in many cancers that have normal
form of RB.
 RB genes. For exaimple, mutational activation of CDK4
 E2F is not the sole target of RB. The versatile RB protein
and overexpression of cyclin D favor cell proliferation by
binds to a variety of other transcription factors that
facilitating RB phosphorylation and inactivation. Indeed,
 regulate cell differentiation. For example, RB stimulates
Jo asnesaq sroun Aueur u passandxanaao si Q ua
myocyte-, adipocyte-, melanocyte-, and macrophage-
 amplification or translocation of the cyclin Dl gene. Muta-
specific transcription factors. Thus, the RB pathway
tional inactivation of genes encoding CDKIs also can drive
 couples control of cell cycle progression at G, with dif-
  s r    o 
ferentiation, which may explain how differentiation is
CDK activity. As mentioned earlier, the CDKN2A gene,
associated with exit from the cell cycle.
which encodes the CDK inhibitor pl6, is an extremely
u o l ro  jo  s
In view of the centrality of RB to the control of the cell
human tumors.
 cycle, an interesting question is why RB is not mutated in
 It is now accepted that loss of normal cell cycle control
every cancer. In fact, mutations in other genes that control
is central to malignant transformation and that at least
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
211
one of the four key regulators of the cell cycle (p16, cyclin
MDM2, increasing its half-life and enhancing its ability to
D, CDK4, RB) is mutated in most human cancers. Notably,
drive the transcription of target genes. Hundreds of genes
in cancers caused by certain oncogenic viruses (discussed
later), this is achieved through direct targeting of RB by
 These genes suppress neoplastic transformation by three 
viral proteins. For example, the human papillomavirus
mechanisims:
p53-mediated cell cycle arrest may be considered the primor-
of RB, preventing it froim inhibiting the E2F transcription
dial response to DNA damage (Fig. 6.21). It occurs late in
factors. Thus, RB is functionally deleted, leading to uncon-
the G phase and is caused mainly by p53-dependent
trolled growth.
transcription of the CDKI gene CDKN1A (p21). The p21
protein inhibits cyclin-CDK complexes and prevents
phosphorylation of RB, thereby arresting cells in the G
SUMMARY
phase. Such a pause in cell cycling is welcome, because
itgives the cells"breathing time" to repair DNA damage.
 RB: GOVERNOR OFTHE CELL CYCLE
The p53 protein also induces expression of DNA damage
+ Like other tumor suppressor genes, both copies of RB must
repair genes. If DNA damage is repaired successfully,
 be dysfunctional for tumor development to occur.
p53 upregulates transcription of MDM2, leading to its
+ In cases of familial retinoblastoma, one defective copy of the
own destruction and relief of the cell cycle block. If the
RB gene is present in the germ line, so that only one additional
damage cannot be repaired, the cell imay enter p53-
somatic mutation is needed to completely eliminate RB
induced
senescence
orundergo
 p53-directed
function.
apoptosis.
+ RB exerts anti-proliferative effects by controlling the G-to-S
p53-induced senescence is a form of permanent cell cycle
r u s as  par is
transition of the cell cycle. In its active form, RB is hypophos-
 and gene expression that differentiate it froin quies-
phorylated and binds to E2F transcription factors.This interac-
tion prevents transcription of genes like cyclin E that are
cence or reversible cell cycle arrest. Senescence requires
activation of p53 and/or Rb and expression of their
needed for DNA replication, and so the cells are arrested
in Gi.
mediators, such as the CDKIs. The mechanisims of
+ Growth factor signaling leads to cyclin D expression, activation
senescence are unclear but seem to involve global chro-
of cyclin D-CDK4/6 complexes, inactivation of RB by phos-
matin changes, which drastically and permanently alter
phorylation, and thus release of E2F.
 gene expression.
+ Loss of cell cycle control is fundamental to malignant transfor-
p53-induced apoptosis of cells with irreversible DNA damage
is the ultimate protectivemechanismagainst neoplastic trans-
mation. Almost all cancers have a disabled G, checkpoint due
to mutation of either RB or genes that affect RB function, such
formatior. It is mediated by upregulation of several pro-
as cyclin D, CDK4, and CDKIs.
 apoptotic genes, including BAX and PLIMA (discussed
+ Many oncogenic DNA viruses, like HPV, encode proteins (e.g,
later).
 E7) that bind RB and render it nonfunctional.
s ns sasss aq pae si ssd 'azns o
DNA damage and assists in DNA repair by causing G1
arrest and inducing the expression of DNA repair genes.
TP53: Guardian of the Genome
A cell with daimaged DNA that cannot be repaired is
 The p53-encoding tumor suppressor gene, TP53, is the
directed by p53 to either enter senescence or undergo
most commonly mutated gene in human cancer. The p53
apoptosis (see Fig. 6.21). In view of these activities, p53 has
protein is a transcription factor that thwarts neoplastic
im ,aoua aq jo upns, au paes Annqn uaag
 transforimation by three interlocking imechanisims: activa-
loss of norimal p53 function, DNA damage goes unre-
tion of temporary cell cycle arrest (terimed quiescence),
paired, mutations become fixed in dividing cells, and the
induction of perimanent cell cycle arrest (termed seres-
jusieu on Supeal laans Aem-auo e onuo sun lia
cence), or triggering of prograimmed cell death (terimed
transformation.
aq ues cgd 'sleusis euaixa jo ,rosuas, e s! g n (sisodody
Confirming the importance of TP53 in controlling car-
viewed as a central monitor of internal stress, directing the
cinogenesis, more than 70% of human cancers have a
 stressed cells toward one of these pathways.
defect in this gene, and the remaining malignant neo-
A variety of stresses trigger the p53 response pathways,
plasms often have defects in genes upstream or down-
including anoxia, inappropriate pro-growth stimuli (e.g,
stream of TP53. Biallelic abnorimalities of the TP53 gene
unbridled MYC or RAS activity), and DNA damage. By
are found in virtually every type of cancer, including car-
 managing the DNA damage response, p53 plays a central
cinoimas of the lung, colon, and breast- the three leading
role in maintaining the integrity of the genome, as dis-
causes of cancer deaths. In most cases, imutations affecting
cussed next.
both TP53 alleles are acquired in soimatic cells. In other
 In nonstressed, healthy cells, p53 has a short half-life (20
tumors, such as certain sarcomas, the TP53 gene is intact
 minutes) because of its association with MDM2, a protein
but p53 function is lost because of aimplification and over-
that targets p53 for destruction. When the cell is stressed,
expression of the MDM2 gene, which encodes a potent
for exaimple, by an assault on its DNA, "sensors" that
 inhibitor of p53. Less comnonly, patients inherit a 1nutant
include protein kinases such as ATM (ataxia telangiectasia
TP53 allele; the resulting disorder is called the Li-Fraumeni
mutated) are activated. These activated sensors catalyze
syndrome. As in the case with familial retinoblastoma,
postranslational modifications in p53 that release it from
inheritance of one mutant TP53 allele predisposes affected
http://ebooksmedicine.net
212
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
lonizing radiation
Carcinogens
/Mutagens
Normal cell
Cell with
(p53 normal)
 mutations or
loss of p53
Oncogenic Stress
Hypoxia
DNA damage
DNA damage
→ p53 accumulates and
 p53-dependent genes 
binds to DNA
not activated
No cell
No DNA
 Transcription dependent and 
cycle arrest
repair, no 
 independent effects on targets
senescence
Mutant cells
鼻
Expansion
Senescence
p21
GADD45
and
(CDK inhibitor)
(DNA repair)
BAX
additional 
mutations
(apoptosis gene)
G1 arrest
 Successful repair
 Repair fails
Normal cells
Apoptosis
Malignant tumor
Fig. 6.2l The role of p53 in maintaining the integrity of the genome.Activation of normal p53 by DNA-darmaging agents or by hypoxia leads to cell cycle
arrest in GI and induction of DNA repair, by transcriptional upregulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CDKNIA (p2l) and the GADD45 genes.
 Successful repair of DNA allows cells to proceed with the cell cycle; if DNA repair fails, p53 triggers either apoptosis or senescence. In cells with loss or
mutations of TP53, DNA damage does not induce cell cycle arrest or DNA repair, and genetically damaged cells proliferate, giving rise eventually to malignant
neoplasms.
individuals to develop malignant tumors because only one
B virus bind to p53 and nullify its protective function.
additional hit is needed to inactivate the second, normal
Thus, transforiming DNA viruses subvert two of the best-
allele. Patients with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome have a
understood tumor suppressors, RB and p53.
50 years of age compared with the general population. In
contrast to tumors developing in patients who inherit a
SUMMARY
mutant RB allele, the spectrum of tumors that develop in
 patients with the Li-Fraumeni syndroime is much more
TP53: GUARDIAN OFTHE GENOME
varied; the most common types are sarcoimas, breast cancer,
· TP53 encodes p53, the central monitor of stress in the cell,
leukemia, brain tumors, and carcinomas of the adrenal
auasosuo aedouddeui eixoue Ag panaie aq ueo ym
cortex. Compared with individuals diagnosed with spo-
signaling, or DNA damage.Activated p53 controls the expres-
radic tumors, patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome develop
sion and activity of genes involved in cell cycle arrest, DNA
 tumors at a younger age and may develop multiple primary
repair, cellular senescence, and apoptosis.
tumors.
+ DNA damage leads to activation of p53 by phosphorylation.
As with RB, norimal p53 also can be rendered nonfunc-
Activated p53 drives transcription of CDKNIA (p2l), which
tional by certain oncogenic DNA viruses. Proteins encoded
 prevents RB phosphorylation, thereby causing a G,-S block in
by oncogenic HPVs, certain polyoima viruses, and hepatitis
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
213
Cell-cell contacts in many tissues are mediated by
the cell cycle. This pause allows the cells to repair DNA
homodimeric interactions between transimeinbrane pro-
damage.
teins called cdherins. E-cadherin (E for epithelial) medi-
+ If DNA damage cannot be repaired, p53 induces cellular senes-
ates cell-cell contact in epithelial layers. Two mechanisms 
cence or apoptosis.
have been proposed to explain how E-cadherin main-
· Of human tumors, 70% demonstrate biallelic mutations in
tains contact inhibition:
TP53. Patients with the rare Li-Fraumeni syndrome inherit one
 One mechanism is nediated by the tumor suppressor
auo kuo yeyn yons 'au wuag ay u esdi jo Ados aanrajap
gene NF2. Its product, neurofibroimin-2, more com-
additional mutation is required to lose normal p53 function.
imonly called merlin, acts downstream of E-cadherin in
Li-Fraumeni syndrome patients are prone to develop a wide
a signling pathway that helps fo maintain contact inhibi-
variety of tumors.
tion. Hoimozygous loss of NF2 is known to cause certain
+ As with RB, p53 can be incapacitated when bound by proteins
neural tumors, and gerim line mutations in NF2 are asso-
encoded by oncogenic DNA viruses such as HPV.
ciated with a tumor-prone hereditary condition called
neurofibromatosis type 2.
·A second mechanism by which E-cadherin may regu-
late contact inhibition involves its ability to bind
β-catenin, another signaling protein. βB-catenin is a key
Transforming Growth Factor-β Pathway
component of the WNT signaling pathway (described
Although much is known about the circuitry that applies
below), which has broad but as of yet incoimpletely
brakes to the cell cycle, the molecules that transimit anti-
understood roles in regulating the morphology and
proliferative signals to cells are less well characterized.
 organization of epithelial cells lining structures such
Best-known is TGF-B, a meimber of a fainily of dimeric
as the gut.
growth factors that includes bone morphogenetic proteins
and activins. In most norimal epithelial, endothelial, and
A further clue to the important of E-cadherin and
hematopoietic cells, TGF-β is a potent inhibitor of pro-
β-catenin in epithelial cancers is illustrated by the rare
liferation. It regulates cellular processes by binding to a
hereditary disease qderomatous polyposis coli (APC). This
coimplex coimposed of TGF-β receptors I and II. Dimer-
disorder is characterized by the development of numer-
ization of the receptor upon ligand binding leads to a
 ous adenomatous polyps in the colon that have a very
cascade of events that result in the transcriptional activa-
high incidence of transforimation into colonic cancers.
 tion of CDKIs with growth-suppressing activity, as well
The polyps consistently show loss of a tumor suppressor
 as repression of growth-promoting genes such as MYC
 gene called APC (naned for the disease), which exerts
and CDK4.
anti-proliferative effects in an unusual manner. APC
 In many forims of cancer, the growth-inhibiting effects
encodes a cytoplasimic protein whose doiminant func-
of the TGF-β pathways are impaired by mutations affect-
tion is to promote the degradation of β-catenin, which
ing TGF-β signaling. These mutations may alter the type II
has several functions. In addition to binding E-cadherin,
TGF-βreceptor or SMAD molecules that serve to transduce
B-catenin also is a key component of the WNT signal-
anti-proliferative signals from the receptor to the nucleus.
 ing pathway (illustrated in Fig. 6.22). WNTs are soluble
Mutations affecting the type II receptor are seen in cancers
factors that bind WNT receptors, which in turn transimit
of the colon, stomach, and endometrium. Mutational inacti-
signals that prevent the APC-mediated degradation of
vation of SMAD4, 1 of the 10 proteins known to be involved
β-catenin, allowing it to translocate to the nucleus, where
in TGF-β signaling, is common in pancreatic cancers. In
it acts as a transcriptional activator. In quiescent cells that
other cancers, by contrast, loss of TGF-β-mediated growth
have not been exposed to WNT, cytoplasimic β-catenin is
control occurs at a level downstreaim of the core TGF-β
degraded by a destruction complex, of which APC is an
signaling pathway; for exaimple, there may be loss of p21
integral part. With loss of APC (e.g, in colon cancers),
expression and/or overexpression of MYC. These tumor
B-catenin degradation is prevented, and the WNT sig-
cells can then use other eleiments of the TGF-β-induced
 naling response is inappropriately activated even in the
 prograim, including immune system suppression or promo-
absence of WNT factors. In colonic epithelium this leads
tion of angiogenesis, to facilitate tumor progression. Thus,
to increased transcription of growth-proimoting genes,
such as cyclin Dl and MYC, as well as transcriptional
depending on the state of other genes in the cell. Indeed,
regulators, such as TWIST and SLUG, which repress E-
in many late-stage tumors, TGF-β signaling activates
cadherin expression and thus reduce contact inhibition.
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process
 APC behaves as a typical tumor suppressor gene. Indi-
that promotes migration, invasion, and metastasis,
as
viduals born with one imutated allele typically are found
discussed later.
 to have hundreds to thousands of adenoinatous polyps in
the colon by their teens or twenties; these polyps show
Contact Inhibition, NF2, and APC
loss of the other APC allele. Almost invariably, one or
When cancer cells are grown in the laboratory, their
-sp se onosn juuu oaun sdiod ar
proliferation fails to be inhibited when they come in
cussed later. APC mutations are seen in 70% to 80% of
contact with each other. This is in sharp contrast to
sporadic colon cancers. Colonic cancers with nornal APC
nontransforimed cells, which stop proliferating once they
 genes soimetimes show activating imutations of β-catenin
forim confluent imonolayers. The mechanisims that govern
that render them refractory to the degrading action
contact inhibition are only now being discovered.
of APC.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
214
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
RESTING CELL
WNT STIMULATION
TUMOR CELL WITH
WNTreceptor
WNT.
MUTATED APC
E-cadherin
APC
Signals
Destruction
complex
β-catenin
PC
β-catenin 
β-catenin
TCF
TCF
TCF
A
B
No proliferation
Proliferation
Proliferation
resting cells (not exposed to WNT), β-catenin forms a macromolecular complex containing the APC protein. This complex leads to the destruction of
β-catenin, and intracellular levels of β-catenin are low. (B) When cells are stimulated by secreted WNT molecules, the destruction complex is deactivated,
β-catenin degradation does not occur, and cytoplasmic levels increase. β-Catenin translocates to the nucleus, where it binds to TCF, a transcription factor
that activates several genes involved in the cell cycle.(C) When APC is mutated or absent, the destruction of β-catenin cannot occur. β-Catenin translocates
to the nucleus and coactivates genes that promote the cell cycle, and cells behave as if they are under constant stirmulation by the WNT pathway.
Altered Cellular Metabolism
SUMMARY
Even in the presence of ample oxygen, cancer cells dem-
TGf-β, COnTaCt InhibITIon,And ApC-β- 
onstrate a distinctive form of cellular metabolism charac-
CATENIN PATHWAYS
terized by high levels of glucose uptake and increased
conversion of glucose to lactose (fermentation) via the
+ TGF-β inhibits proliferation of many cell types by activation of 
glycolytic pathway. This phenoimenon, called the Warburg
 growth-inhibiting genes such as CDKls and suppression of
 growth-promoting genes such as MYC and those encoding
effect and also known as aerobic glycotysis, has been recog-
nized for many years (indeed, Otto Warburg received the
Cyclins.
Nobel Prize in' 1931 for its discovery). Clinically, the
 TGF-β function is compromised in many tumors by mutations
 in its receptors (colon, stomach, endometrium) or by muta-
"glucose-hunger" of tumors is used to visualize tumors via
positron eimission tomography (PET) scanning, in which
tional inactivation of S/MAD genes that transduce TGF-β signal-
ing (pancreas).
● E-cadherin maintains contact inhibition, which is lost in malig-
derivative that is preferentially taken up into tumor cells
(as well as norimal, actively dividing tissues such as the
nant cells.
bone marrow). Most tumors are PET-positive, and rapidly
· The APC gene exerts anti-proliferative actions by regulating the
growing ones are markedly so.
 destruction of the cytoplasmic protein β-catenin. With a loss
Warburg's discovery was largely neglected for many
of APC, β-catenin is not destroyed, and it translocates to the
years, but over the past decade, metabolisim has become
nucleus, where it acts as a growth-promoting transcription
one of the most active areas of cancer research. Metabolic
factor.
pathways (like signaling pathways) in normal and cancer
+ In familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome, inheritance of a
cells are still being elucidated, and the details are complex,
 germ line mutation in the APC gene and sporadic loss of the
but at the heart of the Warburg effect lies a simple question:
sole normal allele causes the development of hundreds of
colonic polyps at a young age.Inevitably, one or more of these
why is it advantageous for a cancer cell to rely on seein-
 ingly inefficient glycolysis (which generates two imolecules
polyps evolves into a colonic cancer. Somatic loss of both
of ATP per molecule of glucose) instead of oxidative phos-
alleles of the APC gene is seen in approximately 70% of spo-
phorylation (which generates up to 36 molecules of ATP
radic colon cancers.
per molecule of glucose)? While pondering this question,
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
215
it is important to recognize that rapidly proliferating
toward aerobic fermentation, with a bit of oxidative phos-
norimal cells, such as in embryonic tissues and lympho-
cytes during immune responses, also rely on aerobic fer-
Imentation. Thus, "Warburg metabolism" is not cancer
chondrial metabolisim. However, a major function of mito-
specific, but instead is a general property of growing cells
chondria in growing cells is not to generate ATP, but rather
that becoimes "fixed" in cancer cells.
to carry out reactions that generate metabolic interimedi-
The answer to this riddle is simple: Aerobic glycolysis
ates that can be shunted off and used as precursors in the
provides rapidly dividing tumor cells with metabolic
synthesis of cellular building blocks. For example, lipid
intermediates that are needed for the synthesis of cellular
biosynthesis requires acetyl-CoA, and acetyl-CoA is largely
components, whereas mitochondrial oxidative phosphor-
synthesized in growing cells from interimediates such as
ylation does not. The reason growing cells rely on aerobic
citrate that are generated in mitochondria.
 So how is this profound reprograimming of imetabolism,
that a growing cell has a strict biosynthetic requireiment; it
the Warburg effect, triggered in growing norimal and
Imust duplicate all of its cellular components - DNA, RNA,
malignant cells? As might be guessed, metabolic repro-
proteins, lipid, and organelles - before it can divide and
gramming is produced by signaling cascades downstream
produce two daughter cells. While oxidative phosphoryla-
of growth factor receptors, the very same pathways that
tion yields abundant ATP, it fails to produce any carbon
shoun pue sauaosuo ui suonnm Aq paenlarap ane
moieties that can be used to build the cellular components
suppressor genes in cancers. Thus, whereas in rapidly
needed for growth (proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids).
dividing norimal cells aerobic glycolysis ceases when the
Even cells that are not actively growing must shunt some
 tissue is no longer growing, in cancer cells this reprogram-
metabolic intermediates away from oxidative phosphory-
ming persists due to the action of oncogenes and the loss 
lation in order to synthesize macromolecules that are
 of tumor suppressor gene function. Some of the important
needed for cellular maintenance.
points of cross-talk between pro-growth signaling factors
By contrast, in actively growing cells only a simall frac-
and cellular metabolism are shown in Fig. 6.23 and include
tion of the cellular glucose is shunted through the oxidative
the following:
Growth factor receptor signaling. In addition to transimit-
ecule of glucose metabolized produces approximately four
ting growth signals to the nucleus, signals from growth
molecules of ATP. Presumably, this balance (heavily biased
factor
receptors
alsoi
influence
 metabolism
by
QUIESCENT CELL
GROWING CELL (NORMAL OR TUMOR)
Glucose
Glucose
Growth
Glucose
Glucose
factor
transporter
RTK
transporter
RTK
PI3K
Autophagy
Lipids
Protein
Increased 
Akt
 synthesis
glycolytic
intermediates ↓
Nucleotide,
Lipid and 
Lysosome
amino acid
GROWTH
amino acid
 synthesis
catabolism
Lactate
 Krebs
 Mitochondrial
 Lipogenesis
cycle
 metabolites
ATP CO2
Increased
glutamine
MYO
utilization
RTK
RTK
Glutamine 
Growth
factor
Fig. 6.23 Metabolism and cell growth. Quiescent cells rely mainly on the Krebs cycle for ATP production; if starved, autophagy (self-eating) is induced to
provide a source of fuel. When stirmulated by growth factors, normal cells markedly upregulate glucose and glutamine uptake, which provide carbon sources
for synthesis of nucleotides, proteins, and lipids. In cancers, oncogenic mutations involving growth factor signaling pathways and other key factors such as
MYC deregulate these metabolic pathways, an alteration known as the Warburg effect.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
216
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
upregulating glucose uptake and inhibiting the activity
responsible for therapeutic failures. Thus, autophagy may
of pyruvate kinase, which catalyzes the last step in the
be a tumor's friend or foe depending on how the signaling
glycolytic pathway, the conversion of phosphoenolpyr-
pathways that regulate it are "wired" in a given tumor.
uvate to pyruvate. This creates a daimming effect that
leads to the buildup of upstream glycolytic intermedi-
Oncometabolism
ates, which are siphoned off for synthesis of DNA, RNA,
and protein.
through tumor genome sequencing studies are mutations
 RAS signaling. Signals downstream of RAS upregulate
in enzyimes that participate in the Krebs cycle. Of these,
the activity of glucose transporters and multiple glyco-
mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) have gar-
lytic enzymes, thus increasing glycolysis; promote
nered the most interest, as they have revealed a new mech-
shunting of mitochondrial interimediates to pathways
anisim of oncogenesis termed oncometabolism (Fig. 6.24).
leading to lipid biosynthesis; and stimulate factors that
The proposed steps in the oncogenic pathway involving
are required for protein synthesis.
IDH are as follows:
 MYC. As mentioned earlier, pro-growth pathways
· IDH acquires a mutation that leads to a specific amino
upregulate expression of the transcription factor MYC,
acid substitution involving residues in the active site of
which drives changes in gene expression that support
the enzyme. As a result, the mutated protein loses it
anabolic metabolisim and cell growth. Anong the MYC
ability to function as an isocitrate dehydrogenase and
regulated genes are those for several glycolytic enzyimes
instead acquires a new enzyimatic activity that catalyzes
and glutaminase, which is required for mitochondrial
the production of 2-hydroxglutarate (2-HG).
utilization of glutaimine, a key source of carbon moieties
 2-HG in turn acts as an inhibitor of several other enzyimes
 needed for biosynthesis of cellular building blocks.
that are meinbers of the TET fainily, including TET2.
TET2 is one of several factors that regulate DNA meth-
The flipside of the coin is that tumor suppressors often
 ylation, which you will recall is an epigenetic modifica-
inhibit metabolic pathways that support growth. We have
tion that controls norimal gene expression and often
already discussed the "braking" effect of the tumor sup-
goes awry in cancer. According to the model, loss of
pressors NF1 and PTEN on signals downstream of growth
TET2 activity leads to abnorimal patterns of DNA
factor receptors and RAS, allowing them to oppose the
methylation.
sdead pue) ueur e aq Aeu hi papun raa qrem
Abnormal DNA methylation in turn leads to misexpres-
all) tumor suppressors that induce growth arrest suppress
sion of currently unknown cancer genes, which drive
the Warburg effect. For exaimple, p53, arguably the most
cellular transforimation and oncogenesis.
important tumor suppressor, upregulates target genes that
collectively inhibit glucose uptake, glycolysis, lipogenesis,
Thus, according to this scenario, mutated IDH acts as an
og papaau ro Aax e) HaN go uoa a pu
oncoprotein by producing 2-HG, which is considered a
the biosynthesis of macromolecules). Thus, it is increas-
prototypical oncometabolite. Oncogenic IDH mutations
ingly clear that the functions of many oncoproteins and
lular metabolism.
 Beyond the Warburg effect, there are two other links
Isocitrate
between metabolisim and cancer that are of sufficient
IDH
dehydrogenase
importance to merit brief mention, autophagy and an
Mutation
unusual set of oncogenic mutations that lead to the cre-
ation of oncometabolites, simall molecules that appear to
mIDH inhibitor
directly contribute to the transforimed state.
Autophagy
 mIDH
Mutant IDH
Autophagy is a state of severe nutrient deficiency in
which cells not only arrest their growth, but also canni-
balize their own organelles, proteins, and membranes as
α-ketoglutarate
2-hydroxyglutarate
carbon sources for energy production (Chapter 2). If this
(oncometabolite)
adaptation fails, the cells die. Tumor cells often seeim to be
able to grow under marginal environmental conditions
Epigenome regulatory enzymes 
without triggering autophagy, suggesting that the path-
ways that induce autophagy are deranged. In keeping with
Epigenetic changes
(DNA methylation,
pressors. Whether autophagy is always bad from the
histone modification)
vantage point of the tumor, however, reimains a matter of
active investigation and debate. For example, under condi-
 Altered cancer gene expression
tions of severe nutrient deprivation, tumor cells may use
hibernation that allows cells to survive hard times for long
Cellular transformation 
periods. Such cells are believed to be resistant to therapies
Fig. 6.24 Proposed action of the oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate
that kill actively dividing cells, and could therefore be
(2-HG) in cancer cells with mutated isocitrate dehydrogenase (mIDH).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
217
have now been described in a diverse collection of cancers,
key components of the intrinsic pathway, or that reset the
including a sizable fraction of cholangiocarcinomas,
balance of regulatory factors so as to favor cell survival
gliomas, acute myeloid leukemias, and sarcomas. Of clini-
in the face of intrinsic stresses (Figure 6.25).
cal significance, because the mutated IDH proteins have an
 Before delving into modes of resistance to apoptosis, a
altered structure, it has been possible to develop drugs that
brief review of the intrinsic pathway is in order. Activation
inhibit mutated IDH and not the norimal IDH enzyme.
of this pathway leads to perimeabilization of the mitochon-
These drugs are now being tested in cancer patients and
drial outer meimbrane and release of molecules, such as
have produced encouraging therapeutic responses. This
cytochrome c, that initiate apoptosis. The integrity of the
 developing story is a remarkable exaimple of how detailed
mitochondrial outer membrane is deterimined by a delicate
understanding of oncogenic mechanisims can yield entirely
new kinds of anti-cancer drugs.
meimbers of the BCL2 protein family. The pro-apoptotic
proteins BAX and BAK are required for apoptosis and
directly promote mitochondrial perimeabilization. Their
s jo siaua sooe-nue an a pa si uo
SUMMARY
family, which are exeimplified by BCL2, BCL-XL, and
ALTERED CELLULAR METABOLISM
MCL1. A third set of proteins, the so-called "BH3-only
+ Warburg metabolism is a form of pro-growth metabolism
 proteins,” which include BAD, BID, and PUMA, shift the
balance between the pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic
favoring glycolysis over oxidative phosphorylation. lt is induced
family members by neutralizing the actions of anti-apop-
in normal cells by exposure to growth factors and becomes
totic proteins like BCL2 and BCL-XL, thereby promoting
fixed in cancer cells due to the action of certain driver
apoptosis. When the sum total of all the BH3-only proteins
mutations.
+ Many oncoproteins (RAS, MYC, mutated growth factor recep-
"overwhelms" the protective BCL2/BCL-XL factors, BAX
 tors) induce or contribute to Warburg metabolism, and many
and BAK are activated and form pores in the mitochondrial
tumor suppressors (PTEN, NFI, p53) oppose it.
membrane. These allow mitochondrial cytochrome c to
· Stress may induce cells to consume their components in a
process called autophogy. Cancer cells may accumulate muta-
tions to avoid autophagy, or may corrupt the process to
 provide nutrients for continued growth and survival.
Deficiency of
 Some oncoproteins such as mutated IDH act by causing the 
ROS
growth factors
formation of high levels of "oncometabolites" that alter the
Radiation
and survival
epigenome, thereby leading to changes in gene expression that
Chemicals
signals
are oncogenic.
DNA
Evasion of Cell Death
damage
一
Tumor cells frequently contain mutations in genes that
Mutation of p53
Overexpression
p53 response
regulate apoptosis, making the cells resistant to cell
 death. As discussed in Chapter 2, apoptosis, or regulated
of MDM2
cell death, refers to an orderly disinantling of cells into
Activation of
BAX/BAK
 BIM and 
component pieces, which are then efficiently consumed by
other sensors
neighboring cells and professional phagocytes without
BCL-2
stimulating inflammation. You will recall that there are
BCL-XL
two pathways that lead to apoptosis: the extrinsic pathway,
MCL-1
Mitochondria
the intrinsic pathway (also known as the mitochondrial
mr jo sso se yns suqad Aa pau (d
Cytochrome c +APAF-1
e ol ioalqns are shao raoueo abeurep vNa pue sroioey
number of intrinsic stresses that can initiate apoptosis, par-
ticularly DNA damage, but also metabolic disturbances
IAP
H Caspase 9
steimming from dysregulated growth as well as hypoxia
caused by insufficient blood supply. These stresses are
Caspase 3
enhanced manyfold when tumors are treated with chemo-
therapy or radiation therapy, which kill tumor cells
by
Apoptosis
is strong selective pressure, both before and during therapy,
for cancer cells to develop resistance to intrinsic stresses
tumor cells to evade cell death.(l) Loss of p53, either through mutation or
that may induce apoptosis. Accordingly, evasion of apop-
tosis by cancer cells occurs mainly by way of acquired
mitochondria as a result of upregulation of anti-apoptotic factors such as
mutations and changes in gene expression that disable
BCL2, BCL-XL, and MCL-1. IAP, Inhibitor of apoptosis.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
218
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
leak out into the cytosol, where it binds to APAF-l and
sn ie  nd ar sp as 
activates caspase-9, which in turn cleaves and activates
characterized by BCL2 overexpression (such as chronic
executioner caspases such as caspase-3. Another group of
s       ( 
factors that function as negative regulators of the intrinsic
dard part of cancer treatiment over the course of the next
pathway is known as inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs),
few years.
Within this framework, it is possible to illustrate the
major mechanisims by which apoptosis is evaded by cancer
cells (Figure 6.25). These mainly involve loss of p53, the
SUMMARY
key component of early steps in the intrinsic pathway, and
 EVASION OF APOPTOSIS
increased expression of anti-apoptotic meimbers of the
BCL2 family.
· Evasion of cell death by cancers mainly involves acquired
·Loss of TP53 function. As already discussed, TP53 is com-
abnormalities that interfere with the intrinsic (mitochondrial) 
monly mutated in cancers at diagnosis, and the fre-
pathway of apoptosis.
quency of TP53 mutations is even higher in tumors that
+ The most common abnormalities involve loss of p53 function,
relapse after therapy. In addition to mutation of TP53,
either by way of TP53 mutations or overexpression of the p53
other lesions in cancers iimpair p53 function indirectly,
inhibitor MDM2.
most notably amplification of MDM2, which encodes an
+ Other cancers evade cell death by overexpressing anti-apop-
inhibitor of p53. Loss of p53 function prevents the
totic members of the BCL2 family, such as BCL2, BCL-XL, and
upregulation of PUMA, a pro-apoptotic BH3-only
MCLI, which protect cells from the action of BAX and BAK,
member of the BCL2 family that is a direct target of p53.
the pro-apoptotic members of the BCL2 family.
As a result, cells survive levels of DNA damage and cell
·+ In a large majority of follicular B-cell lymphomas, BCL2 levels
stress that otherwise would result in their death.
are high because of a (14; 18) translocation that fuses the BCL2
Ouerexpression ofanti-apoptotic members of the BCL2 family.
 gene with regulatory elements of the immunoglobulin heavy
 Overexpression of BCL2 is a coimmon event leading to
chain gene.
the protection of tumor cells froim apoptosis and occurs
● Inhibitors of MDM2 (which activate p53) and inhibitors of
through several mechanisims. One of the best under-
BCL2 family members induce the death of cancer cells by
stood examples is found follicular lymphoma (Chapter
stimulating the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis and are being
12), a B-cell tumor carrying a characteristic (14;18)
developed as therapeutic agents.
(q32;q21) translocation that fuses the BCL2 (located at
18q2l) to the transcriptionally active immunoglobulin
heavy chain gene (located at 14q32). The resulting over-
 abundance of BCL2 protects lyinphocytes from apopto-
Limitless Replicative Potential (lmmortality)
sis and allows thein to survive for abnorimally long
periods, producing a steady accumulation of B lympho-
Tumor cells, unlike normal cells, are capable of limitless
cytes that results in lymphadenopathy. Because BCL2-
replication. As discussed previously in the context of cel-
 overexpressing follicular lymphoimas arise in large part
through reduced cell death rather than explosive cell
capacity of at most 70 doublings. Thereafter, the cells lose
proliferation, they tend to be indolent (slow-growing).
 the ability to divide and enter replicative senescence. This
In other tumors such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia
 phenoinenon has been ascribed to progressive shortening
(Chapter 12), it appears that BCL2 is upregulated
of telomeres at the ends of chroimosoimes.
because of loss of expression of specific micro-RNAs
 Markedly eroded teloimeres are recognized by the DNA
that normally dampen BCL2 expression. Many other
repair machinery as double-stranded DNA breaks, leading
mechanisims leading to overexpression of anti-apoptotic
to cell cycle arrest and senescence, mediated by TP53 and
 meimbers of the BCL2 family have been described, par-
RB. In cells in which TP53 or RB mutations are disabled by
ticularly in the setting of resistance to chemotherapy.
mutations, the nonhoimologous endjoining pathway is
For exainple, amplification of the MCL1 gene is seen in
activated in a last-ditch effort to save the cell, joining the
 a subset of lung and breast cancers.
shortened ends of two chromosomes.
n  r  n  r
Recognition of the mechanisins by which cancers evade
- i pd d a p sosr i 
cell death has stimulated several lines of targeted drug
phase, resulting in new double-stranded DNA breaks. The
developiment. Restoration of p53 function in TP53-mutated
resulting genoimic instability fron the repeated bridge-
tumors is a daunting problem (because of the inherent
 aissd si   ap, ro 
 trophe, characterized by massive apoptosis.
tumors in which p53 is inactive because of overexpression
It follows that for tumors to acquire the ability to grow
of its inhibitor, MDM2. Indeed, inhibitors of MDM2 that
 indefinitely, loss of growth restraints is not enough; both
ZWaw yim sroun u sisoidode anput pue d aeanea
cellular senescence and mitotic catastrophe must also be
gene amplification, such as certain types of sarcoma, are
avoided (Fig. 6.26). If during crisis a cell manages to reac
being tested in clinical trials. Even imore promising results
tivate teloimerase, the bridge-fusion-breakage cycles cease,
are being generated with drugs that mimic the activities
and the cell is able to avoid death. However, during this
of BH3-only proteins and inhibit the function of anti-
 period of genoimic instability that precedes teloimerase acti-
apoptotic meimbers of the BCL2 family, particularly BCL2
vation, numerous mutations could accumulate, helping the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
219
Metaphase
Dicentric
Inactivetelomerase
Shortened telomeres
chromosomes
Anaphase
-p53
Bridge-fusion-
breakage cycle
Multiple
NHEJ
(50-70)
pathway
cell divisions
NHEJ
pathway
Checkpoint
New double-
+p53
activation
 stranded breaks
-Telomerase
Telomerasereactivation
Mitotic
catastrophe
CELL
DEATH
Senescent cell
CANCER
Fig. 6.26 Escape of cells from replicative senescence and mitotic catastrophe caused by telomere shortening.
cell march toward malignancy. Telomerase, active in
● In cells that have disabled checkpoints, DNA repair pathways
norimal steim cells, is absent from or present at very low
are inappropriately activated by shortened telomeres, leading
levels in most soimatic cells. By contrast, telomere mainte-
to massive chromosomal instability and mitotic crisis.
nance is seen in virtually all types of cancers. In 85% to 95%
+ Tumor cells reactivate telomerase, thus staving off mitotic
of cancers, this is due to upregulation of the enzyime telom-
catastrophe and achieving immortality.
erase. A few tumors use other mechanisims, termed a terra-
tive lengthening of telomeres, which depend on DNA
recombination.
Sustained Angiogenesis
Of interest, in a study of the progression from colonic
adenoma to colonic adenocarcinoma, early lesions had a
Even if a solid tumor possesses all of the genetic aberra-
tions that are required for malignant transformation, it
 expression, whereas malignant lesions had complex karyo-
cannot enlarge beyond 1 to 2 mm in diameter unless it
  n e s   s
has the capacity to induce angiogenesis. Like norimal
with a imodel of telomere-driven tumorigenesis in human
 tissues, tumors require delivery of oxygen and nutrients 
cancer. Thus, it appears that unregulated proliferation in
and removal of waste products; presumably the 1- to 2-imm
incipient tumors leads to telomere shortening, followed by
chromosonal instability and the accuinulation of muta-
nutrients, and waste can diffuse to and from blood vessels.
tions. If teloimerase is then reactivated in these cells, telo-
Growing cancers stimulate neoangiogenesis, during which
meres are extended and these mutations becoime fixed,
vessels sprout from previously existing capillaries. Neo-
 contributing to tumor growth.
vascularization has a dual effect on tumor growth: perfu-
sion supplies needed nutrients and oxygen, and newly
forimed endothelial cells stimulate the growth of adjacent
tumor cells by secreting growth factors, such as insulin-like
SUMMARY
 growth factors (IGFs) and PDGF. While the resulting tumor
LImITLESS REPLICATIVE POTENTIAL
vasculature is effective at delivering nutrients and remov-
(IMMORTALITY)
ing wastes, it is not entirely normal; the vessels are leaky
 and dilated, and have a haphazard pattern of connection,
+ In normal cells, which lack expression of telomerase, the short-
features that can be appreciated on angiograns. By perimit-
ened telomeres generated by cell division eventually activate 
ting tumor cells access to these abnorimal vessels, angio-
cell cycle checkpoints, leading to senescence and placing a limit
on the number of divisions a cell may undergo.
 an essential facet of malignancy.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
220
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
How do growing tumors develop a blood supply? The
 Inproveinents are only possible with greater understand-
 current paradigim is that angiogenesis is controlled by a
ing of the "escape routes" through which tumor cells side-
balance between angiogenesis promoters and inhibitors;
step the effects of the angiogenesis inhibitors that are now
in angiogenic tumors this balance is skewed in favor of
in use.
promoters. Early in their development, most human
tumors do not induce angiogenesis. Starved of nutrients,
these tumors remain small or in situ, possibly for years,
SUMMARY
until an angiogeric switch teriminates this stage of vascular
SUSTAINED ANGIOGENESIS
quiescence. The molecular basis of the angiogenic switch
+ Vascularization of tumors is essential for their growth and is
involves increased production of angiogenic factors and/
controlled by the balance between angiogenic and anti-
or loss of angiogenic inhibitors. These factors may be pro-
duced by the tumor cells theinselves or by inflaimimatory
angiogenic factors that are produced by tumor and stromal
cells (e.g., macrophages) or resident stromal cells (e.g)
cells.
+ Hypoxia triggers angiogenesis through the actions of HIF-lo
tumor-associated fibroblasts). Proteases, either elaborated
on the transcription of the proangiogenic factor VEGF.
by the tuimor cells or by stromal cells in response to the
+ Many other factors regulate angiogenesis; for example, p53
tumor, are also involved in regulating the balance between
induces synthesis ofthe angiogenesis inhibitor thombospondin- I,
angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors. Many proteases
while RAS, MYC, and MAPK signaling all upregulate VEGF
can release proangiogenic basic fibroblast growth factors
expression and stimulate angiogenesis.
(bFGF) that are stored in the ECM; conversely, the angio-
· VEGF inhibitors are used to treat a number of advanced
genesis inhibitors angiostatin and endostatin are produced
cancers and prolong the clinical course, but are not curative.
by proteolytic cleavage of plasiminogen and collagen,
respectively.
 The local balance of angiogenic and anti-angiogenic
Invasion and Metastasis
factors is influenced by several factors:
Invasion, and metastasis, the major causes of cancer-
 an oxygen-sensitive transcription factor mentioned
related morbidity and mortality, result from complex
earlier, which then activates the transcription of proan-
interactions involving cancer cells, stromal cells, and the
giogenic cytokines such as VEGF. These factors create
extracellular matrix (ECM). These interactions can be
 broken down into a series of steps consisting of local inva-
 of endothelial cells and guides the growth of new vessels 
sion, intravasation into blood and lymph vessels, transit
toward the tumor.
through the vasculature, extravasation froin the vessels,
Mutations involving tumor suppressors and oncogenes
formation of microimetastases, and growth of microimetas-
in cancers also tilt the balance in favor of angiogenesis.
tases into imacroscopic tumors (Fig. 6.27). Predictably, this
For exaimple, p53 stimulates expression of
anti-
sequence of steps may be interrupted at any stage by either
angiogenic molecules, such as thrombospondin-l, and
host-related or tumor-related factors. For the purpose of
represses expression of proangiogenic molecules, such
discussion, the metastatic cascade can be subdivided into
as VEGF. Thus, loss of p53 in tumor cells provides a
two phases: (1) invasion of ECM and (2) vascular dissemi-
 more perimissive environment for angiogenesis.
nation and homing of tumor cells.
The transcription of VEGF also is influenced by signals
froim the RAS-MAP kinase pathway, and gain-of-
invasion of Extracellular Matrix
function mutations in RAS or MYC upregulate the pro-
Human tissues are organized into a series of compartiments
duction of VEGF. Notably, elevated levels of VEGF
asq o go sad oml q rao qea o pardas
can be detected in the serum and urine of a significant
membranes and interstitial connective tissue (Chapter 1).
fraction of cancer patients.
Although organized differently, each type of ECM is com-
posed of collagens, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans.
The idea that angiogenesis is essential if solid tumors
Tumor cells must interact with the ECM at several stages
are to grow to clinically significant sizes has provided a
in the metastatic cascade (see Fig. 6.27). A carcinoima first
powerful impetus for the development of therapeutic
must breach the underlying baseiment meimbrane, then tra-
agents that block angiogenesis. These agents are now a
verse the interstitial connective tissue, and ultimately gain
access to the circulation by penetrating the vascular base-
cancers; a cardinal example is bevacizumab, a monoclonal
ment meimbrane. This process is repeated in reverse when
antibody that neutralizes VEGF activity and is approved
tumor cell emboli extravasate at a distant site. Invasion of
for use in the treatment of multiple cancers. However,
 the ECM initiates the metastatic cascade and is an active
angiogenesis inhibitors have not been nearly as effective
process that can be resolved into several sequential steps
as was originally hoped; they can prolong life, but usually
(Fig. 6.28):
for only a few months and at high financial cost. The
Loosening of intercellular connections between tumor cells.
mechanisms that underlie the persistence and ultimate
As mentioned earlier, E-cadherins act as intercellular
progression of cancers in the face of therapy with angio-
glues, and their cytoplasimic portions bind to β-catenin
genesis inhibitors are not yet clear. The modest benefit of
(see Fig. 6.22). Adjacent E-cadherin molecules keep the
anti-angiogenic therapy highlights the pernicious nature
cells together; in addition, as discussed earlier, E-cadherin
of advanced cancers, which can even elude therapies
can transimit anti-growth signals by sequestering
directed at stromal support cells such as endothelium.
β-catenin. E-cadherin function is lost in alimost all
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
221
plasiminogen activator, have been implicated in tumor
Transformed
cell invasion. MMPs regulate tumor invasion not only
PRIMARY
cell
Clonal expansion,
by remodeling insoluble components of the basement
TUMOR
- growth, diversification,
 angiogenesis
 ECM-sequestered growth factors, which have cheno-
tactic, angiogenic, and growth-promoting effects. For
 example, MMP-9 is a gelatinase that cleaves type IV
Basement
 Metastatic subclone
 membrane 
+
Adhesion to and
invasion of basement 
 A LOOSENING OF INTERCELLULAR JUNCTIONS
membrane
 Passage through
 extracellular matrix
+
Intravasation
-lL
Interaction with host 
lymphoid cells
Host
Cadherins  Type IV  Laminin  Fibronectin   Laminin  Basement 
lymphocyte
collagen  receptor 
 receptor
membrane
Platelets-
Tumor cell
B DEGRADATION OF ECM
embolus
 Matrix metalloprotease
Extracellular
Type IV
matrix
 collagenase
Adhesion to
basement 
membrane
 Extravasation
Metastatic
deposit
Type IV collagen cleavage
 Plasminogen activator
Angiogenesis
METASTATIC
C MIGRATION AND INVASION
TUMOR
Growth
Fig. 6.27 The metastatic cascade: The sequential steps involved in the
hematogenous spread of a tumor.
epithelial cancers, either by mutational inactivation of 
E-cadherin genes, activation of β-catenin genes, or inap-
Autocrine motility
factor
propriate expression of the SNAIL and TWIST transcrip-
 tion factors, which suppress E-cadherin expression.
 Fibronectin 
Local degradation of the basement membrane and interstitial
crrective tissue. Tumor cells may either secrete proteo-
Fig. 6.28 Sequence of events in the invasion of epithelial basement mem-
lytic enzyimes theimselves or induce stromal cells (e.g-
branes by tumor cells. Tumor cells detach from each other because of
fibroblasts and inflaimmatory cells) to elaborate prote-
reduced adhesiveness and attract inflarmmatory cells. Proteases secreted
from tumor cells and inflarmmatory cels degrade the baserment membrane.
ases. Multiple different proteases, such as matrix metal-
 Binding of tumor cels to proteolytically generated binding sites and tumor
loproteinases (MMPs), cathepsin D, and urokinase
 cell migration follow.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
222
CHAPTER 6
Neoplasia
collagen of the epithelial and vascular basement mein-
tumor-derived DNA can be detected in circulation. Most
brane and also stimulates release of VEGF from ECM-
of these tumor cells circulate as single cells, while others
sequestered pools. Benign tumors of the breast, colon,
forim emboli by aggregating and adhering to circulating
and stomach show litle type IV collagenase activity,
blood elements, particularly platelets.
whereas their malignant counterparts overexpress this
Given the ease with which tumor cells access the circula-
enzyime. Concurrently, the levels of metalloproteinase
tion, it is apparent that the ability of cancers cells to leave
inhibitors are reduced so that the balance is tilted greatly
the circulation, invade, and grow to clinically significant
toward tissue degradation. Indeed, overexpression of
sizes at other sites in the body is (fortunately for the patient)
MMPs and other proteases has been reported for many
highly inefficient.
malignant tumors.
 Several factors seeim to limit the metastatic potential of
Changes in attachment of tumor cells to ECM proteins.
circulating tumor cells. While in the circulation, tumor cells
Normal epithelial cells have receptors, such as integrins,
 are vulnerable to destruction by host inunune cells (dis-
for baseiment meimbrane laminin and collagens that are
cussed later), and the process of adhesion to norimal vas-
polarized at their basal surface; these receptors help to
cular beds and invasion of norimal distant tissues may be
maintain the cells in a resting, differentiated state. Loss
much more difficult than the escape of tumor cells from the
 of adhesion in norimal cells leads to induction of apop-
cancer. Even following extravasation, tumor cells that have
tosis, while, not surprisingly, tumor cells are resistant to
been selected for growth in the originating tissue may find
this form of cell death. Additionally, the matrix itself is
s jo ye o anp as puoas e ui mon on is h
modified in ways that proimote invasion and metastasis.
stromal support or because of recognition and suppression
 For example, cleavage of the baseiment meimbrane pro-
by resident imnune cells. Indeed, the concept of tumor
teins, collagen IV, and laiminin by MMP-2 or MMP-9
dorimancy, referring to the prolonged survival of microme-
generates novel sites that bind to receptors on tumor
tastases without progression, is well described in mela-
cells and stimulate migration.
noma and in breast and prostate carcinoma. Dormancy of
 Locomotior is the final step of invasion, propelling tumor
tumor cells at distant sites may well be the last defense
cells through the degraded basement meimbranes and
 against linically significant metastatic disease.
zones of matrix proteolysis. Migration is a complex, mul-
 Despite these limiting factors, if neglected, virtually all
tistep process that involves many families of receptors
malignant tumors will eventually produce macroscopic
 and signaling proteins that eventually impinge on the
 metastases. The site at which metastases appear is related
 actin cytoskeleton. Such movement seems to be potenti-
to two factors: the anatomic location and vascular drain-
ated and directed by tumor cell-derived cytokines, such
 age of the primary tumor, and the tropism of particular 
 as autocrine motility factors. In addition, cleavage prod-
tumors for specific tissues. As mentioned earlier, imost
ucts of matrix components (e.g, collagen, laminin) and
metastases occur in the first capillary bed available to the
some growth factors (e.g., insulin-like growth factors I
tumor, hence the frequency of imetastases to liver and lung.
and II) have chemotactic activity for tumor cells. Stromal
Many observations, however, suggest that natural path-
cells also produce paracrine effectors of cell motility,
ways of drainage do not wholly explain the distribution of
such as hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/
metastases. For exaimple, prostatic carcinoima preferen-
SCF), which binds to receptors on tumor cells. Concen-
tially spreads to bone, bronchogenic carcinomas tend to
trations of HGF/SCF are elevated at the advancing
involve the adrenal glands and the brain, and neuroblas-
edges of the highly invasive brain tumor glioblastoma
tomas spread to the liver and bones. Such organ tropisim
 multiforme, supporting their role in motility.
 may be related to the following mechanisims:
· Tumor cells may have adhesion molecules whose
It also has become clear that the stromal cells surround-
 ligands are expressed preferentially on the endothelial
ing tuimor cells are not merely a static barrier for tumor
cells of the target organ.
cells to traverse but rather constitute a variable environ-
Chemokines may have an important role in determining
the target tissues for metastasis. For instance, many
and stromal cells such as fibroblasts and immune cells
cancers express the cheimokine receptor CXCR4, which
enable multiple cancer hallimarks (discussed later). For
has been implicated in the extravasation of circulating
exainple, a variety of studies have deinonstrated that
tumor cells originating froim tumors such as breast
tumor-associated fibroblasts exhibit altered expression of
cancer.
genes that encode ECM molecules, proteases, protease
● In some cases, the target tissue may be a nonperimissive
inhibitors, and various growth factors, all of which can
a rog ds on os y'os ann, uao
influence tuunor invasion and extravasation. The most suc-
growth of tumor seedlings. For exainple, although they
cessful tumors may be those that can co-opt the activities
are well vascularized, skeletal muscle and spleen are
of stromal cells to their own nefarious purposes.
rarely sites of metastasis.
Vascular Dissemination and Homing of Tumor Cells
 It must be adimitted, however, that although particular
Because of their invasive properties, tumor cells fre-
tumors “prefer" certain metastatic sites, the precise local-
quently escape their sites of origin and enter the circu-
ization of metastases cannot be predicted in individual
lation. It is now recognized from studies of "liquid
 patients with any forim of cancer. Evidently, much to the
biopsies,” blood samples taken froin patients with solid
disimay of medical students, many tumors have not read
tumors, that millions of tumor cells are shed daily from
the relevant chapters of pathology textbooks! Although the
even simall cancers; hence both tumor cells
and
 molecular mechanisims of colonization are still being
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
223
unraveled, a consistent theime seeims to be that tumor cells
SNAIL and TWIST, transcription factors whose primary
secrete cytokines, growth factors, and proteases that act on
function is to promote epithelial-to-imesenchymal transi-
the resident stroimal cells, which in turn make the meta-
tion (EMT). In EMT, carcinoma cells downregulate certain
static site habitable for the cancer cell. With a better molec-
epithelial markers (e.g., E-cadherin) and upregulate certain
ular understanding of the mechanisims of metastasis, the
mesenchymal markers (e.g, vimentin, smooth muscle
clinician's ability to target them therapeutically will be
actin). These molecular changes are accoimpanied by phe-
greatly enhanced.
notypic alterations such as morphologic change froim
polygonal epithelioid cell shape to a spindly mesenchymal
Metastasis
shape, along with increased production of proteolytic
 Of central inportance in oncology is the question, why do
enzyimes that proimote migration and invasion. These
only some tumors metastasize? It is sobering to realize that
changes are believed to favor the development of a promi-
satisfying answers are still lacking. Some variation in
metastasis clearly relates to inherent differences in the
E-cadherin expression seeims to be a key event in EMT, and
behavior of particular tumors; for example, small cell car-
SNAIL and TWIST are transcriptional repressors that
cinoma of the lung virtually always metastasizes to distant
downregulate E-cadherin expression. How expression of
sites, whereas with soime tumors, such as basal cell carci-
these master regulator transcription factors is stimulated in
noma, metastasis is the exception rather than the rule. In
tumors is not clear; however, experimental models suggest
 general, large tumors are more likely to metastasize than
that interactions of tumor cells with stroimal cells are a key
simall tumors, presumably because (all other things being
stimulus for this change. Thus, acquisition of a metastatic
equal) large tumors will have been present in the patient
 phenotype imay not require a set of mutations but may be
for longer periods of time, providing additional chances
an emergent property arising froim the interactions of
for metastasis to occur. However, tumor size and type
tumor cells and stroma.
cannot adequately explain the behavior of individual
cancers, and it is still open to question whether metastasis
SUMMARY
tumor cell number and time) or reflects inherent differ-
 INVASION AND METASTASIS
ences in metastatic potential froim tumor to tumor (a deter-
ministic model).
+ Ability to invade tissues, a hallmark of malignancy, occurs in 
The deterministic model proposes that metastasis is
four steps: loosening of cell-cell contacts, degradation of ECM,
inevitable with certain tumors because the tumor harbors
 attachment to novel ECM components, and migration of tumor
cells with a specific metastatic phenotype. As discussed
cells.
earlier, as tumor cells grow they randomly accumulate
+ Cell-cell contacts are lost by the inactivation of E-cadherin
mutations, creating subclones with distinct combinations
through a variety of pathways.
of mutations. One possibility is that only rare tumor cells
· Basement membrane and interstitial matrix degradation is
accumulate all of the mutations necessary for metastasis,
 and that this accounts for the inefficiency of the process.
stromal cells, such as MMPs and cathepsins.
However, identification of metastasis-specific mutations
· Proteolytic enzymes also release growth factors sequestered
and metastasis-specific patterns of gene expression has
in the ECM and generate chemotactic and angiogenic frag-
proven to be difficult. An alternative idea is that some
ments from cleavage of ECM gycoproteins.
tumors acquire all of the mutations needed for metastasis
+ The metastatic site of many tumors can be predicted by the
early in their developiment, and that these are the tumors
location of the primary tumor Many tumors arrest in the first
that are fated to be “bad actors." Metastasis, according to
capillary bed they encounter (lung and liver, most
this view, is not dependent on the stochastic generation of
commonly).
metastatic subclones during tumor progression, but is an
+ Some tumors show organ tropism, probably due to activation 
intrinsic property of the tumor that develops early on
of adhesion or chemokine receptors whose ligands are
during carcinogenesis. These mechanisims are not mutually
expressed by endothelial cells at the metastatic site.
exclusive, and it could be that aggressive tumors acquire a
 metastasis-perimissive gene expression pattern early in
tumorigenesis, yet also require some additional random
Evasion of Immune Surveillance
mutations to complete the metastatic phenotype. Nor can
all blame be placed on tumor cells: as mentioned earlier,
Long one of the "holy grails" of oncology, the promise of
there is evidence that the imakeup of the stroima, the pres-
therapies that enable the host immune system to recog-
ence of infiltrating immune cells, and the degree and
nize and destroy cancer cells is finally coming to fruition,
quality of angiogenesis also influence metastasis.
largely due to a clearer understanding of the mechanisms
by which cancer cells evade the host response. Paul
principal or sole contribution is to control programs of
Ehrlich first conceived the idea that tuimor cells can be
gene expression that proimote metastasis. This question is
recognized as “foreign" and eliminated by the inmune
of more than acadeimic interest, because if altered forms of 
systein. Subsequently, Lewis Thoimas and Macfarlane
certain genes promote or suppress the metastatic pheno-
Burnet forimalized this concept by coining the term immune
type, their detection in a primary tumor would have both
surveillance, based on the preimise that a norimal function of
prognostic and therapeutic implications. Among candi-
og poq a us, Ausuo o st wass a a
 dates for such metastasis oncogenes are those encoding
 emerging imalignant cells and destroy them. This idea has
http://ebooksmedicine.net
224
CHAPTER６
Neoplasia
 been supported by many observations- the direct demon-
with DNA viruses, the most important of which are human
stration of tumor-specific T cells and antibodies in patients;
 papilloima virus (HPV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). There
data showing that the extent and quality of immune infil-
is abundant evidence that cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
trates in cancers often correlates with outcome;
the
recognize viral antigens and play importantrolesin surveil-
increased incidence of certain cancers in immunodeficient
lance against virus-induced tunors through their ability to
people and imice; and most recently and most directly, the
recognize and kill virus-infected cells. Most notably, mul-
dramatic success of iminunotherapy in the treatment of
tiple cancers associated with oncogenic viruses, including
several cancers.
HPV-associated cervical carcinoma and EBV-related B cell
 The specific factors that govern the outcoime of interac-
lymphomas, occur at significantly higher rates in individu-
tions between tumor cells and the host immune systeim are
 als with defective T cell imununity, such as patients infected
numerous and are still being defined. In the face of this
with HIV.
 coimplexity, it is helpful to consider a few overarching
principles:
Effective Immune Responses to Tumor Antigens. Assum-
· Cancer cells express a variety of antigens that stimulate
ing that the immune system is norimally capable of elimi
the host imnune systen, which appears to have an
nating emerging cancers, we may ask, what are the key
 important role in preventing the eimergence of cancers.
components of an effective host immune response? It
· Despite the antigenicity of cancer cells, the iminune
appears likely that imunune reactions to cancers are initi-
response to established tumors is ineffective, and in
ated by the death of individual cancer cells, which occurs
some instances imay actually promote cancer growth,
at some frequency in all cancers due to dysregulated
 due to acquired changes that allow cancer cells to evade
growth, metabolic stresses, and hypoxia due to insufficient
 anti-tumor responses and foster pro-tumor responses.
blood supply. When tumor cells die they release "danger
 Defining mechanisims of immune evasion and "immuno-
signals"
"(damage associated molecular patterns, see
Chapter 5) that stimulate innate imnune cells, including
imnunotherapies that work by reactivating latent host
resident phagocytes and antigen presenting cells. It is
immune responses.
believed that soine of the dead cells are phagocytosed by
dendritic cells, which migrate to draining lymph nodes
and present tuimor neoantigens in the context of MHC class
Tumor Antigens. As we have discussed, cancer is a disor-
I molecules, a process termed cross-presentation. The dis-
der that is caused by driver mutations in oncogenes and
played tumor antigens are recognized by antigen-specific
CD8+ T cells, which become activated, proliferate, differ-
acquired rather than inherited. In addition to pathogenic
 entiate into active CTLs, and hoime to the site of the tumor,
driver mutations, cancers, due to their inherent genetic
where they recognize and kill tumor cells presenting neo-
instability, also accumulate passenger mutations. These
 antigens in the context of their own MHC class I molecules
may be particularly abundant in cancers that are caused by
(Fig. 6.29). IFN--producing T helper cells of the Th1 subset,
mutagenic exposures (e.g., sunlight, simoking). All of these
which may be induced by recognition of tuumor antigens,
varied mutations may generate new protein sequences
can activate macrophages and also contribute to the
 us pu s ass a a  (su)
destruction of tumors.
therefore is not tolerant of and can react to.
As will be discussed shortly, some the strongest evi-
In some instances, unmutated proteins expressed by
dence for the importance of CTL responses in immunosur-
 tumor cells also can stimulate the host imunune response.
veillance stems fron the characterization of established
· One such antigen is tyrosinase, an enzyime involved in
human cancers, which often feature acquired mutations
melanin biosynthesis that is expressed only in norimal
that prevent CTLs from recognizing tumor cells
as
melanocytes and melanomas. It may be surprising that
"foreign". It also has been noted in large studies of a wide
the immune system is able to respond to this norimal
Su jo s y i s u no 
self-antigen. The probable explanation is that tyrosinase
CTLs and Thl cells correlate with better clinical outcomes.
is normally produced in such small amounts and in so
While other cell types such as natural killer cells also have
few norimal cells that it is not recognized by the immune
been implicated in anti-tumor responses, the quality and
system and fails to induce tolerance.
 strength of CTL responses are believed to be of preeiminent
 Another group of tumor antigens, the cancer-testis anti-
importance.
e le ur ps are ie saa aq papoua are su
tissues except gerim cells in the testis- hence their naine.
Immune Evasion by Cancers. Since the iminune system
Although the protein is present in the testis it is not
is capable of recognizing and eliminating nascent cancers,
expressed on the cell surface in a forim that can be rec-
it follows that tumors that reach clinically significant sizes
ognized by CD8+ T cells, because sperim do not express
 must be coimposed of cells that are either invisible to the
MHC class I imolecules. Thus, for all practical purposes
host immune system or that express factors that actively
these antigens are tumor specific and are therefore
suppress host imununity. The term cancer immunoediting
 capable of stimulating anti-tumor immune responses.
has been used to describe the ability of the iininune system
to proimote the darwinian selection of the tumor subclones
An additional important class of tumor antigens consists
that are most able to avoid host imnunity or even manipu-
of viral proteins that are expressed in cancer cells trans-
late the imimune system for their own malignant purposes.
formed by oncogenic viruses. The most potent of these anti-
Since CTL responses appear to be the most important
gens are proteins produced by cells that arelatently infected
defense that the host has against tumors, it should come as
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
225
block these checkpoints and release the brakes on the
immune response. Current checkpoint blockade therapies
have resulted in response rates of 10-30% in a variety of
Tumor
solid tumors (1melanoma, lung cancer, bladder cancer, and 
others), and even higher rates in some hematologic malig-
nancies such as Hodgkin lymphoma (Chapter 12). Because
these checkpoints evolved to prevent responses to self anti-
gens (Chapter 5), it is not surprising that patients treated
Dendritic
with checkpoint blockade therapy develop various auto-
cell
 immune manifestations, such as colitis and other types of
systeinic inflaimnation. Most of these reactions can be con-
trolled with anti-inflaimmatory agents.
The remarkable response of advanced cancers to
Phagocytosed
tumor antigen
immune checkpoint inhibitors has energized other work
focused on harnessing the imunune system to coimbat
cancer. These include efforts to develop personalized
 CTL killing of tumor 
tumor vaccines using neoantigens identified in the tumors
of individual patients, as well as new kinds of adoptive
Afferent
Migration of
imnunotherapy. The most advanced of the latter are
tumor-specific
lymphatic
 patient-derived CTLs that are engineered to express chime-
CTL to tumor 
vessel
ric antigen receptors (CARs). CARs have extracellular
domains consisting of antibodies that bind tumor antigens
and intracellular domains that delivered signals that acti-
vate CTLs following their engageiment with antigen on the
surface of tumor cells. CAR T cells are potent killers of
 Activation of tumor 
tumor cells and have produced long-term remissions in
antigen-specific CD8+ T cell
patients with certain leukeimias, such as B cell acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia (Chapter 12). However, CAR T cells
also are associated with serious complications related to
cytokines released from the activated CTLs, and it reimains
 to be seen if they will become a routine part of cancer
treatment.
 Beyond complications of imnunotherapy, it also should
be recognized that the host immune response to tumors is
Lymph node
not an unalloyed blessing. For example, tumors release
Fig. 6.29 Cross-presentation of tumor antigens and induction of CD8+
incompletely characterized factors that alter the function of
cytotoxic T cell antitumor response. (Modified from Abbas AK, Lichtrmon AH,
Pillai S: Cellular and molecular immunology, ed 9, Philadelphia, 2018, Elsevier.)
phocytes, in a fashion that is suspected of proimoting angio-
genesis,issuefibrosis,andtheaccumulationofalternatively
no surprise that tuumor cells show a variety of alterations
activated (M2) macrophages, which you will recall froin
that abrogate CTL responses. These include acquired muta-
al a no uoissandns yim paeiose are g ade
tions in β2-microglobulin that prevent the asseimbly of
 response during wound healing. These types of responses
functional MHC class I molecules, and increased expres-
Imay proimote tunor growth, the converse of what one
sion of a variety of proteins that inhibit CTL function.
would expect from a protective anti-tumor immune
These proteins work by activating what is referred to as
response.
immune checkpoints, inhibitory pathways that normally are
To summarize, while the future appears very bright for
crucial for maintaining self-tolerance and controlling the
cancer immunotherapy, important hurdles remain to be
size and duration of immune responses so as to minimize
cleared. At present, response and resistance to immune
collateral tissue damage.
checkpoint inhibitors are unpredictable, and new biomark-
One of the best-characterized inunune checkpoints
ers are needed to better tailor therapies for individual
involves a protein called PD-Ll (prograimned cell death
 patients. This will entail the developiment of new diagnos-
ligand 1), which is often expressed on the surface of tuimor
tic tests to gauge both the host imimune response and the
cells (Figure 6.30). When PD-L1 engages its receptor, PD-1,
likely means of immune evasion in individual cancers.
 on CTLs, the CTLs becoime unresponsive and lose their
There is reason to believe that imunune checkpoint inhibi-
ability to kill tumor cells. Experimental studies have identi-
tors may be more effective if given before the patient
fied several other immune checkpoint pathways, involving
receives cheimotherapy (which is imnunosuppressive) or
different ligands and receptors, which also have been
 in coimbination with certain targeted therapies directed
implicated in immunoevasion by tumors. Of these, the best
against tumor cells, and many well-designed clinical trials
characterized involves CTLA4, another receptor expressed
will need to be conducted before these questions are
on T cells that inhibits T cell function.
answered. Currently available immunotherapies are effec-
The discovery of checkpoints that shut off anti-tumor
tive in some cancers but not others. Thus, there is a need
immunity has led to the development of antibodies that
for developiment of safe adaptive therapies that are
http://ebooksmedicine.net
226
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
Dendritic
Dendritic
cell_.
 Cell
Tumor peptide-MHC
Tumor peptide-MHC
Primed CTL capable
CD28
TCR
TCR
of killing tumor cells
CD28
CTLA-4
CTLA-4
CD8+
CD8+
CTL
Anti-
T cell
CTLA-4
A Lymph node
NO COSTIMULATION
COSTIMULATION
Inhibited
Activated
CD8+
CD8+
Cytotoxic
CTL
CTL
CTL
CTL
granules
TCR
TCR
 Peptide-MHC
PD-1
Peptide-
MHC
PD-1 ligand 
Anti-PD-1 S
Killing of 
Tumor
Tumor
tumor cell
cell 
cell 
Anti-PD-1
ligand 
B Tumor tissue
Fig. 6.30 Activation of host antitumor immunity by checkpoint inhibitors. (A) Blockade of the CTLA4 surface molecule with an inhibitor antibody allows
cytolytic CD8+ T cells (CTLs) to engage B7 family coreceptors, leading to T cell activation. (B) Blockade of PD-I receptor or PD-I ligand by inhibitory
antibodies abrogates inhibitory signals transmitted by PD-l, again leading to activation of CTLs. (Reprinted from Abbas AK, Lichtmon AH, Pilai S: Cellular and
molecular immunology, ed 9, Philadelphia, 2018, Esevier)
effective in a wide variety of cancers. With all of these
· Antibodies that overcome some of these mechanisms 
caveats, it seeims certain that the field of oncology is on the
o
immune evasion are now approved for treatment of patients 
threshold of transforimative therapeutic advances, all made
with advanced forms of cancer.
 possible by careful study of the normal immune response
and its myriad variations in cancers.
Genomic Instability as an Enabler of Malignancy
The preceding section identified the eight defining features
SUMMARY
Aq paonpond aq on readde ym jo ie Koueueu jo
EVASION OF IMMUNE SURVEILLANCE
genetic alterations involving cancer genes. How do these
+ Tumor cells can be recognized by the immune system as non-
Imutations arise? Although humans are awash in environ-
Imental agents that are mutagenic (e.g, chemicals, radia-
 self and destroyed.
+ Antitumor activity is mediated by predominantly cell-mediated 
tion, sunlight), cancers are relatively rare outcomes of these
encounters. This state of affairs results from the ability of
mechanisms. Tumor antigens are presented on the cell surface
normal cells to sense and repair DNA damage.
by MHC class I molecules and are recognized by CD8+ CTLs.
The importance of DNA repair in maintaining the integ-
+ The different classes of tumor antigens include products of
rity of the genome is highlighted by several inherited dis-
mutated genes, overexpressed or aberrantly expressed pro-
orders in which genes that encode proteins involved in
teins, and tumor antigens produced by oncogenic viruses.
DNA repair are defective. Individuals born with inher-
+ Immunosuppressed patients have an increased risk for devel-
 ited defects in DNA repair genes are at greatly increased
a suouo Aq pasnes sadka Auenued uasue jo suaudo
risk for the development of cancer. Defects in three types
viruses.
of DNA repair systeims - misimatch repair, nucleotide exci-
+ In immunocompetent patients, tumors may avoid the immune
 system by several mechanisms, including selective outgrowth 
sion repair, and recombination repair - are presented next.
While these discussions focus on inherited syndroimes, a
of antigen-negative variants, loss or reduced expression of 
 point worthy of einphasis is that sporadic cancers often
histocompatibility molecules, and immunosuppression medi-
incur mutations in DNA repair genes as well; this in turn
ated by expression of certain factors (e.g.,TGF-β, PD-I ligands)
enables the accumulation of imutations in cancer genes that
by the tumor cells.
contribute directly to development of cancer.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Hallmarks of Cancer
227
 Evidence for the role of DNA repair genes in the origin
Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon
of cancer also coimes from the study of hereditary breast
Cancer Syndrome
cancer. Germ line mutations in two genes, BRCA1 and
Hereditary nonpolyposis colon carcinoma (HNPCC) syn-
BRCA2, account for 50% of cases of familial breast cancer.
drome dramatically illustrates the role of DNA repair
In addition to breast cancer, women with BRCA1 muta-
 genes in predisposition to cancer. This disorder, charac-
tions have a substantially higher risk for developing epi-
terized by familial carcinomas of the colon affecting pre-
        
dominantly the cecum and proxiimal colon (Chapter 14),
risk for developing prostate cancer. Likewise, germ line
results froim defects in genes involved in DNA mismatch
 mutations in the BRCA2 gene increase the risk for develop-
repair. When a strand of DNA is being repaired, the prod-
ing breast cancer in both men and woimen, as well as
 sa s,  ie sa redar r jo si
cancers originating from the ovary, prostate, pancreas, bile
example, if there is an erroneous pairing of G with T,
ducts, stomach, melanocytes, and Blymphocytes. Although
rather than the norimal A with T, the misimatch repair
the functions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 have not been eluci-
 dated fully, cells with a defective version of these genes
errors accuinulate at an increased rate. Mutations in at
develop chromosoimal breaks and severe aneuploidy.
least four mismatch repair genes have been found to
 Indeed, both genes seem to function, at least in part, in the
underlie HNPCC (Chapter 15). Each affected individual
homologous recombination DNA repair pathway. For
inherits one defective copy of one of several DNA mis-
example, BRCA1 forims a complex with other proteins in
match repair genes and acquires the second "hit" in colonic
the homologous recoimbination pathway and also is linked
epithelial cells. Thus, DNA repair genes affect cell growth
to the ATM kinase pathway. BRCA2 was identified as one
only indirectly- by allowing mutations in other genes
of several genes mutated in Fanconi anemia, and the
during the process of norimal cell division. A characteristic
 BRCA2 protein has been shown to bind to RAD51, a protein
finding in the genoime of patients with misinatch repair
required for homologous recoimbination. Similar to other
defects is microsatellite instability (MSI). Microsatellites are
tumor suppressor genes, both copies of BRCA1 and BRCA2
tandein repeats of one to six nucleotides found throughout
must be inactivated for cancer to develop. Although linkage
the genome (Chapter 1). In norimal people, the length of
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to faimilial breast cancers is well
these microsatellites reimains constant. By contrast, in
established, these genes are rarely inactivated in sporadic
patients with HNPCC, these satellites are unstable and
cases of breast cancer. In this regard, BRCA1 and BRCA2
increase or decrease in length. Although HNPCC accounts
sh yons 'sauas rossanddns rouni rao uong juanap an
for only 2% to 4% of all colonic cancers, MSI can
be
APC and TP53, which are frequently inactivated in spo-
 detected in about 15% of sporadic cancers due to acquired
radic cancers.
 mutations that disrupt the function of misimatch repair
genes.
Cancers Resulting From Mutations Induced by Regulated
Xeroderma Pigmentosum
Genomic Instabiity: Lymphoid Neoplasms
Xeroderma pigmentosum is an autosomal recessive dis-
 A special type of DNA damage plays a central role in the
order caused by a defect in DNA repair that is associated
 pathogenesis of tumors of B celis and T lymphocytes. As
with a greatly increased risk for cancers arising in sun-
discussed earlier, adaptive imnunity relies on the ability
exposed skin. Ultraviolet (UV) rays in sunlight cause
 of B cells and T cells to diversify their antigen receptor
cross-linking of pyrimidine residues, preventing normal
 genes. Immature B cells and T progenitors both express a
DNA replication. Such DNA damage is repaired by the
o    e r sid a go 
nucleotide excision repair system. Several proteins are
V(D)J segiment recombination, perimitting the asseinbly of
 involved in nucleotide excision repair, and the inherited
loss of any one of these can give rise to xeroderima
addition, after encountering antigen, mature B cells express
piginentosun.
a specialized enzyime called activation-induced cytosine
deaminase (AID), which catalyzes both immunoglobulin
Diseases With Defects in DNA Repair by
gene class switch recombination and imnunoglobulin
Homologous Recombination
diversification through somatic hypermutation. Errors that
A group of autosoinal recessive disorders coimprising
Bloom syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, and Fanconi anemia is
noglobulin gene class switching and diversification provide
characterized by  hypersensitivity
y _to DNA-damaging
fertile soil for many of the mutations that cause lymphoid
agents, such as ionizing radiation (in Bloom syndrome and
neoplasms, discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
ataxia-telangiectasia), or to DNA cross-linking agents, such
as nitrogen mustard (in Fanconi aneimia). Their phenotype
is complex and includes, in addition to predisposition to
SUMMARY
cancer, features such as neural symptoms (in ataxia-
telangiectasia), aneimia (in Fanconi aneimia), and develop-
GENOMIC INSTABILITY AS AN ENABLER OF
mental defects (in Bloom syndrome). The gene mutated in
MALIGNANCY
ataxia-telangiectasia is ATM, which encodes a protein
+ Individuals with inherited mutations of genes involved in DNA
pasns aeep vna usuas , ur ueodurl st ie asu
repair systems are at greatly increased risk for the develop-
by ionizing radiation and then directing p53 to initiate the
ment of cancer.
DNA damage response, as described earlier.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
228
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
·Inuasion and metastasis. Proteases released from macro-
+ Patients with HNPCC syndrome have defects in the mismatch
 phages foster tissue invasion by reimodeling the ECM,
repair system, leading to development of carcinomas of the
while factors such as TNF and EGF may directly stimu-
colon. These patients' genomes show microsatellite instability
late tumor cell motility. As mentioned earlier, other
(MSI), characterized by changes in length of short tandem
factors released froin stromal cells such as TGF-β may
repeating sequences throughout the genome.
promote epithelial-imesenchyimal transition (EMT),
· Patients with xeroderma pigmentosum have a defect in the
 nucleotide excision repair pathway. They are at increased risk 
which may be a key event in the process of invasion and
metastasis.
for the development of skin cancers in sites exposed to sun-
·Euasion of immune destruction. A variety of soluble factors
light because of an inability to repair pyrimidine dimers induced 
released by macrophages and other stromal cells are
by UV light.
believed to contribute to an immunosuppressive tumor
+ Syndromes involving defects in the homologous recombination
 microenvironment. The leading suspects include TGF-β
DNA repair system constitute a group of disorders—-Bloom 
and other factors that either favor the recruitiment of
syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, and Fanconi anemia-that are
immunosuppressive T regulatory cells or suppress the
function of CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. Furthermore, there is
such as ionizing radiation. BRCA1 and BRCA2, which are
abundant evidence in cancer models and eimerging evi-
mutated in familial breast cancers, also are involved in homolo-
dence in human disease that advanced cancers contain
gous DNA repair.
mainly
 alternatively 2
activated (M2)
macrophages
+ Mutations incurred in lymphocytes expressing gene products
(Chapter 3). M2 macrophages produce cytokines that
that induce genomic instability (RAGI, RAG2,AID) are impor
promote angiogenesis, fibroblast proliferation, and col-
tant in the pathogenesis of lymphoid neoplasms.
lagen deposition, all of which are commonly observed
 in invasive cancers and in healing wounds, giving rise
to the notion that cancers are like "wounds that do not
heal."
Tumor-Promoting Inflammation as an Enabler
A thorough understanding of how cancers "manipu-
of Malignancy
late" inflaimunatory cells to support their growth and sur-
vival reimains elusive. However, the results from animal
Infiltrating cancers provoke a chronic inflammatory reac-
studies are intriguing and raise the possibility of therapies
tion. In patients with advanced cancers, this inflamimatory
directed at tumor-induced inflammation and its down-
reaction can be so extensive as to cause systeimic signs and
streaim consequences. An example of one such intervention
symptoims, such as aneimia (the so-called "aneimia of
involves aspirin and other COX-2 inhibitors, use of which
chronic disease"), fatigue, and cachexia. However, studies
is associated with a decreased risk of colorectal cancer in
several epidemiological studies.
inflammatory cells also modify the tumor microenviron-
Important clinical considerations eimerge from the prin-
ment to enable many of the hallimarks of cancer. These
ciples presented in the foregoing discussion of the hall-
effects may stem from direct interactions between inflam-
 marks of cancer: These hallmarks provide a road map for
matory cells and tumor cells, or through indirect effects of
the development of new therapeutic agents for the treat-
inflaimmatory cells on other resident stromal cells, particu-
 ment of cancer (Fig. 6.31).
larly cancer-associated fibroblasts and endothelial cells.
Proposed cancer-enabling effects of inflaimmatory cells and
ETIOLOGY OF CANCER:
resident stromal cells include the following:
Release of factors that promote proliferation. Infiltrating leu-
CARCINOGENIC AGENTS
kocytes and activated stromal cells have been shown to
secrete a wide variety of growth factors, such as EGF,
Carcinogenic agents inflict genetic damage, which lies at
and proteases that can liberate growth factors fron the
the heart of carcinogenesis. Three classes of carcinogenic
extracellular matrix (ECM).
agents have been identified: (l) chemicals, (2) radiant
 Removal of growth suppressors. As mentioned earlier,
 energy, and (3) microbial products. Chemicals and radiant
the growth of epithelial cells is suppressed by cell-cell
 energy are documented causes of cancer in humans, and
and cell-ECM interactions.  Proteases released by
 inflaimmatory cells can degrade the adhesion molecules
tumors in several animal models and some human tumors.
that mediate these interactions, removing a barrier to
In the following discussion, each class of agents is consid-
growth.
ered separately; of note, however, several may act in
Enhanced resistance to cell death. Detachment of epithelial
concert or sequentially to produce the multiple genetic
cells from basement membranes and from cell-cell
abnorimalities characteristic of neoplastic cells.
interactions can lead to a particular form of programumed
cell death called aroikis. It is suspected that tumor-
Chemical Carcinogens
associated macrophages may prevent anoikis by
p suau s yns sananour uoisae surssdxa
More than 200 years ago, the London surgeon Sir Percival
promote direct physical interactions with tumor cells.
Pott correctly attributed scrotal skin cancer in chimney
Angiogenesis. Inflammatory cells release numerous
sweeps to chronic exposure to soot. On the basis of this
factors, including VEGF, that stimulate angiogenesis.
observation, the Danish Chimney Sweeps Guild ruled that
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Etiology of Cancer: Carcinogenic Agents
229
Immune activating 
 Avoiding immune
 Evading growth
Cyclin-dependent
 anti-CTLA4 mAb 
destruction
suppressors
kinase inhibitors
Sustaining
Enabling
EGFR
Telomerase
+ proliferative
replicative 
inhibitors
 signaling
immortality
 inhibitors
Aerobic glycolysis
Deregulating
Tumor-
 Selective anti-
cellular
inhibitors
promoting
inflammatory drugs
energetics
inflammation
 Proapoptotic
Resisting
Activating
Inhibitors of 
BH3 mimetics
invasion and 
celldeath
metastasis
HGF/c-Met
 Inhibitors of 
Inducing
Genome
MDM2
VEGF signaling
 angiogenesis
instability and 
inhibitors
 mutation
its members must bathe daily. No public health measure
Table 6.5 Major Chemical Carcinogens
since that time has achieved so much in the control of a
Direct-Acting Carcinogens
form of cancer. Subsequently, hundreds of chemicals have
Alkylating Agents
 been shown to be carcinogenic in animals.
 Soime of the major agents are presented in Table 6.5. A
β-Propiolactone
few comuments on a handful of these are offered next.
Dimethyl sulfate
Diepoxybutane
Direct-Acting Agents
 Anti-cancer drugs (cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, nitrosoureas, and
others)
Direct-acting agents require no metabolic conversion to
become carcinogenic. They are typically weak carcinogens
 Acylating Agents
but are important because some of them are cancer chemo-
 I-Acetyl-imidazole
 Dimethylcarbamyl chloride
therapy drugs (e.g., alkylating agents) used in regimens
that may cure certain types of cancer (e.g, Hodgkin lym-
 Pro carcinogens That Require Metabolic Activation
phoma), only to evoke a subsequent, second form of cancer,
 Polycylic and Heterocyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
usually leukeimia. This situation is even more tragic when
 Benz(o)anthracene
the initial use of such agents has been for non-neoplastic
Benzo(o)pyrene
disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis or granuloma-
 Dibenz(a,h)anthracene
3-Methylcholanthrene
tosis with polyangitis. The associated risk for induced
7, 12-Dimethylbenz(o)anthracene
cancer is low, but its existence dictates judicious use of
Aromatic Amines, Amides, Azo Dyes
such agents.
2-Naphthylamine (β-naphthylamine)
Indirect-Acting Agents
Benzidine
 2-Acetylaminofluorene
The designation indirect-acting refers to chemicals that
 require metabolic conversion to an ultimate carcinogen.
 Dimethylaminoazobenzene (butter yellow)
Soime of the most potent indirect cheimical carcinogens are
 Natural Plant and Microbial Products
polycyclic hydrocarbons that are created with burning of
Aflatoxin B
fossil fuels, plant, and animal material. For example,
 Griseofulvin 
Cycasin
benzo[alpyrene and other carcinogens formed during the
Safrole
combustion of tobacco are implicated in the causation of
Betel nuts
lung cancer, and in olden days, benzo[alpyrene created
Others
during the burning of coal was likely responsible for the
 Nitrosamine and amides 
Vinyl chloride, nickel, chromium 
cyclic hydrocarbons also may be produced from animal
Insecticides, fungicides
fats during the process of broiling meats and are present
 Polychlorinated biphenyls
in simoked meats and fish. In the body, benzo[a]pyrene is
http://ebooksmedicine.net
230
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
metabolized to epoxides, which form covalent adducts
(addition products) with molecules in the cell, principally
Detoxification
CARCINOGEN
DNA, but also with RNA and proteins.
 The aroimatic aimines and azo dyes constitute another
 Metabolic 
class of indirect-acting carcinogens. Before its carcinogenic-
 activation
Excretion
ity was recognized, β-naphthylamine was responsible for
a 50-fold increased incidence of bladder cancers in heavily
Electrophilic Z
exposed workers in the aniline dye and rubber industries.
NOIIINII
 intermediates
7
Detoxification
Examples of other occupational carcinogens are listed in
Table 6.5. Because indirect-acting carcinogens require met-
DNA
abolic activation for their conversion to DNA-damaging
repair 
Normal
d szua a uo pasn i isaau y ue
 Binding to DNA:
cell
Adduct formation
ways that are involved, such as that mediated by the cyto-
chrome P-450-dependent 1monooxygenases. The genes that
encode these enzyimes are polymorphic, and enzyme activ-
Cell
death
ity varies among individuals. It is widely believed that the
 Permanent DNA lesion:
susceptibility to chemical carcinogenesis depends at least
 Initiated cell 
in part, on the specific allelic forim of the enzyime that is
inherited. Thus, it may be possible in the future to assess
cancer risk in a given individual by genetic analysis of
Cell proliferation:
enzyme polymorphisims.
 Altered differentiation
 A few other agents merit brief mention. Aflatoxin B is
-ond jae uo Aienu e st i asnaq isaiaui jo
duced by soime strains of Aspergillus, a mold that grows on
 PRENEOPLASTIC CLONE
improperly stored grains and nuts. A strong correlation
PR
has been found between the dietary level of this food con-
Proliferation
Additional mutations 
taminant and the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma
in some parts of Africa and the Far East. Additionally,
MALIGNANT NEOPLASM
vinyl chloride, arsenic, nickel, chroimium, insecticides, fun-
cinogens in the workplace and about the house. Finally,
Fig. 6.32 General schema of events in chemical carcinogenesis. Note that
nitrites used as food preservatives have caused concern,
promoters cause clonal expansion of the initiated cell, thus producing a
since they cause nitrosylation of aimines contained in food.
preneoplastic clone.Further proliferation induced by the promoter or other
The nitrosaimines thus forimed are suspected to be
factors causes accurmulation of additional mutations and ermergence of a
carcinogenic.
malignant tumor.
Mechanisms of Action of
Chemical Carcinogens
raises an important question: Since promoters are not
 Because malignant transformation results from muta-
mutagenic, how do they contribute to tumorigenesis?
tions, it should come as no surprise that most chemical
onod ae sad r ro sia a rno
carcinogens are mutagenic. Indeed, all direct and ultimate
 induction of cell proliferation is a sine qua non of tumor
 promotion. It seems most likely that while the application
that forim cheimical adducts with DNA, as well as with
of an initiator may cause the mutational activation of an
 proteins and RNA. Any gene may be the target of chemical
oncogene such as RAS, subsequent application of promot-
carcinogens, but understandably it is the mutation of
ers leads to clonal expansion of initiated (mutated) cells.
inportant cancer genes, such as RAS and TP53, that is
Forced to proliferate, the initiated clone of cells accumu-
 responsible for carcinogenesis. Indeed, specific cheimical
lates additional mutations, developing eventually into a
carcinogens, such as aflatoxin B1, produce characteristic
malignant tumor. Indeed, the concept that sustained cell
mutations in TP53, such that detection of mutations within
 proliferation increases the risk for mutagenesis, and hence
particular codons strongly points toward aflatoxin as the
promotes neoplastic transforimation, also is applicable to
causative agent. Such specific “mutational signatures" also
human carcinogenesis. For example, endometrial hyper-
exist for cancers caused by UV light, tobacco simoke, and
plasia (Chapter 19) and increased regenerative activity that
other environmental carcinogens and are proving to be
accompanies chronic liver cell injury are associated with
useful tools in epidemiologic studies of carcinogenesis.
the developiment of cancer in these organs. Were it not for
 Carcinogenicity of soime chemicals is augimented by
the DNA repair mechanisims discussed earlier, the inci-
dence of chemically induced cancers in all likelihood
esters, hormones, phenols, certain drugs), which are by
would be much higher. As mentioned previously, the rare
theinselves nontumorigenic. To be effective, repeated or
hereditary disorders of DNA repair, including xeroderma
sustained exposure to the promoter must follow the appli-
pigimentosum, are associated with greatly increased risk
cation of the imutagenic cheimical, or initiator (Fig. 6.32). The
uas pue juoi An Aq paonpui siasues burdonaaap rog
initiation-promotion sequence of chemical carcinogenesis
chemicals.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Etiology of Cancer: Carcinogenic Agents
231
 melanomas are associated with intense interimittent expo-
SUMMARY
-g reaaas sey nuoil an suequns yim sinno se ans
CHEMICAL CARCINOGENS
logic effects on cells. Of particular relevance to
Su q na aerp o Ae a si ssuao
· Chemical carcinogens have highly reactive electrophile groups 
 pyrimidine dimers. This type of DNA damage is repaired
that directly damage DNA, leading to mutations and eventually
by the nucleotide excision repair pathway. With extensive
cancer.
· Direct-acting agents do not require metabolic conversion to
exposure to UV light, the repair systems may be over-
become carcinogenic, while indirect-acting agents are not
whelimed, and skin cancer results. As mentioned earlier,
patients with the inherited disease xeroderma pigmentosum
-aopua Aq uasouueo aewn ue oi panaauos un aaoe
have a defect in the nucleotide excision repair pathway.
nous metabolic pathways. Hence, polymorphisms of endoge-
nous enzymes such as cytochrome P-450 may influence
As expected, there is a greatly increased predisposition to
skin cancers in this disorder.
carcinogenesis by altering the conversion of indirect-acting
agents to active carcinogens.
· After exposure of a cell to a mutagen or an initiator, tumori-
genesis can be enhanced by exposure to promoters, which
SUMMARY
stimulate proliferation of the mutated cells.
RADIATION CARCINOGENESIS
· Examples of human carcinogens are direct-acting agents (e.g.
alkylating agents used for chemotherapy), indirect-acting agents
+ lonizing radiation causes chromosome breakage, chromo-
(e.g, benzo(a)pyrene, azo dyes, aflatoxin), and tumor
 some rearrangements, and, less frequently, point mutations,
any of which may affect cancer genes and thereby drive
promoters.
carcinogenesis.
· Tumor promoters act by stimulating cell proliferation. Increased
+ UV rays in sunlight induce the formation of pyrimidine dimers
 proliferation may occur through direct effects of tumor pro-
within DNA, leading to mutations that can give rise to squa-
moters on target cells or may be secondary to tissue injury
 mous cell carcinomas and melanomas of the skin.
and regenerative repair.
Viral and Microbial Oncogenesis
Radiation Carcinogenesis
 Many DNA and RNA viruses have proved to be oncogenic
Radiation, whatever its source (UV rays of sunlight,
 in animals as disparate as frogs and primates. Despite
radiographs, nuclear fission, radionuclides), is an estab-
intense scrutiny, however, only a few viruses have been
 lished carcinogen. Unprotected miners of radioactive ele-
linked with human cancer. The following discussion
 ments have a 10-fold increased incidence of lung cancers.
focuses on human oncogenic viruses. Also discussed is the
A follow-up study of survivors of the atoimic bombs
 role of the bacterium Helicobacter pylori in gastric cancer.
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki disclosed a markedly
increased incidence of leukemia after an average latent
Oncogenic RNA Viruses
 period of about 7 years, as well as increased mortality rates
Although the study of animal retroviruses has provided
for thyroid, breast, colon, and lung carcinomas. The nuclear
spectacular insights into the molecular basis of cancer, only
 power accident at Chernobyl in the former Soviet Union
 one human retrovirus, human T-cell leukenia virus type 1
continues to exact its toll in the forim of high cancer inci-
(HTLV-1), is firmly implicated in the pathogenesis of
 dence in the surrounding areas. More recently, it is feared
cancer in humans.
that radiation release froim a nuclear power plant in Japan
HTLV-1
causes adult T-cell leukemia/ymphoma
damaged by a massive earthquake and tsunami will result
(ATLL), a tumor that is endemic in certain parts of Japan,
in significantly increased cancer incidence in the surround-
the Caribbean basin, South America, and Africa, and
ing geographic areas.
found sporadically elsewhere, including the United
Therapeutic irradiation of the head and neck can give
States. Worldwide, it is estimated that 15 to 20 million
rise to papillary thyroid cancers years later. The oncogenic
people are infected with HTLV-1. Similar to the human
properties of ionizing radiation are related to its mutagenic
immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, HTLV-1 has
effects; it causes chromosome breakage, chromosomal
 tropisim for CD4+ T cells, and hence this subset of T cells
rearrangeinents such as translocations and inversions, and,
is the major target for neoplastic transformation. Human
less frequently, point mutations. Biologically, double-
infection requires transimission of infected T cells via sexual
stranded DNA breaks seeim to be the most important form
intercourse, blood products, or breastfeeding. Leukemia
of DNA damage caused by radiation.
develops in only 3% to 5% of the infected individuals, typi-
The oncogenic effect of UV rays merits special mention
cally after a long latent period of 40 to 60 years.
because it highlights the importance of DNA repair in
There is little doubt that HTLV-1 infection of T lympho-
carcinogenesis. Natural UV radiation derived from the
cytes is necessary for leukeimogenesis, but the molecular
sun can cause skin cancers (melanoimas, squaimous
mechanisims of transformation are not certain. In contrast
cell carcinomas, and basal cell carcinomas). At greatest
 to several murine retroviruses, HTLV-1 does not contain
risk are fair-skinned people who live in locales such as
Australia and New Zealand that receive a great deal of
tion next to a proto-oncogene has been discovered. In leu-
sunlight. Nonmelanoma skin cancers are associated with
kemic cells, however, viral integration shows a clonal
total cumulative exposure to UV radiation, whereas
pattern. In other words, although the site of viral
http://ebooksmedicine.net
232
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
integration in host chromosomes is random (the viral DNA
Increased
is found at different locations in different cancers), the site
TERT
telomerase
of integration is identical within all cells of a given cancer.
expression
 This would not occur if HTLV-1 were imerely a passenger
HPV E6
Inhibition of p53
that infects cells after transforimation; rather, it means that
HTLV-1 must have been present at the moment of trans-
forimation, placing it at the "scene of the criime."
mmortalization
The HTLV-1 genome contains the gag, pol, enu, and long-
HPV E7
n21
Inhibition of p21
Increased cell
teriminal-repeat regions typical of all retroviruses, but, in
proliferation
contrast to other leukemia viruses, it contains another gene
Genomic instability
referred to as tax. Several aspects of HTLV-1's transform-
Increased
CDK4/cyclin D
ing activity are attributable to Tax, the protein product of
the tax gene. Tax is essential for viral replication, because
it stimulates transcription of viral RNA froin the 5' long-
Inhibition
RB-E2F
terminal repeat. However, Tax also alters the transcription
f RB-E2F
of several host cell genes and interacts with certain host
cell signaling proteins. By doing so, Tax contributes to the
acquisition of several cancer hallmarks, including the
Fig. 6.33 Transforming effects of HPV E6 and E7 proteins. The net effect of
following:
HPV E6 and E7 proteins is to immortalize cells and remove the restraints
·Increased survival and growth ofinfected cells. Tax appears
on cell proliferation.
to interact with PI3 kinase and thereby stimulate the
downstreaim signaling cascade, which you will recall
promotes both cell survival and metabolic alterations
Oncogenic DNA Viruses
that enhance cell growth. Tax also upregulates the
As with RNA viruses, several oncogenic DNA viruses that
expression of cyclin D and represses the expresson of
cause tumors in animals have been identified. Five DNA
multiple CDK 'inhibitors, changes that promote cell
viruses-HPV, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi sarcoma
cycle progression. Finally, Tax can activate the tran-
herpesvirus (KSHV, also called human herpesvirus-8
scription factor NF-kB, which promotes the survival of
[HHV-8]), a polyoma virus called Merkel cell virus, and
many cell types, including lymphocytes.
hepatitis B virus (HBV) - are of special interest because
 Increased genomic instability. Tax may also cause genomic
they are strongly associated with human cancer. KSHV
instability by interfering with DNA-repair functions
and Kaposi sarcoima are discussed in Chapter 5. Merkel cell
 and inhibiting cell cycle checkpoints activated by DNA
virus is associated with a particular cancer, Merkel cell
daimage. In line with these defects, HTLV-1-associated
carcinoma, that is too rare to merit further discussion. The
leukeimias tend to be highly aneuploid.
others are presented here. We also briefly touch on the
 oncogenic effects of hepatitis C virus, an RNA virus, during
 The precise steps that lead to the developiment of adult
our discussion of HBV, since both viruses share an associa-
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma are still not known, but a plau-
tion with chronic liver injury and liver cancer.
sible scenario is as follows. Infection by HTLV-1 causes the
expansion of a nonmalignant polyclonal cell population
Human Papillomavirus
through stimulatory effects of Tax on cell proliferation. The
Scores of genetically distinct types of HPV have been
proliferating T cells are at increased risk for mutations and
identified. Some types (e.g, 1, 2, 4, and 7) cause benign
genomic instability due to the effects of Tax and possibly
squamous papillomas (warts) in humans (Chapters 18 and
other viral factors as well. This instability allows the accu-
 24). Genital warts have low malignant potential and are
mulation of oncogenic mutations and eventually a mono-
also associated with low-risk HPVs, predominantly HPV-6
 clonal neoplastic T-cell population eimerges.
. The most
and HPV-11. By contrast, high-risk HPVs (e.g., types 16
common driver mutations identified thus far are predicted
and 18) cause several cancers, particularly squamous cell
 to enhance T cell receptor signaling and stimulate NF-kB
carcinoima of the cervix and anogenital region. In addi-
activation.
tion, at least 20% of oropharyngeal cancers, particularly
those arising in the tonsils, are associated with high-risk
HPVs.
The oncogenic potential of HPV can be related to prod-
SUMMARY
ucts of two early viral genes, E6 and E7 (Fig. 6.33), each of
ONCOGENIC RNA VIRUSES
which has several activities that are pro-oncogenic.
● Oncogenic activities of E6. The E6 protein binds to and
· HTLV-I causes a T cell leukemia that is endemic in Japan and 
the Caribbean.
 mediates the degradation of p53, and also stimulates the
expression of TERT, the catalytic subunit of teloimerase,
+ The HTLV-I genome encodes a viral protein called Tax, which
which you will recall contributes to the immortalization
stimulates proliferation, enhances cell survival, and interferes
 of cells. E6 from high-risk HPV types has a higher affin-
with cell cycle controls. Although this proliferation initially is
ity for p53 than E6 from low-risk HPV types, a property
polyclonal, the proliferating T cells are at increased risk for
that is likely to contribute to oncogenesis.
secondary mutations that may lead to the outgrowth of a
● Oncogenic activities of E7. The E7 protein has effects that
monoclonal leukemia.
complement those of E6, all of which are centered on
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Etiology of Cancer: Carcinogenic Agents
233
speeding cells through the G-S cell cycle checkpoint. It
the effects of a key surface receptor known as CD40. CD40
binds to the RB protein and displaces the E2F transcrip-
is norimally activated by interaction with CD40 ligands
tion factors that are norimally sequestered by RB, pro-
expressed mainly on T cells. By contrast, LMPl is consti-
moting progression through the cell cycle. As with E6
tutively active and stimulates signaling through the NF-KB
and JAK/STAT pathways, both of which promote B cell
have a higher affinity for RB than do E7 proteins from
proliferation and survival. Thus, the virus "borrows" a
low-risk HPV types. E7 also inactivates the CDK inhibi-
tors p21 and p27, and binds and presumably activates
lication by expanding the pool of infected cells. Another
cyclins E and A.
EBV-encoded protein, EBNA2, transactivates several host
genes, including cyclin D and the SRC family of proto-
An additional factor that contributes to the oncogenic
oncogenes. In addition, the EBV genome contains a viral
potential of HPVs is viral integration into the host genome.
cytokine, vIL-10, that was pirated from the host genome.
In benign warts, the HPV genoime is maintained in a non-
 This viral cytokine can prevent macrophages and mono-
integrated episoimal form, while in cancers, the HPV
 A  e s I he  s
 genome is randomly integrated into the host genome. Inte-
 cells. In imnunologically norinal persons, the EBV-driven
gration interrupts a negative regulatory region in the viral
A   si d   ra
DNA, resulting in overexpression of the E6 and E7 onco-
cytotoxic T cells, and the affected patient either remains
proteins. Furthermore, cells in which the viral genome has
asymptoimatic or experiences a self-limited episode of
integrated show significantly more genomic instability,
infectious mononucleosis. However, a simall number of
which may contribute to acquisition of pro-oncogenic
EBV-infected B cells downregulate expression of immu-
Imutations in host cancer genes.
nogenic viral proteins such as LMP-1 and EBNA2 and
To sumunarize, high-risk HPVs encode oncogenic
enter a long-lived pool of meinory B cells that persist
proteins that inactivate RB and p53, activate cyclin/
throughout life.
CDK complexes, and combat cellular senescence. Thus,
Given these observations, how then does EBV contrib-
it is evident that HPV proteins promote many of the hall-
ute to the genesis of endemic Burkitt lyimphoma? One pos-
marks of cancer. The primacy of HPV infection in the
sibility is shown in Fig. 6.34. In regions of the world where
causation of cervical cancer is confirimed by the effective-
ness of HPV vaccines in preventing it. However, infec-
tion with HPV itself is not sufficient for carcinogenesis,
and full-blown transformation requires the acquisition of
LATENT
EBV receptor (CD21)
mutations in host cancer genes, such as RAS. A high pro-
INFECTION
EBVvirus
 portion of woimen infected with HPV clear the infection
WITH EBV
by immunologic mechanisims, but others do not, some
because of acquired immune abnormalities, such as those
EBV-specific
that result froim HIV infection. As might be expected,
cytotoxic
woimen who are coinfected with high-risk HPV types and
POLYCLONAL
T cells
 HIV are at particularly high risk for developing cervical
B-CELL
EXPANSION
cancer.
B-cellkilling
Epstein-Barr Virus
by CTLs
EBV, a member of the herpesvirus family, was the first
virus linked to a human tumor, Burkitt lymphoma.
EBV antigens
in certain parts of Africa and occurs sporadically else-
B-cell
where. In endeimic areas, the tumor cells in virtually all
Mutation
growth
affected patients carry the EBV genoime. Since its initial
(MYC translocation)
controlled
A 'oe sie o auos edun hng ui ao
Chromosomes
has been detected within the cells of a surprisingly diverse
8
list of other tumors, including most nasopharyngeal carci-
DNA breaks
nomas and a subset of T cell lymphoimas, NK cell lympho-
INCREASED
 mas, gastric carcinomas, and even, in rare instances,
MYC
PROTEIN
 sarcoimas, mainly in the immunosuppressed.
The manner in which EBV causes B cell tumors such
as Burkitt lymphoma is complex and incompletely under-
stood, but best appreciated by considering its effects on
norimal B cells. EBV uses the coimplement receptor CD21
Additional mutations
to attach to and infect B cells. In vitro, such infection leads
to polyclonal B cell proliferation and generation of immor-
OUTGROWTH
 tal B lyimphoblastoid cell lines. One EBV-encoded gene,
OF NEOPLASTIC
LMP1 (latent meimbrane protein 1), acts as an oncogene, as
CLONE: BURKITT
 proven by its ability to induce B cell lyinphomas in trans-
LYMPHOMA
genic mice. LMPl promotes B cell proliferation, mimicking
Fig. 6.34 Possible evolution of EBV-induced Burkitt lymphoma.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
234
CHAPTER 6
Neoplasia
Burkitt lymphoma is endeimic, concomitant infections such
as malaria impair immune competence, allowing sustained
E7 from low-risk strains of HPV (which give rise to benign
warts).
B-cell proliferation. Eventually, cytotoxic T cells eliminate
· EBV is implicated in the pathogenesis of Burkitt lymphomas,
most of the EBV-infected B cells, but a simall number
 survive. It appears that lyimphoima cells emerge froin this
lymphomas in immunosuppressed patients, Hodgkin lymphoma,
residual population only with the acquisition of specific
uncommon T-cell and NK-cell tumors, nasopharyngeal carci-
mutations, most notably translocations that activate the
Certain EBV gene products contribute to oncogenesis
 MYC oncogene. It should be noted that in nonendeimic
by stimulating normal B-cell proliferation pathways. Con-
areas 80% of these tumors are unrelated to EBV, but virtu-
ally all endeimic and sporadic tumors possess the t(8;14)
comitant compromise of immune competence allows sus-
translocation or other translocations that dysregulate MYC.
tained B-cell proliferation, leading eventually to development
Thus, although sporadic Burkitt lyimphomas are triggered
of lymphoma.
develop through similar oncogenic pathways.
 The oncogenic role played by EBV is more direct in
 EBV-positive B-cell lymphomas in immunosuppressed
Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C Viruses
patients. Soine individuals with AIDS or who receive
 The epidemiologic evidence linking chronic HBV and hep-
imnunosuppressive therapy for preventing allograft rejec-
atitis C virus (HCV) infection with hepatocellular carci-
tion develop EBV-positive B-cell tumors, often at multiple
noma is strong (Chapter 16). It is estimated that 70% to
sites. These proliferations are polyclonal at the outset but
85% of hepatocellular carcinomas worldwide are caused
can evolve into monoclonal neoplasins. In contrast to
by HBV or HCV. However, the mode of action of these
Burkitt lymphoma, the tumors in immunosuppressed
viruses in tumorigenesis is not fully elucidated. The HBV
patients usually lack MYC translocations and uniforimly
 and HCV genomes do not encode any viral oncoproteins,
express LMP-1 and EBNA2, which, as discussed, are anti-
and although the HBV DNA is integrated within the
genic and can be recognized by cytotoxic T cells. These
human genome, there is no consistent pattern of integra-
potentially lethal proliferations can be subdued if T cell
 tion in liver cells. Indeed, the oncogenic effects of HBV and
function can be restored, as may occur with withdrawal of
HCV are multifactorial, but the dominant effect seeims to
immunosuppressive drugs in transplant recipients.
be immunologically mediated chronic inflammation with
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma also is associated with EBV
hepatocyte death, leading to regeneration and genoimic
infection. This tumor is endeimic in southern China, in
 damage. Although the imunune systein generally is thought
some parts of Africa, and in the Inuit population of the
 to be protective, recent work has deimonstrated that in the
Arctic. In contrast to Burkitt lymphoma, 100% of nasopha-
setting of unresolved chronic inflammation, as occurs in
ryngeal carcinoimas obtained from all parts of the world
viral hepatitis or chronic gastritis caused by H. pylori (see
contain EBV. The integration site of the viral genome is
 later), the imnune response may becoime maladaptive,
identical (clonal) in all of the tumor cells within individual
promoting tumorigenesis.
tunors, excluding the possibility that EBV infection
As with any cause of hepatocellular injury, chronic viral
occurred after tumor development. The uniform associa-
infection leads to the compensatory proliferation of hepa-
 ss r os   eo 
tocytes. This regenerative process is aided and abetted by
EBV has a central role in the genesis of the tumor, but (as
a plethora of growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, and
with Burkitt lymphoma) the restricted geographic distribu-
other bioactive substances produced by activated immune
tion indicates that genetic or environmental cofactors, or
cells that promote cell survival, tissue reimodeling, and
both, also contribute to tumor development. Unlike Burkitt
 angiogenesis. The activated imnune cells also produce
 lyimphoima, LMP-1 is expressed in nasopharyngeal carci-
 other mediators, such as reactive oxygen species, that are
noma cells and, as in B cells, activates the NF-kB pathway.
genotoxic and mutagenic. A key molecular step seeins to
NF-B, in turn, upregulates the expression of factors such
be activation of the nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) pathway in
as VEGF and matrix metalloproteases that may contribute
hepatocytes caused by mediators derived from the acti-
to oncogenesis.
vated immune cells. Activation of the NF-kB pathway
The relationship of EBV to the pathogenesis of Hodgkin
blocks apoptosis, allowing the dividing hepatocytes
to
lymphoma, yet another EBV-associated tumor, is discussed
incur genotoxic stress and to accumulate mutations.
in Chapter 12.
Although this seems to be the dominant mechanism in
the pathogenesis of virus-induced hepatocellular carci-
noma, both HBV and HCV also contain proteins within
their genoimes that may more directly proimote the devel-
SUMMARY
opiment of cancer. The HBV genoime contains a gene
ONCOGENIC DNA VIRUSES
known as HBx, and hepatocellular cancers develop in mice
engineered to have HBx transgenes. HBx can directly or
+ HPV is associated with benign warts, as well as cervical cancer.
indirectly activate a variety of transcription factors and
+ The oncogenicity of HPV is related to the expression of two
several signal transduction pathways, and may interfere
viral oncoproteins, E6 and E7, which bind to the p53 and RB
with p53 function. In addition, viral integration can cause
tumor suppressors, respectively, neutralizing their function.
secondary rearrangements of chromosoimes, including
· E6 and E7 from high-risk strains of HPV (which give rise to
-dns rou umouun oqey Aeur je suonalap aldginu
cancers) have higher affinity for their targets than do E6 and 
pressor genes.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Clinical Aspects of Neoplasia
235
HCV, an RNA virus, also is strongly linked to the patho-
proliferation. In time, a monoclonal B cell tumor eimerges
genesis of liver cancer. The molecular mechanisms used by
from the proliferating B cells, perhaps as a result of accu-
HCV are even less well defined than those for HBV. In
mulation of imutations in growth regulatory genes. In
addition to chronic liver cell injury and coimpensatory
keeping with this model, early in the course of disease,
regeneration, coimponents of the HCV genoime, such as the
eradication of H. pylori with antibiotics causes regression
HCV core protein, may have a direct effect on tumorigen-
of the lymphoma by reimoving the antigenic stimulus for
T cells. MALT lymphoma is thus a remarkable example of
signal transduction pathways.
a tumor that depends on signals elicited by interactions
with host imnune cells for its continued growth and
SUMMARY
survival.
HEPATITIS B AND HEPATITIS CVIRUSES 
SUMMARY
· Between 70% and 85% of hepatocellular carcinomas world-
HELICOBACTER PYLORI
wide are due to infection with HBV or HCV.
+ The oncogenic effects of HBV and HCV are multifactorial, but 
+ H. pyiori infection has been implicated in both gastric adeno-
the dominant effect seems to be immunologically mediated
carcinoma and MALT lymphoma.
chronic inflammation, with hepatocelular injury,stimulation of
+ The mechanism of H. pyiori-induced gastric cancers is multi-
hepatocyte proliferation, and production of reactive oxygen
factorial, including immunologically mediated chronic inflam-
species that can damage DNA.
mation, stimulation of gastric cell proliferation, and production
· The HBx protein of HBV and the HCV core protein can acti-
of reactive oxygen species that damage DNA. H. pyiori patho-
vate a variety of signal transduction pathways that also may
genicity genes, such as CagA, also may contribute by stimulating
contribute to carcinogenesis.
 growth factor pathways.
+ It is thought that H. pyiori infection leads to polyclonal B-cell
Helicobacter pylori
proliferations and that eventually a monoclonal B-cell tumor
(MALT lymphoma) emerges as a result of accumulation of
H pylori infection is implicated in the genesis of both
mutations.
gastric adenocarcinomas and gastric lymphomas. First
incriminated as a cause of peptic ulcers, H. pylori now has
acquired the dubious distinction of being the first bacte-
rium classified as a carcinogen.
CLINICAL ASPECTS OF NEOPLASIA
The scenario for the development of gastric adenocarci-
noma is similar to that for HBV- and HCV-induced liver
The importance of neoplasms ultimately lies in their effects
on patients. Although malignant tumors are of course
a background of chronic inflamnation. As in viral hepati-
more threatening than benign tumors, morbidity and mor-
tis, the inflammatory milieu contains numerous genotoxic
tality may be associated with any tumor, even a benign
agents, such as reactive oxygen species. The sequence of
one. Indeed, both malignant and benign tumors may cause
histopathologic changes consists of initial development of
 probleims because of (1) location and impingement on adja-
chronic inflammation/gastritis, followed  by gastric
cent structures, (2) functional activity such as hormone
 atrophy, intestinal metaplasia of the lining cells, dysplasia,
synthesis or the developmentof paraneoplastic syndroimes,
and cancer. This sequence takes decades to complete and
(3) bleeding and infections when the tumor ulcerates
occurs in only 3% of infected patients. Like those of HBV
through adjacent surfaces, (4) symptoms that result from
 and HCV, the H. pylori genoime also contains genes directly
rupture or infarction, and (5) cachexia or wasting. The fol-
implicated in oncogenesis. Strains associated with gastric
lowing discussion considers the effects of a tumor on the
 adenocarcinoma have been shown to contain a "pathoge-
host, the grading and clinical staging of cancer, and the 
nicity island" that contains cytotoxin-associated A gene
laboratory diagnosis of neoplasms.
(CagA). Although H. pylori is noninvasive, CagA is injected
into gastric epithelial cells, where it has a variety of effects,
Effects of Tumor on Host
including the initiation of a signaling cascade that mimics
unregulated growth factor stimulation.
'snoi juueu pue uaq qoq u renns si uono
As mentioned earlier, H. pylori is associated with an
A simall (l-cin) pituitary adenoima can coimpress and
increased risk for the development of gastric lymphomas
destroy the surrounding norimal gland, giving rise to hypo-
as well. The gastric lymphomas are of B-cell origin, and
pituitarisim. A 0.5-cim leiomyoma in the wall of the renal
because the transforined B cells grow in a pattern resein-
[uan on bupea 'iddns pooq a uo yoonua Au Aiae
bling that of norimal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
ischemia and hypertension. A coimparably sinall carcinoma
(MALT), they have been referred to as MALT lymphomas
within the comnon bile duct may induce fatal biliary tract
(Chapter 12). Their molecular pathogenesis is incompletely
obstruction.
understood but seems to involve strain-specific H. pylori
 Signs and symptoims related to horimone production are
factors, as well as host genetic factors, such as polymor-
often seen in patients with benign and malignant neo-
s sa i o saod a un s
plasims arising in endocrine glands. Adenomas and carci-
as IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). It is thought that
nomas arising in the beta cells of the pancreatic islets of
H. pylori infection leads to the activation of H. pylori-reac-
 Langerhans can produce hyperinsulinisim, sometimes fatal.
tive T cells, which in turn cause polyclonal B cell
Similarly, some adenomas and carcinomas of the adrenal
http://ebooksmedicine.net
236
CHAPTER6 
Neoplasia
cortex disrupt homeostatic mechanisims by elaborating
factors, such as TGF-α and the active form of vitaimin D.
steroid hormones (e.g., aldosterone, which induces sodium
Another possible mechanisim for hypercalceimia is wide-
retention, hypertension, and hypokalemia). Such hormonal
spread osteolytic metastatic disease of bone; of note,
however, hypercalcemia resulting from skeletal metastases
tumor than with a corresponding carcinoma.
is not a paraneoplastic syndroime. Cushing syndrome
A tumor may ulcerate through a surface, with conse-
 arising as a paraneoplastic phenoimenon usually is related
quent bleeding or secondary infection. Benign or malignant
to ectopic production of ACTH or ACTH-like polypeptides
neoplasims that protrude into the gut lumen may become
by cancer cells, as occurs in simall cell carcinoma of the lung.
caught in the peristaltic pull of the gut, causing intussuscep-
 auu Keun ose saopus oseidoaue
tion (Chapter 15) and intestinal obstruction or infarction.
hypercoagulability, leading to venous throimbosis and
nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (Chapter 11). Other
Cancer Cachexia
 manifestations are clubbing of the fingers and hypertro-
 Many cancer patients suffer progressive loss of body fat
phic osteoarthropathy in patients with lung carcinomas
and lean body mass, accompanied by profound weak-
(Chapter 13). Still others are discussed in the consideration
ness, anorexia, and anemia -a condition referred to as
of cancers of the various organs of the body.
cachexia. There is some correlation between the size and
extent of spread of the cancer and the severity of the
Grading and Staging of Cancer
cachexia. However, cachexia is not caused by the nutri-
tional denands of the tumor. Although patients with
Methods to quantify the probable clinical aggressiveness
cancer often are anorexic, current evidence indicates that
of a given neoplasim and its apparent extent and spread in
cachexia results froim the action of soluble factors such as
the individual patient are necessary for arriving at an accu-
cytokines produced by the tumor and the host, rather than
rate prognosis and for comparing end results of various
reduced food intake. In patients with cancer, calorie expen-
 treatinent protocols. For instance, the results of treating
diture remains high, and basal metabolic rate is increased,
well-differentiated thyroid adenocarcinomas localized to
despite reduced food intake. This is in contrast with the
the thyroid gland will on average be very different from
lower metabolic rate that occurs as an adaptive response
those obtained from treating highly anaplastic thyroid
in starvation. The basis of these metabolic abnormalities is
cancers that have invaded the neck organs. Systeims have
not fully understood. It is suspected that TNF and other
been developed to express, at least in seimiquantitative
cytokines produced by macrophages in response to tumor
terims, the level of differentiation, or grade, and extent of
cells or by the tumor cells theimselves mediate cachexia.
spread of a cancer within the patient, or stage, as paraime-
TNF suppresses appetite and inhibits the action of lipopro-
ters of the clinical gravity of the disease. Of note, when
tein lipase, preventing the release of free fatty acids from
compared with grading. staging has proved to be of
lipoproteins. There is no satisfactory treatiment for cancer
greater clinical value.
cachexia other than removal of the underlying cause, the
Grading. Grading of a cancer is based on the degree of
tumor.
differentiation of the tumor cells and, in some cancers,
the number of mitoses and the presence of certain archi-
Paraneoplastic Syndromes
tectural features. Grading schemes have evolved for
Symptom complexes that occur in patients with cancer
and that cannot be readily explained by local or distant
categories (low grade and high grade) to four categories.
spread of the tumor or by the elaboration of hormones
Criteria for the individual grades vary in different types
indigenous to the tissue of origin of the tumor are referred
duae le inq 'aiay paap jou aie os pue siu jo
to as paraneoplastic syndromes. They appear in 10% to
in essence, to judge the extent to which the tuimor cells
15% of patients with cancer, and their clinical recognition
reseimble or fail to resemble their norimal counterparts.
is important for several reasons:
Although histologic grading is useful, the correlation
 Such syndromes may represent the earliest manifesta-
tion of an occult neoplasim.
less than perfect. In recognition of this probleim and to
· In affected patients, the pathologic changes may be
avoid spurious quantification, it is common practice to
 associated with significant clinical illness and may even
characterize a particular neoplasm in descriptive terms,
be lethal.
for example, well-differentiated, mucin-secreting ade-
 The symptom coimplex may mimic metastatic disease,
 nocarcinoma of the stoimach, or poorly differentiated
thereby confounding treatiment.
pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Staging. The staging of solid cancers is based on the size
The paraneoplastic syndroimes are diverse and are asso-
of the primary lesion, its extent of spread to regional
ciated with many different tumors (Table 6.6). The most
lymph nodes, and the presence or absence of blood-
common paraneoplastic syndromes are hypercalcemia,
borne metastases. The major staging systeim currently in
Cushing syndrome, and nonbacterialthrombotic endocar-
use is the Anerican Joint Coimumittee on Cancer Staging.
ditis, and the neoplasims most often associated with these
This system uses a classification called the TNM
and other syndromes arelung and breast cancers and hema-
system — Tfor primary tumor, N for regional lymph node
tologic malignancies. Hypercalceimia in cancer patients is
involveiment, and M for metastases. TNM staging varies
multifactorial, but the most important mechanism is the
for specific forms of cancer, but there are general princi-
synthesisof a parathyroid horimone-related protein (PTHrP)
ples. The primary lesion is characterized as T1 to T4
by tumor cells. Also iimplicated are other tumor-derived
based on increasing size. To is used to indicate an in situ
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Clinical Aspects of Neoplasia
237
Table 6.6 Paraneoplastic Syndromes
 Clinical Syndrome
Major Forms of Neoplasia
Causal Mechanism(s)/Agent(s)
Endocrinopathies
Cushing syndrome
 Small cell carcinoma of lung 
 ACTH or ACTH-like substance
 Pancreatic carcinoma
Neural tumors
 Syn drome of inappropriate anti-diuretic 
 Small cell carcinoma of lung; intracranial neoplasms
Anti-diuretic hormone or atrial 
hormone secretion
 natriuretic hormones
 Hypercalcemia
 Squamous cell carcinoma of lung
 Parathyroid hormone-related protein,
Breast carcinoma
TGF-α.
Renal carcinoma
Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma
Hypoglycemia 
 Fibrosarcoma
 Insulin or insulin-like substance 
 Other mesenchymal sarcomas
Ovarian carcinoma
 Polycythemia
Renal carcinoma
Erythropoietin
 Cerebellar hemangioma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Nerve and Muscle Syndrome
Myasthenia
 Bronchogenic carcinoma, thymoma
Disorders of the central and peripheral
Breast carcinoma, teratoma
Immunologic
nervous systems
 Dermatologic Disorders
 Acanthosis nigricans
Gastric carcinoma
Immunologic; secretion of epidermal
Lung carcinoma
growth factor
Uterine carcinoma
 Dermatomyositis
 Bronchogenic and breast carcinoma
Osseous, Articular, and Soft-Tissue Changes
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy and 
Bronchogenic carcinoma
Unknown
clubbing of the fingers
Vascular and Hematologic Changes
Venous thrombosis (Trousseau 
 Pancreatic carcinoma
 Turmor products (mucins that activate
phenomenon)
 Bronchogenic carcinoma
dotting)
Other cancers
 Non bacterial thrombotic endocarditis
Advanced cancers
Hypercoagulability
 Anemia
Immunologic
Others
 Nephrotic syndrome
Various cancers
Tumor antigens, immune complexes
ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; IL-1, interleukin-I; TGF-α, transforming growth factor-α; TNf, tumor necross factor.
lesion. N0 would mean no nodal involveiment, whereas
 N1 to N3 would denote involvement of an increasing
appropriate to the tissue, are caused by the ectopic production
number and range of nodes. MO signifies no distant 
and secretion of bioactive substances such as ACTH, PTHrP,
or TGF-c.
metastases, whereas M1 or sometimes M2 reflects the
 presence and estimated number of metastases.
+ Grading of tumors is determined by cytologic appearance and 
is based on the idea that behavior and differentiation are
 In modern practice, grading and staging of tumors are
 related, with poorly diferentiated tumors having more aggres-
being  supplemented
 sive behavior.
by
molecular(
 characterization,
 described later.
+ Staging (extent of tumor), determined by surgical exploration
or imaging, is based on size, local and regional lymph node 
spread, and distant metastases. Staging is of greater clinical
SUMMARY
value than grading.
CLINICAL ASPECTS OFTUMORS
+ Cochexid, defined as progressive loss of body fat and lean body
Laboratory Diagnosis of Cancer
mass, accompanied by profound weakness, anorexia, and
Every year the approach to laboratory diagnosis of cancer
anemia, is caused by release of cytokines by the tumor or host.
becoimes more complex, more sophisticated, and more spe-
+ Paraneoplastic syndromes, defined as systemic symptoms that
cialized. For virtually every neoplasim mentioned in this
sauownou Aq do peauds youn Aq pauieidxa aq houuey
text, the experts have characterized several subcategories;
http://ebooksmedicine.net
238
CHAPTER6
Neoplasia
we must walk, however, before we can run. Each of the
following sections attempts to present the state of the art,
avoiding details of technologies.
Morphologic Methods
In most instances, the laboratory diagnosis of cancer is not
difficult. The two ends of the benign-malignant spectrum
pose no problems; in the middle, however, lies a "no man's
land" where the wise tread cautiously. Clinicians tend to
underestimate the contributions they make to the diagno-
sis of a neoplasim. Clinical and radiologic data are invalu-
able for optimal pathologic diagnosis. Radiation-induced
changes in the skin or mucosa can be similar to those of
cancer. Sections taken from a healing fracture can mimic
an osteosarcoma. The laboratory evaluation of a lesion can
A
be only as good as the specimen submitted for exaimina-
tion. The speciimen must be adequate, representative, and
properly preserved.
 Several sampling approaches are available, including
excision or biopsy, fine-needle aspiration, and cytologic
simears. When excision of a lesion is not possible, selec-
sseu aiel e jo Asdonq iog alis aedondde ue jo uog
requires awareness that the imargins inay not be repre-
sentative and the center may be largely necrotic. Request-
ing frozen section diagnosis is sometimes desirable, as, for
example, in determining the nature of a mass lesion or
in evaluating the regional lymph nodes in a patient with
cancer for metastasis. This method, in which a sample
is quick-frozen and sectioned, perimits histologic evalu-
ation within minutes. In experienced, competent hands,
frozen section diagnosis is accurate, but there are particular
Fig. 6.35 (A) Normal Papanicolaou smear from the uterine cervix. Large,
instances in which the superior histologic detail provided
flat cells with small nuclei are typical. (B) Abnormal smear containing a sheet
by more time-consuming routine methods is needed. In
of malignant cells with large hyperchromatic nuclei. Nuclear pleomorphism
such instances, it is better to wait a few days, despite the
is evident, and one cell is in mitosis.A few interspersed neutrophils, much
drawbacks, than to perform inadequate or unnecessary
smaller in size and with compact, lobate nuclei, are seen. (Courtesy of Dr.
surgery.
Richard M. DeMay, Department of Pothology, University of Chicago, Chicogo,
Fine-needle aspiration of tumors is another approach that
illinois)
 is widely used. It involves aspiration of cells from a mass,
followed by cytologic examination of the cells after they
have been spread out on a slide. This procedure is used
gratifying control of cervical cancer is the best testaiment to
most coimmonly with readily palpable lesions affecting the
the value of the cytologic method.
breast, thyroid gland, lyimph nodes, and salivary glands.
Immunohistochemistry offers  a powerful  adjunct to
Modern imaging techniques perimit extension of the
routine histologic examination. Detection of cytokeratin by
method to deeper structures, such as the liver, pancreas,
stains perforimed  with  specific monoclonal antibodies
and pelvic lymph nodes. Use of this diagnostic modality
 points to a diagnosis of undifferentiated carcinoma rather
obviates surgery and its attendant risks. Although it entails
than large cell lymphoma. Similarly, detection of prostate-
soime difficulties, such as simall sample size and saimpling
  so s  (  
errors, in experienced hands it can be reliable, rapid, and
histochemical staining allows definitive diagnosis of a
useful.
 primary tumor in the prostate gland. Imununocytochemical
 Cytologic (Papanicolaou) smears provide another method
detection of estrogen receptors allows prognostication and
for the detection of cancer. Historically, this approach has
directs therapeutic intervention in breast cancers.
been used widely for discovery of carcinoma of the cervix,
Flow cytometry is used routinely in the classification of
often at an in situ stage, but now it is used to investigate
leukemias and lymphomas. In this method, fluorescently
-oua se ns 'u paadsns jo sog rao Au
labeled antibodies against cell surface molecules and dif-
metrial carcinoma, bronchogenic carcinoma, bladder and
ferentiation antigens are used to obtain the phenotype of
prostate tuinors, and gastric carcinoimas; for the identifica-
malignant cells (Chapter 12).
tion of tuumor cells in abdominal, pleural, joint, and cere-
brospinal fluids; and, less commonly, for evaluation of
Tumor Markers
other forims of neoplasia. Neoplastic cells are less cohesive
Biocheimical assays for tumor-associated enzymes, hor-
than others and are therefore shed into fluids or secretions
mones, and other tuimor markers in the blood cannot
(Fig. 6.35). The shed cells are evaluated for features of
be utilized for definitive diagnosis of cancer; however,
anaplasia indicative of their origin from a tumor. The
they are used with varying success as screening tests
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Clinical Aspects of Neoplasia
239
and have utility in monitoring the response to therapy
of these alterations deterimines the patient's subsequent
a ro e a  ass  
therapy. FISH and PCR methods can be used to detect
assays is considered with many of the specific forms
amplification of oncogenes such as HER2 and NMYC,
 of neoplasia discussed in other chapters, so only a few
which provide therapeutic and prognostic inforimation
examples suffice here. PSA, used to screen for prostatic
for breast cancers and neuroblastoimas, respectively.
adenocarcinoma, is one of the most frequently used tuumor
Sequencing of cancer genoimes is now routine in soime
markers in clinical practice. Prostatic carcinoma can
be
centers, allowing for the identification of point muta-
suspected when elevated levels of PSA are found in the
lood e ioipaid jeu csdi se qons sauas raoues ut suog
blood. However, PSA screening also highlights problems 
outcome in many different types of cancer. Although
encountered with use of virtually every tumor marker.
not yet standard of care, efforts are ongoing to develop
Although PSA levels often are elevated in cancer, PSA
tests that assess the host iimmune response to tumors,
levels also may be elevated in benign prostatic hyperpla-
for example, by quantifying the number of infiltrating
sia (Chapter 18). Furtherimore, there is no PSA level that
cytotoxic T cells, as this too is helpful in gauging
 ensures that a patient does not have prostate cancer. Thus,
prognosis.
the PSA test suffers from both low sensitivity and low
Detection of minimal residual disease. Another energing
 specificity, and its use as a screening tool has become
use of molecular techniques is for detection of miniimal
quite controversial. The PSA assay is extremely valu-
residual disease after treatinent. For example, detection
able, however, for detecting residual disease or recurrence
of BCR-ABL transcripts by PCR assay gives a measure
following treatiment for prostate cancer. Other tumor
of residual disease in patients treated for chronic
markers used in clinical practice include carcinoembry-
Imyeloid  leukemia.  Recognition  that  virtually
all
onic antigen (CEA), which is elaborated by carcinoimas of
advanced tumors are associated with both intact circu-
the colon, pancreas, stomach, and breast, and alpha feto-
lating tumor cells and products derived from tumors
 protein (AFP), which is produced by hepatocellular carci-
(e.g, cell-free circulating tumor DNA) has led to interest
nomas, yolk sac remnants in the gonads, and occasionally
in following tumor burden through sensitive blood tests
teratocarcinomas and eimbryonal cell carcinoimas. Like
Auap! on pausisap
tumor-specific nucleic  acid
PSA, CEA and AFP can be elevated in a variety of non-
sequences.
neoplastic conditions and thus also lack the specificity
Diagnosis of hereditary predisposition to cancer. Gerin line
and sensitivity required for the early detection of cancers,
mutation of several tumor suppressor genes, such as
but they may be useful in monitoring disease once the
BRCA1, increases a patient's risk for developing certain
diagnosis is established. With successful resection of the
types of cancer. Thus, detection of these mutated alleles
tumor, these markers disappear from the serum; their
may allow the patient and the physician to devise an
reappearance almost always signifies recurrence. CEA is
aggressive screening protocol, as well as an opportu-
further discussed in Chapter 15 and alpha fetoprotein in
nity for prophylactic surgery. In addition, such detec-
Chapter 16.
tion allows genetic counseling of relatives who are at
risk.
Molecular Diagnosis
Therapeutic decision-making. Therapies that directly target
An increasing number of molecular techniques are being
specific mutations are increasingly being developed,
 used for the diagnosis of tumors and for predicting their
and thus detection of such mutations in a tumor can
behavior.
guide the developiment of targeted therapy, as discussed
 Diagnosis of malignancy. Because each T cell and B cell
later. It is now becoiming evident that certain targetable
-Arod 'sjuauraueirea aua rodanan uanue anbrun se
mutations transgress imorphologic categories. One
rer go uonoap pasea-(od) uonoan uero aser
example involves a valine for glutaimate substitution in
ranged T-cell receptor or imnunoglobulin genes allows
anino acid 600 (V600E) of the serine/threonine kinase
monoclonal (neoplastic) and polyclonal (reactive) pro-
BRAF, which you will recall lies downstream of RAS in
liferations to be distinguished. Many hematopoietic
the growth factor signaling pathway. Melanomas with
neoplasms, as well as a few solid tumors, are defined by
the V600E BRAF mutation respond well to BRAF inhibi-
particular translocations, so the diagnosis can be made
tors, whereas melanomas without this mutation show
by detection of such translocations. For exaimple, fluo-
no response. Subsequently, it was realized that the saime
e  ro () eir ns i 
V600E mutation is also present in a subset of imany other
(Chapter 7) can be used to detect translocations charac-
diverse cancers, including carcinoimas of the colon and
teristic of Ewing sarcoina and several leukeinias and
thyroid gland, most hairy cell leukeimias, and many
lymphoimas. PCR-based detection of BCR-ABL tran-
cases of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (Fig. 6.36). These
scripts can confirm the diagnosis of chronic myeloid
tumors are morphologically diverse and have distinct
leukeimia (Chapter 12). Finally, certain heinatologic
cells of origin, but they share identical oncogenic lesions
malignancies are now defined by the presence of point
in a common pro-growth pathway.
mutations in particular oncogenes. For example,
as
mentioned earlier, the diagnosis of another myeloid
Molecular Profiling of Tumors: The Future of
neoplasm called polycythemia vera requires the identifi-
Cancer Diagnostics
cation of specific imutations in JA K2, a gene that encodes
Until recently, molecular studies of tumors involved the
 a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase.
analysis of individual genes. However, the past few years
 Prognosis and behavior. Certain genetic alterations are
have seen the introduction of revolutionary technologies
associated with a poor prognosis, and thus the presence 
that can rapidly sequence an entire genoime; assess
http://ebooksmedicine.net
240
CHAPTER 6
Neoplasia
BRAF inhibitor
Melanoma
BRAF (V600E)
 Colon adenocarcinoma
mutation
 Papillary thyroid carcinoma
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Hairy cell leukemia
Fig. 6.36 Diverse tumor types that share a common mutation, BRAF (V600E), may be candidates for treatment with the same BRAF inhibitors.
epigenetic modifications genoime-wide (the epigenome);
underlie various cancers; description of the full panoply of
quantify all of the RNAs expressed in a cell population (the
 genetic lesions that are found in individual cancers; and a
transcriptome); measure many proteins simultaneously
greater appreciation of the genetic heterogeneity that exists
(the proteome); and take a snapshot of all of the cell's
in individual cancers from area to area. While whole-
Imetabolites (the metaboloime). Thus, the diagnosis, man-
 genome sequencing to manage patients can be perforimed,
agement and study of cancer has entered theageof "omics!"
most efforts in the clinical realm are focused on developing
 The most coiminon method for large-scale analysis of
sequencing imethods that permit identification of therapeu-
RNA expression in use in research laboratories has been
tically "actionable" genetic lesions in a timely fashion at a
based on DNA microarrays, but newer methods involving
- r  sre  so as
RNA sequencing that offer a more comprehensive and
cable to tumors, such as lung carcinomas, that are geneti-
quantitative assessiment of RNA expression are beginning
cally diverse and require a "personalized" approach if
to supplant older methods. However, RNA is prone to
targeted therapy is to succeed (Fig. 6.37). Thus, the current
degradation and is a more difficult analyte to work with
 trend in molecular diagnostic laboratories is to develop
than DNA in clinical practice. Furthermore, DNA sequenc-
 methods that perimit several hundred exons of key genes
ad uanas n ue raurs aean si su
to be sequenced simultaneously at sufficient "depth" (fold
ting the developiment of methods that rely on massively
coverage of the sequence in question) to reliably detect any
parallel sequencing (so-called "next-generation [NextGen]
mutations that might be present in as few as 5% of tumor
sequencing") that can be readily performed on virtually
 cells. A second method that is moving into clinical practice
Na u saseanui a ( ad uaas anss Au
 involves the use of DNA arrays to identify changes in DNA
sequencing capacity and speed that such methods have
 copy number, such as amplifications and deletions. Arrays
containing probes that span the entire genoime at soime
are matched by an equally remarkable decrease in cost. The
standard spacing can detect all but the simallest copy
first reasonably complete draft of the sequence of the
 number aberrations, providing inforimation that is comple-
human genome, released in 2003, took 12 years of work
 mentary to that obtained from focused DNA sequencing.
and cost about $2,700,000,000. The cost of sequencing the
Other “omics,” such as proteomics and epigenoimics, are
whole genoime has now decreased to less than $5000 in
currently being used mainly in therealm of clinical research,
some commercial laboratories, making the test readily
but with many drugs that target the cancer epigenome
affordable. At present, using NextGen sequencing, the 
moving into the clinic, it can be anticipated that tests
process of whole-genome of individual tumors can be com-
directed at assessing the state of the epigenome that predict
pleted in as little as a few weeks, which includes the time
response to such agents are soon to follow.
required for the extraordinarily complex task of asseim-
The exciteiment created by the development of new tech-
bling and analyzing the sequencing data.
niques for the global molecular analysis of tumors has led
These advances have enabled the systematic sequencing
some scientists to predict that the end of histopathology is
and cataloging of genomic alterations in various human
 in sight. However, histopathologic inspection of tumors 
cancers, an effort sponsored by the National Cancer Insti-
provides information about important characteristics of
tute called The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The main
cancers, such as anaplasia, invasiveness, and tuumor hetero.
impact of cancer genome sequencing to date has been in
 geneity, that cannot be gleaned froim DNA sequences. His-
the area of research: identification of new mutations that
topathology coupled with in situ bioimarker tests perforimed
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Clinical Aspects of Neoplasia
24
From anatomy...
...tomolecular target
● Proteins released by tumors into the serum, such as PSA, can
 be used to screen populations for cancer and to monitor for 
 recurrence after treatment.
Lung
Mutated KIT
+ Molecular analyses are used to determine diagnosis and prog-
nosis, to detect minimal residual disease, and to diagnose
 patients with a hereditary predisposition to cancer.
+ Molecular profiling of tumors by RNA expression profling.
DNA sequencing, and DNA copy number arrays are useful in 
Mutated
molecular stratification of otherwise identical tumors or those
Breast
HER2
 of distinct histogenesis that share a mutation for the purpose
Genetic analysis
THERAPIES
of targeted treatment and prognostication.
+ Assays of circulating tumor cells and of DNA shed into blood,
stool, sputum, and urine are under development.
Mutated
Prostate
EGFR
RGETED
TAR
SUGGESTED READINGS
Artandi SE, DePinho RA: Telomeres and telomerase in cancer, Carci-
Mutated
nogenesis 31:9-18, 2010. fA review discussing theimportance of telomeres
Colon
BRAF
andtelomerase.}
 Bai L, Wang S: Targeting apoptosis pathways for new cancer thera-
peutics, Annuat Reo Med 65:139-155, 2014. JA review of apoptosis
pathways and therapeutic strategies to actioate them in cancer celts.!
 Burkhart DL, Sage I: Cellular mechanisms of tumour suppression by
Brain
Mutated Pl3K
the retinoblastoma gene, Nat Reo Carcer 8:671-682, 2008. [A review
of Rb function.!
Cilloni D, Saglio G: Molecular pathways: BCR-ABL, Clin Cancer Res 
18:930-937,2012.fA discussion ofthefunctional consequences andlini
Fig. 6.37 Genetic analysis of cancers is being utilized to identify mutations
cal significance of aberrant tyrosine kinase activity in chronic myeloid
that can be targeted by drugs.
leukemiamediated by the constitutiveenzyme activityofCR-ABL
 Coussens LM, Zitvogel L, Palucka AK: Neutralizing tumor-promoting
chronic inflammation: a magic bullet?, Srience 339:286-291, 2013. [A
discussion ofclinicat and experimental studies describing protumorigenic
 on tissue sections also reinains the best way to assess
roles for immune cells that elicit cancer-associated inflammation.
tumor :stromal cell interactions, such as angiogenesis and
Hanahan D, Coussens L: Accessories to the crime: functions of cell
host immune responses; the latter mnay have an increas-
recruited to the tumor microenvironment, Cancer Cell 20:309-322,
ingly important role in guiding therapeutic interventions
2012. [A review discussing fhe role of stroma in cancer.}
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA: The hallmarks of cancer (2011): the next
that are designed to counteract immune evasion by tumors.
generation, Cell 144:646-674, 2011. IA reexamination of the haltmarks
Thus, what lies ahead is not the replaceiment of one set of
of cancer.!
techniques by another. On the contrary, for the foreseeable
Joerger AC, Fersht AR: The p53 pathway: Origins, inactivation in
future the most accurate diagnosis and assessiment of prog-
cancer, and emerging therapeutic approaches, Annu Reo Biochem
nosis in cancer patients will be arrived at by a combination
85:375-404, 2016.fA zuide-ranging discussion of p53functions and dys-
of morphologic and molecular techniques.
function in cancer, with an eye forvards development of new cancer
-rn pue saskieue snuroua ui saoueape a jo lle yim
therapies.!
 geted therapies, one can safely predict that we are on the
Lord C, Ashworth A: BRCAness revisited, Nat Reo Cancer 16:110-120,
2016. fA discussion of how BRCAs function as tumor suppressors and
juaueai pue sisoubeip roum jo abe uapiog a jo dsn
Those of you who are in medical school now can safely
how this informs therapy for fumors with eoidence of BRCA
dysfunction.!
assume that the expectations for rapid advances in cancer
 Manning AL, Dyson NJ: RB: mitotic implications of a tumour suppres-
diagnosis and therapy will be realized while you are still
sor, Nat Rev Cancer 12:220-226, 2012. fn addition fo fhewelt-established
 in practice. Get ready!
roles ofRBincontrotofceltcycle progression andproliferation,thisreview
describesother emerging tumor suppressive functionssuch as mainte
nance of genomic stabitity.!
Martinez P, Blasco MA: Telomeric and extra-telomeric roles for
SUMMARY
telomerase and the telomere-binding proteins, Naf Reo Cancer
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF CANCER
11:161-176, 2011. fA veview discussing fhe role of telomeric proteins in
immortalization of cancer cells and other emerging non-telomeric func-
+ Several sampling approaches exist for the diagnosis of tumors,
tions that may atso contribute to oncogenesis.
including excision, biopsy, fine-needle aspiration, and cytologic
Massague J, Obenauf AC: Metastatic colonization by circulating
smears.
tumour cells, Nature 529:298-306, 2016. fA discussion of concepts fo
+ Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry studies help in the
explain metastasis.
diagnosis and classification of tumors, because distinct protein
 Munoz-Espin D, Serrano M: Cellular senescence: from physiology to
pathology, Nat Reo Mol Cell Biol 15:482-496, 2014. A discussion of the
expression patterns define different entities.
mechanisms of senescence and their potential therapeutic releoance.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
242
CHAPTER 6 
Neoplasia
Nieto MA, Huang RY-J, Jackson RA, et al: EMT: 2016, Ce 166:21-45,
-da fo sauanbasuon pun sasnn au fo uossnsp Suiu-inf  9o
even Warburg did not anticipate, Cancer Cell 21:297-308, 2012. [A
liat-mesenchymat transition in cancer.!
account of the molerular pathways of reprogramming of energy metabo-
 Pickup M, Novitskly S, Moses HL: The roles of TGF-β in the tumor 
lism in cancer and the emergence of "oncometabolites."}
Welti J, Loges S, Dimmeler S, et al: Recent molecular discoveries in 
cussing the tumor-promoting effects of TGF-β.I
angiogenesis and anti-angiogenesis therapies in cancer, ↓ Clin Inoesf
 Stine ZE, Walton ZE, Altman BJ, et al: MYC, metabolism, and cancer,
123:3190-3200, 2013. fA discussion of angiogenic mechanisms and suc-
Cancer Discoo 5:1024-1039, 2015. [A review of the connections betzveen
cesses and chatlenges of anti-angiogenic therapy in cancer.}
MYC and cancer cel metabolism.}
White E: The role of autophagy in cancer, J Clin Inoest 125:42-46, 2016.
 Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA: The cancer genome, Nature
[A discussion of the diverse possible contribufions of autophagy to cancer.
458:719-724, 2009.fAn excellent summary of next-generation sequencing
technologies and their application to cancer.!
van Roy F: Beyond E-cadherin: roles of other cadherin superfamily
members in cancer, Nat Reo Cancer 14:121-134, 2014. fA review dis-
Cussing the role of members of the cadherin famity in cancer.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
See Targeted Therapy available online at studentconsult.com
CHAPTER
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
CHAPTER OUTLINE
Genetic Diseases 243
Structural Abnormalities 263
Necrotizing Enterocolitis 279
Nature of Genetic Abnormalities
Generai Features of Chromosomal
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
Contributing to Human Disease 244
Disorders 264
(SIDS) 280
Mutations in Protein-Coding Genes 244
Cytogenetic Disorders involving Autosomes 264
Fetal Hydrops 282
 Alterations in Protein-Coding Genes Other Than
Cytogenetic Disorders involving Sex
immune Hydrops 283
Mutations 244
Chromosomes 267
Nonimmune Hydrops 283
 Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by
Single-Gene Disorders With Atypical
Tumors and Tumorlike Lesions of Infancy
Single-Gene Defects 245
Patterns of Inheritance 269
and Childhood 285
Transmission Patterns of Singie-Gene
Tnipiet Repeat Mutations 269
Benign Neopiasms 285
Disorders 246
Diseases Coused by Mutations in Mitochondrial
Malignant Neopiasms 286
Diseases Coused by Mutations in Genes
Genes 271
Molecular Diagnosis of Mendelian and
Encoding Structural Proteins 247
Diseases Caused by Alterations of Imprinted
Complex Disorders 291
Diseases Coused by Mutations in Genes
 Regions: Prader-Wili and Angeiman 
Indications for Genetic Analysis 292
 Encoding Receptor Proteins or Channeis 248
Syndromes 271
Molecular Diagnosis of Coby Number
Diseases Coused by Mutations in Genes 
Pediatric Diseases 273
Abnormalities 292
Encoding Enzyme Proteins 254
Congenital Anomalies 273
 Direct Detection of DNA Mutations by
Diseases Coused by Mutations in Genes
Etiology 275
Polymerase Chgin Reaction (PCR)
Encoding Proteins That Reguiate Cell 
Perinatal Infections 277
Analysis 294
Growth 26 1
 Prematurity and Fetal Growth
Linkage Analiysis and Genomewide Associntion
Complex Multigenic Disorders 261
Restriction 277
Studies 295
Cytogenetic Disorders 262
Respiratory Distress Syndrome of the
Numenic Abnormalities 262
Newborn 278
Genetic Diseases
The completion of the human genome project was a land-
"precision medicine") to the treatiment of cancer and other
mark achieveiment in the study of human diseases. It estab-
diseases with a genetic coimponent.
lished that humans have only about 25,000 protein-coding
Because disorders of childhood are of genetic origin,
 genes, far fewer than the 100,000 previously estimated and
 developimental and pediatric diseases are discussed along
alimost half the nunber in the lowly rice plant (Oryza
with genetic diseases in this chapter. However, it must be
sativa)! The unraveling of this "genetic architecture"
is
borne in mind that not all genetic disorders manifest in
beginning to unlock secrets of inherited as well as acquired
infancy and childhood, and conversely, many pediatric
human disease. Powerful technologies now allow applica-
diseases are not of genetic origin. To the latter category
tions of the human gene sequences to the analysis of human
belong diseases resulting froim immaturity of organ
diseases. Current 1
high-throughput
systems. In this context it is helpful to clarify three coim-
sequencing technologies can routinely sequence the human
monly used terms: hereditary, faimilial, and congenital.
exome (the entire coimpendium of coding genes) in a couple
Hereditary disorders, by definition, are derived from one's
of days for as little as $l000. The speed and reduced costs
parents, are transimitted in the gaimetes through the genera-
 of DNA sequencing are increasingly facilitating the appli-
tions, and therefore are familial. The term congenital simply
cation of “personalized medicine"
(also known as
implies “present at birth." Of note, sone congenital
243
http://ebooksmedicine.net
244
CHAPTER7(
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
diseases are not genetic (e.g., congenital syphilis). On the
and the phenotypic manifestations of the diseases caused
other hand, not all genetic diseases are congenital; the
by this class of mutations.
expression of Huntington disease, for example, begins only
after the third or fourth decade of life.
Alterations in Protein-Coding Genes Other
Than Mutations
NATURE OF GENETIC
 In addition to alterations in DNA sequence, coding genes 
 also can undergo structural variations, such ascopy number
ABNORMALTIES CONTRIBUTING
changes—amplifications or deletions—or translocations that
TO HUMAN DISEASE
result in aberrant gain or loss of protein function. As with
 mutations, structural changes imay occur in the gerimline,
 There are several types of genetic abnorimalities that affect
or be acquired in somatic tissues. In many instances, patho-
 the structure and function of proteins, disrupting cellular
genic germline alterations involve a contiguous portion
homeostasis and contributing to disease.
of a chromosoime rather than a single gene, such as in
the 22q microdeletion syndrome, discussed later. With
Mutations in Protein-Coding Genes
the widespread availability of next-generation sequencing
technology for assessing DNA copy number variation at
The term mutation refers to permanent changes in the
very high resolution genome wide, pathogenic structural
DNA. Those that affect germ cells are transimitted to the
alterations have now been discovered in common disor-
progeny and may give rise to inherited diseases. Mutations
ders such as autisim. Cancers often contain somatically
in somatic cells are not transimitted to the progeny but are
acquired structural alterations, including amplifications,
important in the causation of cancers and some congenital
deletions, and translocations. The so-called “Philadelphia
malformations.
chroimosoime" - translocation t(9;22) between the BCR and 
 Details of specific mutations and their effects are dis-
ABL genes in chronic myeloid leukemia (Chapter 12) - is
cussed along with the relevant disorders throughout this
a classic example.
book. Cited here are some coiminon exaimples of gene
mutations and their effects:
Alterations in Non-Coding RNAs
· Point mutations result from the substitution of a single
It is worth noting that until recently the major focus of
nucleotide base by a different base, resulting in the
gene hunting has been discovery of genes that encode pro-
replaceiment of one amino acid by another in the
teins. Recent studies indicate, however, that a very large
protein product. The mutation in the β-globin chain
number of genes do not encode proteins. Instead, the non-
of hemoglobin giving rise to sickle cell aneimia is an
Supos-uou, palies-os -sauas asau jo sionpoid paposua
a si r uon snod e go anxa jx
RNAs (ncRNAs)" - play important regulatory functions.
meaning of the genetic code. Such mutations are some-
Although many distinct families of ncRNAs exist, the
times called missense mutations. By contrast, certain
two most important examples, -simall RNA molecules
 point imutations may change an aimino acid codon
called microRNAs (imiRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs
to a chain termination codon, or a stop codon. Such
(lncRNAs) - are discussed in Chapter 1.
"norserse" mutatiors interrupt translation, and in most
cases RNAs are rapidly degraded, a phenomenon called
With this brief review of the nature of abnormalities
that contribute to the pathogenesis of human diseases, we
formed.
can turn our attention to the three major categories of
·Frameshift mu tatiors occur when the insertion or deletion
genetic disorders:
of one or two base pairs alters the reading frame of the
·Mendelian disorders resulting from mutations in single
DNA strand.
 genes. The genetic abnorimalities show high penetrance,
Trinucleotide repeat mu tations belong to a special category,
meaning that most individuals who inherit the anomaly
because these mutations are characterized by amplifica-
show phenotypic effects. These diseases are hereditary
tion of a sequence of three nucleotides. Although the
and familial. They include many uncommon conditions,
specific nucleotide sequence that undergoes amplifica-
such as storage diseases and inborn errors of
tion varies with different disorders, all affected sequences
metabolisim.
 () ss pue () aun sponu a arrs
Complex disorders involving multiple genes as well as envi-
 example, in fragile X syndrome, prototypical of this cat-
rormental influences. These are soimetimes called multi-
egory of disorders, there are 200 to 4000 tandem repeats
factorial diseases. They include soime of the most
 of the sequence CGG within a gene called FMR1. In
common disorders of mankind, including hypertension,
norimal populations, the number of repeats is simall, aver-
diabetes, and allergic and autoimmune diseases.
aging 29. The expansions of the trinucleotide sequences
Diseases arising from chromosomal abnormalities, including
prevent normal expresson of the FMR1 gene,thus giving
changes in the number or structure of chroimosoimes.
rise to mental retardation. Another distinguishing feature
Several rare developmental abnormalities are attribut-
of trinucleotide repeat mutations is that they are dynamic
able to chromosomal alterations.
(i.e., the degree of amplification increases during game-
Other genetic diseases, which involve single gene muta-
togenesis). These features, discussed in greater detail
tions but do not follow simple mendelian rules of inheri-
later in this chapter, influence the pattern of inheritance
tance. These  single-gene disorders  with nonclassic
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
245
inheritance patterns include those resulting from triplet
Recognition of genetic heterogeneity not only is impor-
repeat mutations or from mutations in imitochondrial
tant in genetic counseling but also facilitates under-
DNA, and those in which the transimission is influenced
standing of the pathogenesis of comumon disorders such
as diabetes mellitus (Chapter 20).
Each of these four categories is discussed separately.
manifestations of mutations affecting a known single
Table 7.l Estimated Prevalence of Selected Mendelian
MENDELAN DISORDERS: DISEASES
Disorders Among Live-Born Infants
 Disorder
Estimated Prevalence
CAUSED BY SINGLE-GENE DEFECTS
 Familial hypercholesterolermia
I in 500
Single-gene defects (imutations) follow the well-known
 mendelian patterns of inheritance (Tables 7.1 and 7.2).
 Polycystic kidney disease
I in 1000
Although individually rare, together they account for
 Hereditary spherocytosis
I in 5000 (northern Europe)
approximately 1% of all adult adimissions to hospitals and
 Marfan syndrome
I in 5000
about 6% to 8% of all pediatric hospital adimissions. Listed
 Huntington disease
1 in 10,000
next are a few important tenets and caveats when consider-
 Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
ing mendelian disorders:
· Mutations involving single genes follow one of three
Sickle cell anemia
I in 500 (U.s.African Americans)*
patterns of inheritance: autosomal dominant, autoso-
Cystic fibrosis
I in 3200 (U.5. Caucasians)
mal recessive, or X-linked.
Tay-Sachs disease
I in 3500 (U.s.Ashkenazi Jewish;
A single-gene mutation may have many phenotypic
French Canadians)
effects (pleiotropy) and, conversely, mutations at several
 Phenylketonuria
I in 10,000
genetic loci may produce the saine trait (genetic hetero-
MPSs—all types
I in 25,000
geneity). For example, Marfan syndrome, which results
Glycogen storage diseases—-all 
I in 50,000
from a basic defect in connective tissue, is associated
types
with widespread effects involving the skeleton, eyes,
Galactosemia
1 in 60,000
and cardiovascular system, all of which stem froim a
X-Linked Inheritance
 mutation in the gene encoding fibrillin, a component of
 Duchenne muscular dystrophy
connective tissues. On the other hand, several different
I in 3500 (U.5. males)
types of mutations can cause retinitis pigimentosa, an
Hemophilia
I in 5000 (U.S.males)
inherited disorder associated with abnorimal retinal
The prevalence of heterozygous sickle celltric is I in I2 for U.S.African Americans.
1  consequent  visual impairment.
MPS, Mucopolysaccharidosis.
pigimentation  and
Table 7.2 Biochemical Basis and Inheritance Pattern for Selected Mendelian Disorders
Disease
Abnormal Protein
 Protein Type/Function
 Autosomal Dominant Inheritane
 Familial hypercholesterolemia 
LDL receptor
Receptor transport
 Marfan syndrome
Fbrillin
 Structural support: extracellular matrix
Ehler-Danlos syndrome*
Collagen
 Structural support: extracellular matrix 
Hereditary spherocytosis
 Spectrin, ankyrin, or protein 4.1
aegesw a pooig paioddns ienns
 Neurofibromatosis, type I
Neurofibromin-I (NF-1)
Growth regulation 
 Adult polycystic kidney disease
Polycystin-I (PKD-1)
Cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions
Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis transrmermbrane regulator
lon channel
 Phenylketonuria
 Phenylalanine hydroxylase
Enzyme
Tay-Sachs disease
Hexosaminidase
Enzyme
 Severe combined immunodeficiency
Adenosine deaminase
Enzyme
 Q- and β-thalassemiast
Hemoglobin
Oxygen transport
Sickle cell anemiat
 Hemoglobin 
Oxygen transport
X-Linked Recessive Inheritance
Hemophilia A
Factor VIlll
Coagulation
Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy
Dystrophin 
 Structural support: cell membrane
 Fragile X syndrome
FMRP
RNA translation
*Some variants of Ehler-Danlos syndrome have an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
tAlthough full-blown sympcoms require biallic mutations,heterozygotes for thalassemia and sickle celanemiamay present with mild clinical disease.Thus,these disorders
sometimes are categorized as "autosomal codominant' entities.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
246
CHAPTER7(
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
gene are influenced by other genetic loci, which are
phenotype are not fully understood. In soime cases, espe-
called modifier genes. As discussed later in the section
cially when the gene encodes one subunit of a imultimeric
on cystic fibrosis these modifier loci can affect the sever-
protein, the product of the mutant allele can interfere
ity or extent of the disease.
with the asseinbly of a functionally norimal multimer. For
 The use of proactive prenatal genetic screening in high-
example, the collagen molecule is a trimer in which the
risk populations (eg-, persons of Ashkenazi Jewish
three collagen chains are arranged in a helical configu-
descent) has significantly reduced the incidence (Table
ration. The presence of mutated collagen chains reduces
7.1) of certain genetic disorders such as Tay-Sachs
the assembly of the reimaining norimal chains, producing a
disease.
Imarked deficiency of collagen. In this instance the mutant
allele is called dominant negative, because it impairs the
function of a norimal allele. This effect is illustrated in some
Transmission Patterns of Single-Gene Disorders
forms of osteogenesis imperfecta (Chapter 21)
Disorders of Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
Disorders of Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
Disorders of autosomal dominant inheritance are mani-
Disorders of autosomal recessive inheritance are mani-
fested in the heterozygous state, so at least one parent
 fested in the homozygous state. They occur when both of
 in an index case usually is affected. Both males and
the alleles at a given gene locus are mutants. Therefore,
females can be affected, and both sexes can transmit
such disorders are characterized by the following features:
the condition. When an affected person marries an unaf-
(1) The trait does not usually affect the parents, who are
fected one, each child has one chance in two of having
carriers of one diseased allele, but multiple siblings may
the disease. The following features also pertain to auto-
show the disease; (2) siblings have one chance in four of
soimal dominant diseases:
being affected (ie., the recurrence risk is 25% for each
Withany autosomal dominant disorder, some patients do not
birth); and (3) if the mutant gene occurs with a low fre-
hwve affected parents. Such patients owe their disorder to
quency in the population, there is a strong likelihood that
new mutations involving either the egg or the sperim
the affected patient (the proband) is the product of a con-
 from which they were derived. Their siblings are neither
sanguineous marriage. They make up the largest group of
affected nor at increased risk for developiment of the
mendelian disorders.
disease.
In contrast with the features of autosomal dominant
Clinical features can be modified by reduced penetrance and
 diseases, the following features generally apply to most
variable expressivity. Some persons inherit the mutant
autosoinal recessive disorders:
The expression of the defect tends to be more uniform than in
referred to as rduced penetrance. The variables that affect
autosomal dominant disorders.
penetrance are not clearly understood. In contrast with
Complete penetrance is common.
penetrance, if a trait is consistenly associated with a
Onset is frequently earty in life.
imutant gene but is expressed differently aimong persons
Although new mutations for recessive disorders do occur, they
carrying the gene, the phenoimenon is called variable
are rarely detected clinically. Because the affected person
expressivity. For exaimple, manifestations of neurofibro-
 is an asyimptomatic heterozygote, several generations
matosis 1 range from brownish spots on the skin to
may pass before the descendants of such a person
multiple tumors and skeletal deforimities.
 mate with other heterozygotes and produce affected
offspring.
uugunh u se poouip un amaddn pou op su8is pum
disease).
 heterozygotes, equal amounts of norimal and defective
·In autosomal dominant disorders, a 50% reduction in the
enzyme are synthesized. Usually the natural "margin of
normal gene product is associated with clinical signs and
safety" ensures that cells with half of their complement
symptoms. Because a 50% loss of enzyime activity can be
 of the enzyime function normally.
compensated for, involved genes in autosomal domi-
nant disorders usually do not encode enzyime proteins,
X-Linked Disorders
but instead fall into two other categories of proteins:
 The Y chromosoime is home to the testes-deterimining gene
· Those involved in regulation of coimplex metabolic
SRY, which directs imale sexual differentiation, but apart
sa) ronuo ypaag o poalqns uao 'semd
 from very rare instances of Y-linked familial deafness, no
membrane receptors, transport proteins). An example
Y chroimosoime-linked mendelian disorders have ever
 of this pathogenic mechanisim is found in familial
been reported. Thus, for the most part, sex-linked disor-
hypercholesterolemia, which results from mutation
ders are X linked. Most X-linked disorders are X-linked
in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene
recessive and are characterized by the following features:
(discussed later).
·Heterozygous female carriers transmit them only to sons, who
 Key structural proteins, such as collagen and compo-
of course are hemizygous for the X chromosome.
nents of the red cell membrane skeleton (e.g. spec-
Heterozygous females rarely express the full phenotypic
trin, abnormalities of which result in hereditary
change,because theyhave the paired normal allele.Although
spherocytosis).
one of the X chroimosoimes in females is inactivated (see
further text), this process of inactivation is random,
The biochemical mechanisims by which a 50% reduc-
which typically allows sufficient numbers of cells with
tion in the levels of such proteins results in an abnorimal
the norimal expressed allele to eimerge.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
247
·An affected male does not transmit the disorder to sons, but
Excessive TGF-β signaling has deleterious effects on vas-
all daughters are carriers. Sons of heterozygous woimen
cular smooth muscle developiment and the integrity of
have one chance in two of receiving the imutant gene.
extracellular matrix. In support of this hypothesis, muta-
tions in the TGF-β type II receptor give rise to a related
syndrome, called Marfan syndrome type 2 (MFS2). Fur-
SUMMARY
thermore, patients with germline mutations in one isoform
of TGF-β, called TGF-β3, present with an inherited predis-
TRANSMISSION PATTERNS OF
 position to aortic aneurysim and other cardiovascular man-
SINGLE-GENE DISORDERS
 s,     s 
+ Autosomal dominant disorders are characterized by expres-
 patients (see later). Of note, angiotensin receptor blockers,
sion in heterozygous state; they affect males and females
which inhibit the activity of TGF-β, improve aortic and
equally, and both sexes can transmit the disorder.
cardiac function in mouse models of Marfan syndrome.
· Autosomal dominant disorders often invovle dysfunctional
Prevention of cardiovascular disease entails the use of
 receptors and structural proteins.
beta-aderenergic blocking agents, which lower blood pres-
+ Autosomal recessive diseases occur when both copies of a
sure, as well as angiotensin receptor inhibitors, which not
 gene are mutated and frequently involve enzymes. Males and
only lower blood pressure but also interfere with TGF-β
females are affected equally.
activity.
· X-linked disorders are transmitted by heterozygous females
to their sons, who manifest the disease. Female carriers usually
are unaffected because of random inactivation of one X
MORPHOLOGY
chromosome.
Skeletal abnormalities are the most obvious feature of
Marfan syndrome. Patients have a slender, elongated habitus with 
abnormally long legs, arms, and fingers (arachnodactyly); a high-
Diseases Caused by Mutations in Genes Encoding
arched palate; and hyperextensibility of joints.A variety of spinal
Structural Proteins
deformities, such as severe kyphoscoliosis, may be present. The
chest is deformed, exhibiting either pectus excavatum (i.e., deeply
Marfan Syndrome
depressed sternum) or a pigeon-breast deformity The most
Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder of
characteristic ocular change is bilateral dislocation, or sublux-
connective tissues, manifested principally by changes in
ation, of the lens secondary to weakness of its suspensory liga-
the skeleton, eyes, and cardiovascular system. It is caused
ments (ectopia lentis). Ectopia lentis, particularly if bilateral, is
by an inherited defect in an extracellular glycoprotein
a sisans auos pue aoas uee doy sads aa
called fibrillin-1. This glycoprotein, secreted by fibroblasts,
diagnosis. Most serious, however, is the involvement of the car-
is the major component of microfibrils found in the extra-
diovascular system. Fragmentation of the elastic fibers in the
cellular matrix. Microfibrils serve as scaffolding for the
tunica media of the aorta predisposes affected patients to aneu-
deposition of tropoelastin, an integral component of elastic 
rysmal dilation and aortic dissection (Chapter I0).These changes,
fibers. Although microfibrils are widely distributed in the
called cystic medionecrosis, are not specific for Marfan syn-
body, they are particularly abundant in the aorta, liga-
drome; similar lesions occur in hypertension and with aging. Loss
Iments, and the ciliary zonules that support the ocular lens,
of medial support causes dilation of the aortic valve ring, giving
precisely the tissues that are proiminently affected in
rise to aortic incompetence. The cardiac valves, especially the
Marfan syndrone.
mitral valve, may be excessively distensible and regurgitant
 Fibrillin is encoded by the FBN1 gene, which maps to
(floppy valve syndrome), giving rise to mitral valve prolapse
chromosomal locus 15q2l. Mutations in FBN1 are found in
and congestive cardiac failure (Chapter I l). Aortic rupture is the
all patients with Marfan syndrome. More than 1800 distinct 
ssa7 'ase Aue ie Jnsoo Xew pue ypeap jo asneo uowwos asou
causative mutations in the very large FBN1 gene have been
frequently, cardiac failure is the terminal event.
found, a level of complexity that complicates diagnosis by
Although the lesions described are typical of Marfan syn-
DNA sequencing. As a result, the diagnosis is mainly based
drome, they are not seen in all cases. There is much variation in
  s   r 
clinical expression, and some patients may exhibit predominantly
symptoms, it is thought that the mutant fibrillin protein
 cardiovascular lesions with minimal skeletal and ocular changes.
may act as a dominant negative, preventing the asseimbly
It is believed that the variable expressivity is related to different
of norimal microfibrils. The prevalence of Marfan syndrome
 mutations in the FBNI gene.
is estimated to be 1 in 5000. Approximately 70% to 85% of
cases are familial, and the rest are sporadic, arising from
de novo FBN1 mutations in the gerim cells of parents.
Although many of the abnorimalities in Marfan syn-
SUMMARY
drome can be explained on the basis of structural failure
MARFAN SYNDROME
of connective tissues, some, such as overgrowth of bones,
+ Marfan syndrome is caused by a mutation in the FBN! gene
 are difficult to relate to simple loss of fibrillin. It is now
encoding fibrillin, which is required for structural integrity of
evident that loss of microfibrils gives rise to abnorimal
connective tissues and activation ofTGF-β.
and excessive activation of transforming growth factor-β
+ The major tissues affected are the skeleton, eyes, and cardio.
(TGF-B), because norimal microfibrils sequester TGF-β,
vascular system.
thereby controlling the bioavailability of this cytokine.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
248
CHAPTER７
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
· Deficient synthesis of type V collagen resulting from
Clinical features may include tall stature, long fingers, bilateral 
mutations in COL5Al and COL5A2 is inherited as
subluxation of lens, mitral valve prolapse, aortic aneurysm, and 
an autosomal doiminant disorder and results in
aortic dissection.
dassical EDS.
+ Prevention of cardiovascular disesae involves the use of drugs
that lower blood pressure and inhibit TGF-β signaling.
SUMMARY
Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes
EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROMES
saseasp go dnol e are (ssai) saoruas souea-sa
· There are six variants of EDS, all characterized by defects in
characterized by defects in collagen synthesis or struc-
collagen synthesis or assembly. Each of the variants is caused
ture. All are single-gene disorders, but the mode of inheri-
by a distinct mutation.
 tance encoimpasses both autosomal doiminant and recessive
+ Clinical features may include fragile, hyperextensible skin vul-
-oo jo sa pus o aade are arau su
nerable to trauma, hypermobile joints, and ruptures involving 
lagen; all have characteristic tissue distributions and are
colon, cornea, or large arteries. Wound healing is poor.
the products of different genes. To some extent, the clinical
heterogeneity of EDS can be explained by mutations in
different collagen genes.
Diseases Caused by Mutations in Genes Encoding
At least six clinical and genetic variants of EDS are rec-
ognized. Because defective collagen is the basis for these
Receptor Proteins or Channels
disorders, certain clinical features are comnon to all
Familil Hypercholesterolemia
variants.
·Tissues rich in cotlagen, such as skin, ligaments, and joints,
Familial hypercholesterolemia is a "receptor disease"
frequently are affected in most variants of EDS.Because the
caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene encod-
 abnormal collagen fibers lack adequate tensile strength,
ing the LDL receptor, which is involved in the transport
joints are hypermobile. These features permit grotesque
and metabolism of cholesterol. As a consequence of recep-
contortions, such as bending the thumb backward to
tor abnorimalities there is a loss of feedback control that
touch the forearm and bending the knee upward to
normally holds cholesterol synthesis in check. The result-
 create almost a right angle. Indeed, it is believed that
 ing elevated levels of cholesterol induce premature athero-
most contortionists have some forim of EDS; however, a
sclerosis and greatly increase the risk of myocardial
predisposition to joint dislocation is one of the prices
infarction. Familial hypercholesterolemia is ainong the
paid for this virtuosity.
most common of mendelian disorders; the frequency of the
Skin fragility. The skin is extraordinarily stretchable,
heterozygous condition is 1 in 500 in the general popula-
extremely fragile, and vulnerable to trauma. Minor inju-
tion. Approximately 7% of the body's cholesterol circulates
ries produce gaping defects, and surgical repair or
in the plasima, predominantly in the form of LDL. As might
any surgical intervention is accomplished only with
 be expected, the amount of plasma cholesterol is influ-
 great difficulty because of the lack of normal tensile
enced by its synthesis and catabolism, and the liver plays
strength.
a crucial role in both these processes, as described later. A
Structural failure of organ or tissues. The structural defect
brief review of the synthesis and transport of cholesterol
in connective tissue may lead to serious interral complica-
follows.
tions, including rupture of the colon and large arteries
(vascular EDS); ocular fragility, with rupture of the
Normal Cholesterol Metabolism. Cholesterol may be
cornea and retinal detachment (kyphoscoliotic EDS);
derived froin the diet or froim endogenous synthesis.
and diaphragimatic hernias (classical EDS), among
Dietary triglycerides and cholesterol are incorporated into
others.
chyloimicrons in the intestinal mucosa and travel by way
of the gut lymphatics to the blood. These chylomicrons are
The molecular bases for three of the more comnon vari-
hydrolyzed by an endothelial lipoprotein lipase in the cap-
ants are as follows:
illaries of muscle and fat. The chylomicron reimnants, rich
·Deficient synthesis of type Ill collagen resulting from muta-
in cholesterol, are then delivered to the liver. Soime of the
tions affecting the COL3A1 gene. This variant, vascular
cholesterol enters the 1metabolic pool (to be described), and
EDS, is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder
some is excreted as free cholesterol or as bile acids into the
and is characterized by weakness of tissues rich in type
biliary tract. The endogenous synthesis of cholesterol and
III collagen (e.g., blood vessels, bowel wall), predispos-
LDL begins in the liver (Fig. 7.1). The first step in the syn-
ing them to rupture.
thesis is the secretion of triglyceride-rich very-low-density
Deficiency of the enzyme lysyl hydroxylase.Decreased
lipoprotein (VLDL) by the liver into the blood. In the capil-
hydroxylation of lysyl residues in types I and II colla-
laries of adipose tissue and muscle, the VLDL particle
gen interferes with the forimation of crosslinks aimong
undergoes lipolysis and is converted to interimediate-
collagen molecules. As might be expected, this variant
 density lipoprotein (IDL). In coimparison with VLDL, the
(kyphoscoliotic EDS), resulting from an enzyme defi-
content of triglyceride is reduced and that of cholesteryl
ciency, is inherited as an autosoimal recessive disorder.
esters is enriched in IDL, but IDL retains on its surface the
 Patients typically manifest with congenital scoliosis and
VLDL-associated apolipoproteins B-100 and E. Further
ocular fragility.
metabolisim of IDL occurs along two pathways: Most of the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
249
● Cholesterol esters
· It suppresses cholesterol synthesis by inhibiting the
● Triglycerides
B-100
activity of the enzyime 3-hydroxy-3-imethylglutaryl-
coenzyme A reductase (HMG-CoA reductase), which is
ApoC
the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthetic pathway.
ApoE
It stinulates the forimation of cholesterol esters for
VLDL
storage of excess cholesterol.
It downregulates the synthesis of cell surface LDL recep-
 tors, thus preventing excessive accumulation of choles-
Fat
terol inside cells.
cells
Live
Lipolysis
The transport of LDL by the scavenger recep-
cell
of VLDL
tors, alluded to earlier, seeims to occur in cells of the
mononuclear-phagocyte systeim and possibly in other
LDL receptor
tors for chemically modified (e.g-, acetylated or oxidized)
 LDLs. The amount catabolized by this scavenger recep-
tor pathway is directly related to the plasima cholesterol
level.
Pathogenesis
Receptor-mediated
clearance of IDL
B-100
 In familial hypercholesterolemia, mutations in the LDL
receptor protein impair the intracellular transport and
ApoE
IDL
catabolism of LDL, resulting in accumulation of LDL
 Receptor-mediated 
cholesterol in the plasma. In addition, the absence of LDL
 clearance of LDL
Conversion of
 receptors on liver cells impairs the transport of IDL into the
IDL to LDL
liver, so a greater proportion of plasima IDL is converted
?
B-100
 into LDL. Thus, patients with familial hypercholesterolemia
 Other clearance
LDL
develop excessive levels of serum cholesterol as a result of
Fig. 7.I Low-densitylipoprotein (LDL) metabolism and the role ofthe liver
the combined effects of reduced catabolism and excessive
in its synthesis and dearance. Lipolysis of very-low-density lipoprotein
biosynthesis (Fig. 7.1). This leads to a marked increase of
cholesterol uptake by the monocyte-inacrophages and vas-
are then stored in fat cels and used as a source of energy in skeletal muscles.
IDL (intermediate-density lipoprotein) remains in the blood and is taken up
cular walls through the scavenger receptor. This accounts 
for the appearance of skin xanthoimas and preimature 
by the liver.
atherosclerosis.
Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autosomal domi-
nant disease. Heterozygotes have a twofold- to threefold
IDL particles are directly taken up by the liver through the
elevation of plasima cholesterol levels, whereas hoimozy-
LDL receptor described later; others are converted to
gotes may have in excess of a fivefold elevation. Although
cholesterol-rich LDL by a further loss of triglycerides and
their cholesterol levels are elevated froim birth, heterozy-
the loss of apolipoprotein E. In the liver cells, IDL is recy.
gotes remain asymptomatic until adult life, when they
cled to generate VLDL
develop cholesterol deposits (xanthoimas) along tendon
The LDL receptor pathway metabolizes two-thirds of
sheaths and preimature atherosclerosis resulting in coro-
the resultant LDL particles, and the rest is metabolized
nary artery disease. Hoimozygotes are much more severely
by a receptor for oxidized LDL (scavenger receptor), to
affected, developing cutaneous xanthomas in childhood
be described later. The LDL receptor binds to apolipo-
 and often dying of myocardial infarction before the age of 
proteins B-100 and E and thus is involved in the trans-
20 years.
 port of both LDL and IDL. Although the LDL receptors
Analysis of the cloned LDL receptor gene has shown
 are widely distributed, approximately 75% are located on
that more than 900 different mutations can give rise to
hepatocytes, so the liver plays an extremely inportant
familial hypercholesteroleinia. These can be divided into
role in LDL metabolisin. The first step in the receptor-
five categories. Class I mutations are uncoimnon, and they
mediated transport of LDL involves binding to the cell
are associated with complete loss of receptor synthesis.
surface receptor, followed by endocytotic internalization
With class I mutations, the most prevalent type, the recep-
inside so-called clathrin-coated pits (Fig. 7.2). Within the
tor protein is synthesized, but its transport from the endo-
cell, the endocytic vesicles fuse with the lysosoimes, and the
 plasinic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus is impaired
LDL molecule is enzymatically degraded, resulting ulti-
because of defects in protein folding. Class Il mutations
Imately in the release of free cholesterol into the cytoplasim.
produce receptors that are transported to the cell surface
The exit of cholesterol from the lysosomes requires the
but fail to bind LDL normally. Class IV imutations give rise
 action of two proteins, called NPCi and NPC2 (described
to receptors that fail to internalize within clathrin pits after
later). The cholesterol not only is used by the cell for mem-
binding to LDL, whereas class V mutations encode recep-
brane synthesis but also takes part in intracellular choles-
 tors that can bind LDL and are internalized but are trapped
terol homeostasis by a sophisticated systeim of feedback
in endosomes because dissociation of receptor and bound
control:
LDL does not occur.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
250
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
Protein
LDL
Cholesterol esters
LDL receptor
ApoB-100
Plasma membrane
Coated
蓝
Clathrin
PCSK9
Recycling
vesicle
Coated
Golgi
vesicle
Endosome
apparatus
 Synthesis of
 Synthesis of
LDL receptors
cholesterol
UU DNA
HMG-CoA reductase
Lysosome
UURNA
inhibits
inhibits
Amino
acids
Oversupply of
Receptor
 cholesterol
 Cholesterol
Stimuates
Cell membrane,
steroid hormones,
Endoplasmic
Receptor
Ribosome
Storage of
and bile acids
reticulum 
 protein 
cholesterol esters
Fig. 7.2 The LDL receptor pathway and regulation of cholesterol metabolism. The yellow orrows show three regulatory functions of free intra-
cellular cholesterol: (l) suppression of cholesterol synthesis by inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase, (2) stimulating the storage of excess cho-
lesterol as esters, and (3) inhibition of synthesis of LDL receptors. PCSK9 causes intracellular degradation of LDL receptors in liver cells,
reducing the level of LDL receptors on the cell mermbrane. HMG-CoA reductase, 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase; LDL low-density
lipoprotein; PCSK9, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9.
 In recent years, a new mechanism of posttranslational
SUMMARY
 regulation of plasima LDL levels has been elucidated,
wherein an enzyime referred to as PCSK9 causes intracel-
 FAMILIAL HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
lular degradation of LDL receptors in hepatocytes, before
+ Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autosomal dominant disor.
they reach the cell surface. With fewer LDL receptors on
der caused by mutations in the gene encoding the LDL recep-
the cell surface, there is reduced uptake of plasima LDL,
tor. Activating mutations of PcsK9 (far less common), which
leading to hypercholesteroleinia. Families with activat-
 degrades LDL receptors, also cause a similar phenotype.
ing mutations of the gene PCSK9, which codes for the
+ Patients develop hypercholesterolemia as a consequence of
enzyme, have many features similar to classic familial
impaired transport of LDL into the cells.
hypercholesterolemia.
+ In heterozygotes, elevated serum cholesterol greatly increases
The discovery of the critical role of LDL receptors in
the risk of atherosclerosis and resultant coronary artery
cholesterol homeostasis has led to the rational design of
disease; homozygotes have an even greater increase in serum
the statin family of drugs that are now widely used to
cholesterol and a higher frequency of ischemic heart disease.
lower plasma cholesterol. They inhibit the activity of
 Cholesterol also deposits along tendon sheaths to produce
HMG-CoA reductase and thus proimote greater synthesis
xanthomas.
of LDL receptors (Fig. 7.2). However, the upregulation of
LDL receptors is accompanied by a compensatory increase
 in PCSK9 levels, which dampens the effects of statins.
Cystic Fibrosis
Therefore, agents that antagonize PCSK9 enzyimatic func-
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a disorder of epithelial ion trans-
tion have been developed, and large clinical trials have
port affecting fluid secretion in exocrine glands and the
shown the benefits using such inhibitors in patients with
 epithelial linings of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and
refractory hypercholesterolemia.
reproductive tracts. The ion transport defects lead to
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
251
abnorinally viscid mucous secretions that block the airways
Pathogenesis
and the pancreatic ducts which in turn are responsible for
The primary defect in CF is reduced production, or abnor-
the two most important clinical manifestations: recurrent
mal function of an epithelial chloride channel protein
and chronic pulmonary infections and pancreatic insuffi-
encoded by the CF transmembrane conductance regula-
ciency. In addition, although the exocrine sweat glands are
tor (CFTR) gene. Disruptive mutations in CFTR render the
structurally normal (and remain so throughout the course
of this disease), ahigh level of sodium chloride in the sweat is
ions (Fig. 7.3). However, the impact of this defect on trans-
Q consistent and characteristic biochemical abnormality in CF.
port function is tissue specific. The major function of the
At the same time, it must be reimeimbered that CF can
CFTR protein in the sweat gland ducts is to reabsorb
present with a bewilderingly variable set of clinical find-
luminal chloride ions and augment sodium reabsorption
ings. This variation in phenotype results from diverse
through the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC). Therefore,
mutations in the CF-associated gene, tissue-specific effects
in the sweat ducts, loss of CFTR function leads to decreased
of loss of the CF gene's function, and the influence of
 reabsorption of sodiun chloride and production of hyper-
disease modifier genes.
tonic ("salty") sweat (Fig. 7.3, top). In contrast to sweat
With an incidence of 1 in 2500 live births in the United
glands, CFTR in the respiratory and intestinal epithelium
States, CF is the most common lethal genetic disease that
is one of the most important avenues for active luminal
affects white populations. The carrier frequency in the
secretion of chloride. At these sites, CFTR mutations result
United States is 1 in 20 aimong Caucasians but significantly
in loss or reduction of chloride secretion into the lumen
lower among African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics.
(Fig. 7.3, bottom). Active luiminal sodium absorption
CF follows simple autosoimal recessive transimission,
through ENaCs also is increased, and both of these ion
although even heterozygous carriers have a predisposition
changes increase passive water reabsorption from the
toward pulmonary and pancreatic disease at higher rates
lumen, lowering the water content of the surface fluid layer
 than the general population.
coating inucosal cells. Thus, unlike the sweat ducts, there
NORMAL
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
LUMEN OF SWEAT DUCT
LUMEN OF SWEAT DUCT
Na
CFTR
ENaC
NORMAL
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
AIRWAY
AIRWAY
Normal
Dehydrated
mucus.
 mucus
Na+
HC
Na+
H0
CH
Na+
HC
Fig. 7.3 (Top) In CF, a chloride channel defect in the sweat duct causes increased chloride and sodium concentration in sweat. (Botom) Patients with CF
have decreased chloride secretion and increased sodium and water reabsorption in the airways,leading to dehydration of the mucus layer coating epithelial
cells, defective mucociliary action, and mucous plugging. CFTR, Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; ENaC, epithelial sodium channel respon-
sible for intracellular sodium conduction.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
252
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
is no difference in the salt concentration of the surface fluid
Sweat glands-
 layer coating the respiratory and intestinal imucosal cells in
Increased sweat chloride
 concentration
and intestinal coimplications in CF seeim to stein from dehy-
Sinuses
dration of surface fluid layer. In the lungs, this dehydration
Sinusitis
leads to defective mucociliary action and the accuimulation
 of concentrated, viscid secretions that obstruct the air pas-
sages and predispose to recurrent pulimonary infections. In
addition to chloride, CFTR also regulates secretion of bicar-
Lungs
bonate ions. In fact, certain CFTR variants manifest only
Inflammation
with abnormal bicarbonate transport while chloride ion
 Pseudomonas infection
transport is largely preserved. Pancreatic insufficiency, a
Bronchiectasis
feature of classic CF, is virtually always present in patients
who carry CFTR mutations with abnorimal bicarbonate
Liver
conductance.
Cirrhosis
 Since the CFTR gene was cloned in 1989, more than 1800
 disease-causing mutations have been identified. They can
Pancreas-
be classified on the basis of clinical course of CF or the
 E xocrine dysfunction 
Pancreatitis
nature of the underlying defect. Mechanistically, they may
Diabetes
result in reduced quantity of functional CFTR that reaches
the cell surface or reduced function of CFTR that reaches
Intestine
the cell surface. As we shall see these differences impact
 Neonatal obstruction 
(meconium ileus)
on the developiment of treatiment strategies. They can also
Distal obstruction
be classified as severe or mild, depending on the clinical
phenotype. Severe mutations are associated with complete
loss of CFTR protein function, whereas mild mutations
Male reproductive tract
allow soime residual function. The most common severe
Azoospermia
Infertility
CFTR mutation is a deletion of three nucleotides coding for
Bilateral obstruction of vas deferens
phenylalanine at amino acid position 508 (4F508).
This
Fig. 7.4 Tissues affected in patients with CF. (Adapted from Cutting GR: Cystic
causes misfolding and total loss of the CFTR. Worldwide,
fibrosis genetics: from molecular understonding to clinical opplication. Nat Rev
AF508 mutation is found in approximately 70% of patients
Genet 16:45,2015.)
with CF. Since CF is an autosoimal recessive disease,
affected persons harbor mutations on both alleles. As dis-
cussed later, the nature of mutations on the two alleles
 intestine of infants. Sometimes these cause small bowel obstruc-
influences the overall phenotype, as well as organ-specific
tion, known as meconium ileus.
manifestations. Although CF reimains one of the best-
 The pulmonary changes are the most serious complica-
known examples of the "one gene-one disease" axiom,
tions of this disease (Fig. 7.6). These changes stem from obstruc-
there is increasing evidence that other genes modify the
tion of the air passages by the viscous mucus secretions of
frequency and severity of organ-specific manifestations.
submucosal glands and superimposed infections. The bronchioles
Examples of modifier genes include mannose-binding
often are distended with thick mucus, associated with marked
lectin 2 (MBL2) and transforiming growth factor-β1 (TGF-
 hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the mucus-secreting cells. Super-
β1). It is postulated that polyimorphisms in these genes
 imposed infections give rise to severe chronic bronchitis and
influence the ability of the lungs to tolerate infections with
virulent microbes (see later), thus modifying the natural
history of CF.
MORPHOLOGY
 Even "classic" CF can present with a multitude of manifestations
(Fig. 7.4). Pancreatic abnormalities are present in 85% to 90%
of patients. In the milder cases, there may be only accumulations
of mucus in the small ducts, with some dilation of the exocrine
glands. In more advanced cases, usually seen in older children or
adolescents, the ducts are totally plugged, causing atrophy of the
exocrine glands and progressive fibrosis (Fig. 7.5). The total loss
of pancreatic exocrine secretion impairs fat absorption and may
lead to vitamin A deficiency. This may contribute to squamous
metaplasia of the lining epithelium of the pancreatic ducts, which
may exacerbate injury caused by the inspissated mucus secre-
Fig. 7.5 Mild to moderate changes of CF in the pancreas. The ducts are
tions.Thick viscid plugs of mucus also may be found in the small 
dlated and plugged with eosinophilic mucin,and the parenchymal glands are
atrophic and replaced by fibrous tissue.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
253
is  not required — the  pancreas-sufficient  phenotype.
Pancreatic insufficiency is associated with malabsorption
of protein and fat and increased fecal loss. Manifestations
of malabsorption (e.g., large, foul-simelling stools; abdomi-
nal distention; poor weight gain) appear during the first
year of life. The faulty fat absorption imay induce defi-
ciency states of the fat-soluble vitaimins, resulting in mani-
festations of avitaminosis A, D, or K. Hypoproteinemia
may be severe enough to cause generalized edema. Persis-
tent diarrhea may result in rectal prolapse in as many as
10% of children with CF. The pancreas-sufficient pheno-
type usually is not associated with other gastrointestinal
complications, and in general, these patients demonstrate
excellent growth and development. In contrast to exocrine
insufficiency, endocrine insufficiency (ie., diabetes)
is
uncoimmon in CF and occurs late in the course of the
disease especially with improved survival of patients with
CF.
Cardiorespiratory complications, such as chronic cough,
persistent lung infections, obstructive pulnonary disease,
and cor pulmonale, constitute the most coimmon cause of
death (accounting for approximately 80% of fatalities) in
patients who receive follow-up care in most CF centers
Fig. 7.6 Lungs of a patient who died of cystic fibrosis. Extensive mucous
plugging and dlation of the tracheobronchial tree are apparent. The pul-
sd go %os 'ae go sia st 4g sa pa a u
monary parenchyma is consolidated by a combination of both secretions
with classic CF harbor P. aeruginosa, and 3.5% harbor B.
and pneumonia; the greenish discoloration is the product of Pseudomo-
cpacia. With the indiscriminate use of antibiotic prophy-
nas infections. (Courtesy of Dr Eduordo Yunis: Childrens Hospital of Pitsburgh,
laxis, there has been an unfortunate resurgence of resis-
Pittsburgh,Pennsyivonia.
tant strains of Pseudomoras in many patients. Significant
liver disease occurs late in the natural history of CF and
 is foreshadowed by pulmonary and pancreatic involve-
bronchiectasis. Development of lung abscesses is common. Staph-
 ment; with increasing life expectancy, liver disease is
ylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, and Pseudomonas aeru-
now the third most coimunon cause of death in patients
 ginosa are the three most common organisms responsible for
with CF (after cardiopulmonary and transplant-related 
lung infections. Even more sinister is the increasing frequency of
complications). More extensive DNA sequencing has
infection with another pseudomonad, Burkhoideria cepacia. This 
shown that the spectrum of diseases caused by gerimline
 opportunistic bacterium is particularly hardy, and infection with 
CFTR mutations (either biallelic or in heterozygous car-
this organism has been associated with fulminant illness ("cepacia
riers) is broader than the "classic" multisysten disease
syndrome"). The liver involvement follows the same basic
described earlier. For example, soime patients suffering
pattern. Bile canaliculi are plugged by mucinous material, accom-
from recurrent bouts of abdominal pain and pancreatitis
panied by ductular proliferation and portal inflammation. Hepatic
since childhood who were previously classified as having
steatosis ("fatty liver") is a common finding in liver biopsies.
"idiopathic" chronic pancreatitis are now known to harbor
With time, cirrhosis develops, resulting in diffuse hepatic nodu-
biallelic CFTR variants that are distinct from those seen in
larity. Such severe hepatic involvement is encountered in less
"classic" CF. Patients with isolated pancreatitis or bilateral
than l0% of patients. Azoospermia and infertility are found
absence of vas deferens (see earlier) resulting from CFTR
in 95% of the affected males who survive to adulthood; bilateral
mutations are included under the umbrella of "CFTR-
absence of the vas deferens is a frequent finding in these
opathies." Similarly, whereas CF carriers were initially
 patients. In some males, this may be the only feature suggesting
thought to be asyimptomatic, studies suggest that they
 an underlying CFTR mutation.
have an increased lifetime risk for chronic lung disease
In most cases, the diagnosis of CF is based on persistently
elevated sweat electrolyte concentrations (often the mother
Cinical Course
es saisn, juenun ra asnaq sisouep a san
 In few childhood diseases are clinical manifestations as
characteristic clinical findings (sinopulmonary disease
protean as those of CF (Fig. 7.4). Approximately 5% to 10%
and gastrointestinal manifestations), or a family history.
of the cases come to clinical attention at birth or soon after
 Sequencing the CFTR geneis the gold standard for diagnosis
because of an attack of meconiuin ileus. Exocrine pancre-
of CF.
atic insufficiency occurs in a majority (85% to 90%) of
 There have been major improveiments in the manage-
 patients and is associated with “severe" CFTR mutations
 ment of acute and chronic complications of CF, including
on both alleles (e.g., 4F508/4F508). By contrast, 10% to 15%
more potent anti-imicrobial therapies, pancreatic enzyime
 s, auo pue aaas, auo aany oqm sund go
replaceiment, and bilateral lung transplantation. Impor-
mutation, or two "mild" CFTR mutations, retain sufficient
 tantly, two new forims of treatiment aimed at increasing
 pancreatic exocrine function that enzyme supplementation
CFTR protein function in certain CFTR variants have been
http://ebooksmedicine.net
254
CHAPTER７
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
approved. For example, a group of agents known as CFTR
than 60. About one-third of these children are never able
"potentiators" are used in a minority (~3% to 5%) of CF
to walk, and two-thirds cannot talk. Seizures, other neuro-
patients who harbor a G155D mutation in the CFTR gene.
logic abnormalities, decreased pigmentation of hair and
In this variant, functionally defective CFTR is present in
skin, and eczeima often accompany the mental retardation
otherwise normal amounts at the cell membrane; the orally
 in untreated children. Hyperphenylalanineimia and the
bioavailable CFTR "potentiator" partially restores the criti-
resultant imental retardation can be avoided by restricting
cal ion transport functions to the defective channel. Another
phenylalanine intake early in life. Hence, several screening
approved drug contains a combination of two agents- one
procedures are routinely perforimed to detect PKU in the
the aforeimentioned potentiator and the second a drug that
immediate postnatal period.
increases the transport of the defective A508 CFTR protein
Many female patients with PKU who receive dietary
to the cell meimbrane. It is too early deterimine the impact
 treatiment beginning early in life reach childbearing age
 of the eimerging molecular therapies on prognosis and sur-
and are clinically norimal. Most of them have marked
vival. Overall, improved management of CF have extended
hyperphenylalaninemia, because dietary treatment is dis-
the median life expectancy to close to 40 years and, is
continued after they reach adulthood. Between 75% and
steadily changing a lethai disease of childhood into a
90% of children born to such women are mentally retarded
chronic disease of adults.
and microcephalic, and 15% have congenital heart disease,
even though the infants theimselves are heterozygotes. This
syndroime, termed maternal PKU, results from the terato-
 genic effects of phenylalanine or its metabolites that cross
SUMMARY
the placenta and affect specific fetal organs during devel-
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
opment. The presence and severity of the fetal anoimalies
+ CF is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in 
directly correlate with the maternal phenylalanine level, so
the CFTR gene encoding the CF transmembrane regulator.
it is imperative that maternal dietary restriction of phenyl-
+ The principal defect is of chloride ion transport, resulting in 
alanine be initiated before conception and continued
high salt concentrations in sweat and in viscous luminal secre-
throughout pregnancy.
tions in respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts.
The biochemical abnormality in PKU is an inability to
CFTR mutations can be severe (△F508), resulting in multisys-
convert phenylalanine into tyrosine. In normal children,
+
tem disease, or mild, with limited disease extent and severity.
less than 50% of the dietary intake of phenylalanine is
+ Cardiopulmonary complications constitute the most common
necessary for protein synthesis. The remainder is converted
to tyrosine by the phenylalanine hydroxylase system (Fig.
cause of death; pulmonary infections, especially with resistant
Pseudomonas or Burkhoideria species, are frequent. Bronchiec-
7.7). When phenylalanine metabolism is blocked because
tasis and right-sided heart failure are long-term sequelae.
of a lack of PAH enzyme, shunt pathways coime into play,
a u pxa ae  s s 
+ Pancreatic insufficiency is extremely common;infertility caused 
by congenital bilateral absence of vas deferens is a character-
amounts in the urine and in the sweat. These iimpart a
istic finding in adult patients with CF.
strong musty or mousy odor to affected infants. It is
+ Liver disease, including cirrhosis, is increasing in frequency as
believed that excess phenylalanine or its metabolites con-
life expectancy increases.
tribute to the brain damage in PKU. Concomitant lack of
+ Molecular therapies that enhance the transport or stability of
tyrosine (Fig. 7.7), a precursor of melanin, is responsible
mutant CFTR protein are useful in patients who harbor certain 
for the light color of hair and skin.
CFTR alleles.
At the molecular level, approximately 500 mutant
alleles of the PAH gene have been identified, only some
of which cause a severe deficiency of the enzyime. Infants
with mutations resulting in a severe lack of PAH activity
Diseases Caused by Mutations in Genes Encoding
present with the classic features of PKU, whereas those
Enzyme Proteins 
with some residual activity present with milder disease
 or may be asyimptoimatic, a condition referred to as benign
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
yperpherylalaninemia. Because the numerous disease-
PKU results from mutations that cause a severe lack
causing alleles of the PAH gene, complicate molecular
of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). It
diagnosis, measurement of serum phenylalanine levels
affects 1 in 10,000 live-born white infants and there are
is used to differentiate benign hyperphenylalaninemia
several variants of this disease. The most comumon form,
from PKU; the levels in the latter disorder typically are ≥5
referred to as classic phenylketonuria, is coimunon in
times higher than normal. After a biocheimical diagnosis
persons of Scandinavian descent and is distinctly uncom-
is established, the specific mutation causing PKU can be
mon in African-American and Jewish populations.
determined. With this inforimation, carrier testing of at-risk
Homozygotes with this autosomal recessive disorder
family members can be perforimed. Currently, enzyime
classically have a severe lack of PAH, leading to hyperphe-
replacement therapy is being tried as a imethod for reduc-
nylalaninemia and PKU. Affected infants are normal at
ing circulating phenylalanine levels in patients with classic
birth but within a few weeks exhibit a rising plasima
 PKU. The replacement enzyme, known as phenylalanine
phenylalanine level, which impairs brain developiment.
aimmonia lyase (or PAL), converts excess phenylalanine to
Usually, by 6 months of life, severe mental retardation
 ammonia and other nontoxic metabolites.
becomes all too evident; less than 4% of untreated phenyl-
 Although 98% of cases of hyperphenylalanineimia are
 ketonuric children have intelligence quotients (IQs) greater
 attributable to mutations in PAH, approximately 2% arise
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
255
 Phenylalanine 
Tetrahydrobiopterin.
NAD
(BH4)
+ 02
Phenylalanine
 Dihydropteridine
hydroxylase (PAH)
reductase (DHPR)
Tyrosine
Dihydrobiopterin
NADH
+ H2O
(BH2)
Fig. 7.7 The phenylalanine hydroxylase system. NADH, Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, reduced form.
from abnorimalities in synthesis or recycling of the cofactor
clear understanding of the mechanism of injury to the
tetrahydrobiopterin (Fig. 7.7). Clinical recognition of these
 brain, although elevated galactitol levels in neuronal
variant forims is important because these patients cannot
 tissues suggests that this may contribute to the damage.
be treated by dietary restriction of phenylalanine alone, but
Almost from birth, affected infants fail to thrive. Vomit-
 also require supplementation with tetrahydrobiopterin,
-sasu yiul jo saep man e uim readde eayeip pue bu
certain neurotransimitter precursors, and folic acid.
tion. Jaundice and hepatomegaly usually become evident
during the first week of life. Accumulation of galactose and
 galactose-1-phosphate in the kidney impairs ainino acid
SUMMARY
transport, resulting in aminoaciduria. Fulminant Esche-
PHENYLKETONURIA
nchia coli septiceinia occurs with increased frequency.
 Newborn screening tests are widely utilized in the United
· PKU is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a lack of
States. They depend on fluoroimetric assay of GALT enzyme
 the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase and a consequent inabil-
activity on a dried blood spot. A positive screening test
ity to metabolize phenylalanine.
 Imust be confirmed by assay of GALT levels in RBC. Ante-
+ Clinical features of untreated PKU may include severe mental
natal diagnosis is possible by assay of GALT activity in
 retardation, seizures, and decreased pigmentation of skin,
cultured amniotic fluid cells or deterimination of galactitol
which can be avoided by restricting the intake of phenylalanine
level in amniotic fluid supernatant.
in the diet.
 Many of the clinical and morphologic changes of
· Female patients with PKU who discontinue dietary treatment
 galactosemia can be prevented or ameliorated by removal
can give birth to children with malformations and neurologic
of galactose from the diet for at least the first 2 years of
impairment resulting from transplacental passage of phenylala-
life. If instituted soon after birth, this diet prevents cata-
nine metabolites.
racts and liver damage and perimits almost normal devel-
opment. Even with dietary restrictions, however, older
pue iaprosip yoaads e Aq paioae are Auanbaij sjuaned
Galactosemia
gonadal failure (especially premature ovarian failure) and,
 Galactosemia is an autosomal recessive disorder of galac-
less commonly, by an ataxic condition.
 tose metabolism resulting from a mutation in the gene
encoding the enzyme galactose-I-phosphate uridyltrans-
SUMMARY
ferase (GALT). It affects 1 in 60,000 live-born infants. Nor-
GALACTOSEMIA
mally, lactase splits lactose, the major carbohydrate of
mammalian milk, into glucose and galactose in the intesti-
+ Galactosemia is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
nal microvilli. Galactose is then converted to glucose in
lack of the GALT enzyme, leading to the accumulation of 
several steps, in one of which the enzyme GALT is required.
galactose- I -phosphate and its metabolites in tissues.
As a result of this transferase deficiency, galactose-l-phos-
Clinical features may include jaundice, liver damage, cataracts,
 phate and other metabolites, including galactitol, accumu-
neural damage, vomiting and diarrhea, and E. coli sepsis. Dietary
late in many tissues, including the liver, spleen, lens of the
restriction of galactose can prevent at least some of the more
eye, kidney, and cerebral cortex.
severe complications.
The liver, eyes, and brain bear the brunt of the damage.
The early-onset hepatomegaly results largely from fatty
change, but in time widespread scarring that closely
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
reseinbles the cirrhosis of alcohol abuse may supervene
Lysosomes, the digestive systeim of the cells, contain a
(Chapter 16). Opacification of the lens (cataract) develops,
variety of hydrolytic enzymes that are involved in the
probably because the lens absorbs water and swells as
 breakdown of coinplex substrates, such as sphingolipids
galactitol, produced by alternative metabolic pathways,
and mucopolysaccharides, into soluble end products.
accumulates and increases its tonicity. Nonspecific altera-
These large molecules may be derived from the turnover
 tions appear in the central nervous systen (CNS), includ-
of intracellular organelles that enter the lysosoimes by
ing loss of nerve cells, gliosis, and edeina. There is still no
Qutophagy, or they inay be acquired froim outside the cell
http://ebooksmedicine.net
256
CHAPTER 7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
by phagocytosis. With an inherited lack of a lysosoimal
lysosomal enzymes or proteins involved in substrate deg
enzyime, catabolisim of its substrate remains incomplete,
radation, endosomal sorting, or lysosomal meimbrane
leading to accumulation of the partially degraded insolu-
 integrity. Lysosoimal storage disorders are divided into cat-
ble metabolites within the lysosomes (Fig. 7.8). This is
egories based on the biochemical nature of the substrates
called primary storage. Stuffed with incompletely digested
and the accumulated metabolites. (Table 7.3). Within each
 macroinolecules, lysosomes becoime large and nunerous
group are several entities, each resulting froim the defi-
enough to interfere with normal cell functions. Because
ciency of a specific enzyime.
lysosomal function is also essential for autophagy, impaired
Although the combined frequency of lysosomal storage disor
ders (LSDs)is about 1 in 5000 live births, lysosomal dysfunction
strates such as polyubiquinated proteins and old and effete
may be involued in the etiotogy of several more-common diseases.
mitochondria. The absence of this quality-control mecha-
For example, an important genetic risk factor for develop-
nism causes accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria,
ing Parkinson disease is the carrier state for Gaucher
which can trigger the generation of free radicals and
 disease, and virtually all Gaucher disease patients develop
apoptosis.
Parkinson disease. Nieinann Pick C is another LSD con-
Approximately 60 lysosoimal storage diseases have
nected to the risk for Alzheimer disease. Such intercon-
been identified. These may result from abnorimalities of
nectedness steims from the multifunctionality of the
lysosome. For example, lysosomes play critical roles in (i)
autophagy, resulting from fusion with the autophagosome;
Complex substrate
un (im) pue (saosoeyd yim asny Aaq se 'nnn (
brane repair, through fusion with the plasma meimbrane.
neurologic impairiment that begins in childhood. Studies
 Nomal lysosomal
Lysosomal enzyme
show that several neurodegenerative LSDs also are associ-
degradation
deficiency
ated with a dysregulation of the imunune systeim. For
example, imnunosuppression occurs in Gaucher disease
A
and mucopolysaccharidoses VIl, whereas in Nieimann
Pick disease-type-Cl, hyperactivation of the imimune
systeim is seen. The mechanistic basis of linkage to imunu-
 nologic changes reimains to be deciphered.
Small
Despite this complexity, certain features are common to
diffusible
 most diseases in this group:
end products
· Autosomal recessive transimission
● Patient population consisting of infants and young
children
 Storage of insoluble interimediates in the mononuclear
 Frequent CNS involveiment with associated neuronal
damage
Cellular dysfunction caused not only by storage of undi-
Aas go apss e Aq ose ia  pas
PRIMARY
Stored nonmetabolized
events, for exaimple, macrophage activation and release
STORAGE
products
 of cytokines
Defective fusion of autophagosome with lysosome
 Most of these conditions are very rare, and their detailed 
 description is better relegated to specialized texts and
reviews. Only a few of the more comunon conditions are
Defective degradation of intracellular organelles
considered here.
Tay-Sachs Disease (GM2 Gangliosidosis: Deficiency in
Hexosaminidase β Subunit)
Accumulation of
SECONDARY
Accumulation
 toxic proteins 
 of aberrant 
Gangliosidoses are characterized by accumulation of
STORAGE
mitochondria
gangliosides, principally in the brain, as a result of a
deficiency of one of the lysosomal enzymes that catabo-
+
lize these glycolipids. Depending on the ganglioside
 Induction of 
CELL DEATH
Generation of
 involved, these disorders are subclassified into GM1 and
cell damage
 free radicals 
GM2 categories. Tay-Sachs disease,by far the mostcoimnon
of all gangliosidoses, is caused by loss-of-function muta-
Fig. 7.8 Pathogenesis of lysosomal storage diseases. In this example, a
tions of the β subunit of the enzyime hexosaminicdase A,
which is necessary for the degradation of GM2. More than
into soluble end products (A,B and C).If there is a deficiency or malfunction
of one of the enzymes (e.g., B), catabolism is incomplete,and insoluble inter-
100 mutations have been described; most disrupt protein
mediates accumulate in the lysosomes. In addition to this primary storage,
folding or intracellular transport. Tay-Sachs disease, similar
secondary storage and toxic effects result from defective autophagy.
to other lipid storage disorders, is most coimunon among
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
257
Table 7.3 Lysosomal Storage Disorders
Disease
Enzyme Deficiency
Major Accumulating Metabolites
Glycogenosis, type 2-Pompe
α-I,4-Glucosidase (lysosomal
Glycogen
disease
glucosidase)
Sphingolipidases
GMI gangliosidosis
GMI ganglioside β-galactosidase
GMI ganglioside, galactose-containing oligosaccharides
 Type I—-infantile, generalized 
Type 2——juvenile
GM2 gangliosidosis
Tay-Sachs disease
Hexosaminidase, α subunit 
GM2 ganglioside
Sandhoff disease
Hexosaminidase, β subunit 
 GM2 ganglioside, globoside 
GM2 gangliosidosis variant AB
Ganglioside activator protein
GM2 ganglioside
Sulfatidoses
 Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Arylsulfatase A
 Sulfatide
 Multiple sulfatase deficiency
 Arylsulfatase A, B, C; steroid sulfatase;
 Sulfatide, steroid sulfate, heparan sulfate, dermatan
iduronate sulfatase; heparan
sulfate
N-sulfatase
Krabbe disease
 Galactosylceramidase
Galactocerebroside
Fabry disease
α-Galactosidase A
Ceramide trihexoside
Gaucher disease
Glucocerebrosidase
Glucocerebroside
 Niemann-Pick disease: types A and B
 Sphingomyelinase
 Sphingomyelin
Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPss)
MPS I H (Hurler)
Q-L-lduronidase
Dermatan sulfate, heparan sulfate
MPS Il (Hunter)
l-lduronosulfate sulfatase
Mucolipidoses (MLs)
I-cell disease (ML Il) and pseudo-Hurler
 Deficiency of phosphorylating enzymes
Mucopolysaccharide, glycolipid
polydystrophy
 essential for the formation of
mannose-6-phosphate recognition
marker; acid hydrolases lacking the 
recognition marker cannot be
targeted to the lysosomes but are
secreted extracellularly
Other diseases of complex
carbohydrates
Fucosidosis
α-Fucosidase
Fucose-containing sphingolipids and glycoprotein
Mannosidosis
Q-Mannosidase
fragments
 Aspartylgly cosaminuria
 Aspartylglycosamine amide hydrolase
 Mannose-containing oligosaccharides
Aspartyl-2-deoxy-2-acetarmido-glycosylarmine
Other lysosomal storage diseases
Wolman disease
Acid lipase
Cholesterol esters, triglycerides
 Acid phosphate deficiency
Lysosomal acid phosphatase
Phosphate esters
Ashkenazi Jews, among whom the frequency of heterozy-
misfolded, it induces the so-called "unfolded protein"
 gous carriers is estimated to be 1 in 30. Heterozygote car-
response (Chapter 2). If such misfolded enzyimes are not
riers can be(
detected by measuring the
level
of
stabilized by chaperones, they undergo proteasoimal deg-
hexosaminidase in the serum or by DNA sequencing.
radation, leading to accumulation of toxic substrates and
 intermediates within neurons. These findings have spurred
accumulates in many tissues (e.g, heart, liver, spleen,
clinical trials of molecular chaperone therapy for some
nervous systein), but the involvement of neurons in the
variants of later-onset Tay-Sachs and other selected lyso-
central and autonomic nervous systems and retina domi-
soimal storage diseases. Such therapy involves the use of
 nates the clinical picture. The accumulation of GM2 occurs
synthetic chaperones that can cross the blood-brain barrier,
within neurons, axon cylinders of nerves, and glial cells
bind to the mutated protein, and enable its proper folding.
throughout the CNS. Affected cells appear swollen and
Sufficient functional enzyme can then be rescued to aime-
sometimes foamy (Fig. 7.9A). Electron microscopy shows
liorate the effects of the inborn error.
whorled onionskin-like configurations within lysosomes
In the most common acute infantile variant of Tay-Sachs
composed of layers of meimbranes (Fig. 7.9B). These patho-
disease, infants appear normal at birth, but motor weak-
logic changes are found throughout the CNS (including the
3bonomau Aq pamonog 'ae jo suuoul g oi e ie subaq ssau
spinal cord), peripheral nerves, and autonomic nervous 
 inpairiment, onset of blindness, and progressively more
system. The retina usually is involved as well, where the
 severe neurologic dysfunctions. Death occurs within 2 to 3
 pallor produced by swollen ganglion cells in the peripheral
years.
retina results in a contrasting "cherry red" spot in the rela-
tively unaffected central macula.
Niemann-Pick Disease Types A and B
The molecular basis for neuronal injury is not fully
 Type A and type B Niemann-Pick diseases are related
understood. Because in many cases the mutant protein is 
entities characterized by a primary deficiency of acid
http://ebooksmedicine.net
258
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
A
B
Fig. 7.9 Ganglion cells in Tay-Sachs disease. (A) Under the light microscope,a large neuron has obvious lipid vacuolation.(B) A portion of a neuron under
the electron microscope shows prominent lysosomes with whorled configurations just below part of the nucleus. (A, Courtesy of Dr. Arthur Weinberg, Depart-
Woshington.)
sphingomyelinase and the resultant accumulation of
disorder, with NPCl being responsible for a majority of
sphingomyelin. As with Tay-Sachs disease, Nienann-Pick
cases. Unlike most other lysosoimal storage diseases, NPC
disease types A and B are common in Ashkenazi Jews. The
results froim a primary defect in lipid transport. Affected
gene for acid sphingomyelinase maps to chromosoime
cells accumulate cholesterol as well as gangliosides such as
11p15.4 and is one of the imprinted genes that is preferen-
GM1 and GM2. Both NPC1 and NPC2 are involved in the
tially expressed from the maternal chromosome as a result
transport of free cholesterol froim the lysosoimes to the cyto-
of epigenetic silencing of the paternal gene (discussed
plasim. NPC is clinically heterogeneous. The most common
later).
form manifests in childhood and is marked by ataxia, verti-
 In type A, characterized by a severe deficiency of
cal supranuclear gaze palsy, dystonia, dysarthria, and psy-
sphingomyelinase, t
the  breakdown  of  sphingomyelin
chomotor regression.
Gaucher Disease
excess sphingomyelin accumulates in phagocytic cells and
in neurons. Macrophages become stuffed with droplets
Gaucher disease results from mutation in the gene that
 or particles of the coimplex lipid, inparting a fine vacu-
encodes glucocerebrosidase, and the resultant deficiency
olation or foaminess to the cytoplasim (Fig. 7.10). Electron
of this enzyme leads to an accumulation of glucocer-
 microscopy shows engorged secondary lysosoines that
ebroside, an intermediate in glycolipid metabolism,
often contain meimbranous cytoplasimic bodies reseinbling
in the mononuclear phagocytic cells. There are three
concentric lamellated myelin figures, soimetimes called
autosoimal recessive variants of Gaucher disease result-
"zebra" bodies. Because of their high content of phago-
 ing froim distinct allelic mutations. Coimunon to all is
cytic cells, the organs most severely affected are the spleen,
deficient activity of a glucocerebrosidase that cleaves the
liver, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and lungs. The splenic
glucose residue fron ceramide. Norinally, macrophages
enlargeiment may be striking. In addition, the entire CNS,
including the spinal cord and ganglia, is involved in this
inexorable process. The affected neurons are enlarged and
vacuolated as a result of the accumulation of lipids. This
o ss m  u sisar s
and severe neurologic deterioration. Death usually occurs
within the first 3 years of life. By comparison, patients
with the type B variant, which is associated with mutant
sphigomyelinase with some residual activity, have organo-
megaly but no neurologic manifestations. Estimation of
sphingomyelinase activity in the leukocytes can be used
for diagnosis of suspected cases, as well as for detection
of carriers. Molecular genetic tests are also available for
diagnosis at specialized centers.
Niemann-Pick Disease Type C
Although previously considered to be related to type A
and type B Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is quite
Fig. 7.10 Niemann-Pick disease in liver. The hepatocytes and Kupffer cells
distinct at the biocheimical and molecular levels and is
have a foamy, vacuolated appearance resulting from deposition of lipids.
more common than types A and B combined. Mutations in
(Courtesy of Dr. Arthur Weinberg, Department of Pothology, University of Texas
two related genes, NPC1 and NPC2, can give rise to this
Southwestem Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Mendelian Disorders: Diseases Caused by Single-Gene Defects
259
particularly in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow, sequen-
There is a reciprocal relationship between the level of this
tially degrade glycolipids derived from the breakdown
enzyime and alpha synuclein. The latter is involved in
 of senescent blood cels. In Gaucher disease, the degra-
the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (Chapter 24). The
dation stops at the level of glucocerebrosides, which
level of glucocerebrosides in leukocytes or cultured fibro-
accumulate in macrophages. These cells- the so-called
blasts is helpful in diagnosis and in the detection of het-
"Gaucher cells"- becoime enlarged, with soime reaching
erozygote carriers. DNA testing is also available in select
a diameter as great as 100 μum, because of the presence of
populations.
distended lysosomes, and they acquire a pathognomonic
 Currently, there are two approved therapies for type I
cytoplasmic appearance characterized as "wrinkled tissue
Gaucher disease. The first is lifelong enzyime replaceiment
paper" (Fig. 7.11). It is evident now that Gaucher disease
therapy via infusion of recombinant glucocerebrosidase.
is caused not just by the burden of storage material but
The second, known as substrate reduction therapy, involves
also by activation of the macrophages. High levels of
oral intake of an inhibitor of the enzyme glucosylceraimide
 macrophage-derived cytokines, such as interleukins (IL-1,
synthase. This leads to reduced systeimic levels of gluco-
IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), are found in affected
cerebroside, the substrate for the defective enzyime in
tissues.
Gaucher disease. Clinical trials have confirmed that sub-
One variant, type l, also called the chronic nonneurono-
strate reduction therapy leads to reduced spleen and liver
pathic form, accounts for 99% of cases of Gaucher disease. It
sizes, improved blood counts, and enhanced skeletal func-
is characterized by clinical or radiographic bone involve-
ment (osteopenia, focal lytic lesions, and osteonecrosis)
through transplant of heinatopoietic stem cells containing
in 70% to 100% of cases. Additional features are hepa-
the corrected enzyme.
tosplenoimegaly and  the absence of  CNS involveiment.
The spleen often enlarges to massive proportions, filling
Mucopolysaccharidoses
the entire abdomen. Gaucher cells are found in the liver,
Mucopolysaccharidoses  (MPSs)  are characterized by
spleen, lyimph nodes, and bone marrow. Marrow replace-
defective degradation and excessive storage of  muco-
Iment and cortical erosion may produce radiographically
 polysaccharides in various tissues. Recall that mucopoly-
visible skeletal lesions, and peripheral blood cytopenias.
saccharides are part of the extracellular matrix and are
-anoje au Aq pasnes are saueuo auoq iey paaaaq s! H
synthesized by connective tissue fibroblasts. Most muco-
mentioned macrophage-derived cytokines. Type 1 is most
polysaccharide is secreted, but a certain fraction is degraded
comnon in Ashkenazi Jews; unlike other variants, it is
within lysosome through a catabolic pathway involving
coimpatible with long life. Neurologic signs and syimptoms
 multiple enzyimes. Several clinical variants of MPS, classi-
-n asa 'z adi un suna e pue z sad azar
fied numerically from MPS I to MPS VIl, have been
festations appear during infancy (acute infantile neurono-
 described, each resulting from the deficiency of one spe-
pathic form) and are more severe, whereas in type 3, they
cific enzyme in this pathway. The mucopolysaccharides
emerge later and are milder (chronic neuronopathic form).
that accumulate within the tissues include derimatan
Although the liver and spleen also are involved, the clinical
sulfate, heparan sulfate, keratan sulfate, and (in some
features in types 2 and 3 are dominated by neurologic dis-
cases) chondroitin sulfate.
turbances, including convulsions and progressive mental
Hepatosplenomegaly, skeletal deformities, lesions of heart
deterioration. As mentioned earlier mutation of the gluco-
alves, subendotheliat arteriat deposits,particularly in the coro-
cerebroside gene is a very important risk factor for Parkin-
naryarteriesandleinsinthebrain,refaure thatare seenn
son disease. Patients with Gaucher disease have a 20 fold
all of the MPSs. In imany of the more protracted syndromes,
higher risk of developing Parkinson disease (compared to
 coronary subendothelial lesions lead to myocardial ische-
controls) and 5-10% of patients with Parkinson disease
Imia. Thus, myocardial infarction and cardiac decompensa-
have mutations in the gene encoding glucocerebrosidase.
tion are important causes of death. Most cases are associated
Fig. 7.ll Gaucher disease involving the bone marrow. (A) Gaucher cells with abundant lipid-laden "wrinkled" cytoplasm.(B) Electron micrograph of Gaucher
cells with elongated distended lysosomes. (Courtesy of Dr Matthew Fries, Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestem Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
260
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
with coarse facial features, clouding of the cornea, joint
stiffness, and mental retardation. Urinary excretion of the
hepatosplenomegaly and bone erosion. Types 2 and 3 are char-
acterized by variable neuronal involvement.
accumulated mucopolysaccharides often is increased. With
· MPSs result from accumulation of mucopolysaccharides in
all of these disorders except one, the mode of inheritance
many tissues including liver, spleen, heart, blood vessels, brain,
is autosomal recessive; the exception, Hunter syndrome, is
an X-linked recessive disease. Of the seven recognized vari-
cornea, and joints. Affected patients in all forms have coarse 
facial features. Manifestations of Hurler syndrome include
ants, only two well-characterized syndromes are discussed
briefly here.
corneal clouding, coronary arterial and valvular deposits, and
·MPs type I, also known as Hurler syndrome, is caused by a
death in childhood. Hunter syndrome is associated with a
deficiency of α-L-icturonidase. In Hurler syndrome, affected
milder clinical course.
children have a life expectancy of 6 to 10 years, and
death is often a result of cardiac complications. Accu-
 mulation of derimatan sulfate and heparan sulfate is
seen in cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system, in
Glycogen Storage Diseases (Glycogenoses)
fibroblasts, and within endothelium and smooth muscle
An inherited deficiency of any one of the enzymes
cells of the vascular wall. The affected cells are swollen
involved in glycogen synthesis or degradation can result
and have clear cytoplasn, resulting froin the accumula-
 in excessive accumulation of glycogen or some abnormal
tion of inaterial positive for periodic acid-Schiff staining
form of glycogen in various tissues. The type of glycogen
within engorged,  vacuolated lysosoimes. Lysosomal
stored, its intracellular location, and the tissue distribution
 inclusions also are found in neurons, accounting for the
of the affected cells vary depending on the specific enzyme
mental retardation.
deficiency. Regardless of the tissue or cells affected, the
glycogen most often is stored within the cytoplasim, or
drome inits mode of inheritance (X-linked), the absence of
sometimes within nuclei. One variant, Poimpe disease, is a
crmeal clouding, and often its milder clinical course. As in
forim of lysosoimal storage disease, because the missing
Hurler syndrome, the accumulated mucopolysaccha-
enzyime is localized to lysosoimes. Most glycogenoses are
rides in Hunter syndrome are heparan sulfate and der-
inherited as autosomal recessive diseases, as is common
matan sulfate, but this results from a deficiency of
with "imissing enzyime" syndroimes.
L-iduronate sulfatase. Despite the difference in enzyme
Approximately a dozen forims of glycogenoses have
deficiency, an accumulation of identical substrates
been described in association with specific enzyime defi-
occurs because breakdown of heparan sulfate and der-
ciencies. Based on pathophysiologic findings, they can be
matan sulfate requires both c-L-iduronidase and the
grouped into three categories (Table 7.4):
sulfatase; if either one is missing, further degradation is
Hepatic type. Liver contains several enzyimes that synthe-
blocked. Diagnosis is made by measuring the level of
size glycogen for storage and also break it down into
enzyme in leukocytes. DNA diagnosis is not routinely
free glucose. Hence, a deficiency of the hepatic enzymes
employed because of the large number of alellic
involved in glycogen metabolisim is associated with two
mutations.
major clinical effects: enlargeiment of the liver due to
storage of glycogen and hypoglyceimia due to a failure
of glucose production (Fig. 7.12). Von Gierke disease (type
I glycogenosis), resulting froim a lack of glucose-6-
SUMMARY
phosphatase, is the most important example of the
LYSOSOMAL STORAGE DISEASES
hepatic forim of glycogenosis (Table 7.4).
Myopathic type. In striated muscle, glycogen is an impor-
+ Tay-Sachs disease is caused by an inability to metabolize GM2
 gangliosides because of a lack of the β subunit of lysosomal
tant source of energy. Not surprisingly, most forms of
glycogen storage disease affect muscles. When enzyimes
hexosaminidase. GM2 gangliosides accumulate in the CNS and
that are involved in glycolysis are deficient, glycogen
cause severe mental retardation, blindness, motor weakness,
and death by 2 to 3 years of age.
storage occurs in muscles and there is an associated
+ Niemann-Pick disease typesA and B are caused by a deficiency
muscle weakness due to impaired energy production.
Typically, the myopathic forms of glycogen storage dis-
of sphingomyelinase. In the more severe, type A variant, accu-
eases are marked by muscle craimps after exercise, myo-
mulation of sphingomyelin in the nervous system results in
globinuria, and failure of exercise to induce an elevation
neuronal damage. Sphingomyelin also is stored in phagocytes
in blood lactate levels because of a block in glycolysis.
within the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes, causing
McArdle disease (type V glycogenosis), resulting from a
their enlargement. In type B, neuronal damage is not present.
deficiency of muscle phosphorylase, is the prototype of
+ Niemann-Pick disease type C is caused by a defect in choles-
myopathic glycogenoses.
terol transport and resultant accumulation of cholesterol and
-ap e Aq pasnes st (asasp aduod) sisouaosi 1ladai
 gangliosides in the nervous system. Affected children exhibit 
 ataxia, dysarthria, and psychomotor regression.
ciency of lysosoimal acid maltase and is associated with
deposition of glycogen in virtually every organ, but car-
+
Gaucher disease results from lack of the lysosomal enzyme
diomegaly is most prominent. Most affected patients die
glucocerebrosidase and accumulation of glucocerebroside in 
mononuclear phagocytic cells. In the most common, type I
within 2 years of onset of cardiorespiratory failure.
Therapy with the imissing enzyme (glucosidase) can
variant, affected phagocytes become enlarged (Gaucher cells)
reverse cardiac muscle damage and modestly increase
and accumulate in liver, spleen, and bone marrow, causing
longevity.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Complex Multigenic Disorders
261
Table 7.4 Principal Subgroups of Glycogenoses
Clinicopathologic
Enzyme
Category
Specific Type
Deficiency
Morphologic Changes
Clinical Features
Hepatic type
Hepatorenal (von
Glucose-6-
Hepatomegaly: intracytoplasmic
In untreated patients, failure to
Gierke disease,
 phosphatase
accumulations of glycogen 
thrive, stunted growth,
type l)
and small amounts of lipid; 
Xesaouas pue Xesswoedy
intranuclear gycogen
Hypogycemia resulting from failure
 Renomegaly: intracytoplasmic
 of glucose mobilization, often 
accumulations of glycogen in 
leading to convulsions
cortical tubular epithelial cells
 Hyperlipidemia and hyperuricemia
resulting from deranged glucose
metabolism; rmany patients develop
 gout and skin xanthomas
 Bleeding tendency caused by platelet
dysfunction
With treatment (providing
continuous source of glucose),
most patients survive and develop
late complications (e.g., hepatic
adenomas)
Myopathic type
McArdle disease
Muscle
 Skeletal muscle ony:
 Painful cramps associated with
(type V)
phosphorylase
accumulations of glycogen
strenuous exercise
predominant in
 Myoglobinuria occurs in 50% of 
subsarcolemmal location 
cases
Onset in adulthood (>20 year)
Muscular exercise fails to raise
 lactate level in venous blood
 Compatible with normal longevity
Miscellaneous type
Generalized
Lysosomal
 Mild hepatomegaly: ballooning 
Massive cardiomegaly, muscle
glycogenosis
glucosidase (acid
of lysosomes with glycogen
hypotonia, and cardiorespiratory
(Pompe disease,
maltase)
teating lacy cytoplasmic
failure before age 2
type Il)
pattern
 Milder adult form with only skeletal
Cardiomegaly: gycogen within 
 muscle involvement manifests with
sarcoplasm as well as
chronic myopathy
membrane-bound 
Skeletal muscle: similar to heart
(see earlier, under
cardiomegaly)
SUMMARY
be transimitted to the offspring. These mutant genes pre-
dispose the offspring to hereditary tumors, a topic dis-
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASES
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 6. A few salient exaimples
 of familial neoplasms arising in children are discussed later
· Inherited deficiency of enzymes involved in glycogen metabo-
lism can result in storage of normal or abnormal forms of
 in this chapter.
 glycogen, predominantly in liver or muscles or in all tissues.
+ In the hepatic form (von Gierke disease), liver cells store gly-
COMPLEX MULTIGENIC DISORDERS
cogen because of a lack of hepatic glucose-6-phosphatase.
· There are several myopathic forms, including McArdle disease,
 in which lack of muscle phosphorylase gives rise to storage in 
Complex multigenic disorders -so-called "multifactorial
 Or polygenic disorders"-are caused by interactions
skeletal muscles and cramps after exercise.
+ In Pompe disease there is lack of lysosomal acid maltase, and
between genetic variants and environmental factors. A
all organs are affected, but heart involvement is predominant.
 genetic variant that occurs in at least 1% of the population
is called a polymorphism. According to the common
disease-common variant hypothesis, complex multigenic
Diseases Caused by Mutations in Genes Encoding
disorders occur when many polymorphisims, each with a
Proteins That Regulate Cell Growth
modest effect and low penetrance, are coinherited. Two
additional important facts have emerged from studies of
As detailed in Chapter 6, two classes of genes, protoonco-
common complex disorders such as type 1 diabetes:
genes and tumor suppressor
r genes, regulate norimal cell
?
 Although complex disorders result from the collective
growth. Mutations affecting these genes, most often in
inheritance of many polymorphisims, different polymor-
 somatic cells, are involved in the pathogenesis of tumors.
phisims vary in significance. For exaimple, of the 20 to 30
 In approximately 5% to 10% of all cancers, however, muta-
genes implicated in type 1 diabetes, 6 or 7 are most
 tions affecting certain tumor suppressor genes are present
important, and a few HLA alleles contribute more than
 in all cells of the body, including germ cells, and hence can
50% of the risk (Chapter 20).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
262
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
NORMAL
of inheritance must be done with caution. Such attribution
Liver
depends on many factors but first on faimilial clustering
and the exclusion of mendelian and chromosomal modes
Glycogen 
 of transimission. A range of levels of severity of a disease
is suggestive of a complex multigenic disorder, but, as
Glucose
Various tissues
pointed out earlier, variable expressivity and reduced pen-
etrance of single mutant genes also may account for this
Blood
glucose
phenomenon. Because of these issues, it is sometimes dif-
ficult to distinguish between mendelian and multifactorial
o.
Glycolysis
disorders.
Glucose -
Muscle
Energy 
CYTOGENETIC DISORDERS
Chromosomal abnormalities occur much more frequently
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE—HEPATIC TYPE
than is generally appreciated. It is estimated that approxi-
mately 1 in 200 newborn infants has some form of chromo-
somal abnorimality. The figure is much higher in fetuses
that do not survive to terim; in as many as 50% of first-
Glycogen 
 trimester spontaneous abortions, the fetus may have a
Glucose
chromosomal abnormality. Cytogenetic disorders result
Low blood glucose
from alterations in the number or structure of chromo-
somes and may affect autosomes or sex chromosoimes.
Before eimbarking on a discussion of chroimosoimal
 aberrations, it is appropriate to review karyotyping as the
basic tool of the cytogeneticist. A karyotype is a photo-
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE-MYOPATHIC TYPE
graphic representation of a stained metaphase spread in
which the chromosomes are arranged in order of decreas-
Glycolysis
ing length. A variety of techniques for staining chromo-
Glucose
Low
somes has been developed. With the widely used Gieimsa
stain (G banding) technique, each chroimosoime set can be
Glycoger
energy
: output 
 e go d a e ssassd on s
and dark bands of variable widths (Fig. 7.13). The use of
banding techniques allows identification of each chromo-
Fig. 7.12 (Top) A simplified scheme of normal glycogen metabolism in the
some, and can detect and localize structural abnorimalities
liver and skeletal muscles. (Middie) The effects of an inherited deficiency of 
large enough to produce changes in banding pattern
hepatic enzymes involved in glycogen metabolism. (Bottom) The conse-
(described later).
quences of a genetic deficiency in the enzymes that metabolize glycogen in
skeletal muscles.
Numeric Abnormalities
In humans, the normal chromosome count is 46 (i.e., 2n =
 Some polymorphisims are comnon to multiple diseases
46). Any exact multiple of the haploid number (n) is
of the same type, whereas others are disease-specific.
called euploit. Chromosoime numbers such as 3n and 4n
This observation is well illustrated in inunune-imediated
are called polyploid. Polyploidy generally results in a
inflamnatory diseases (Chapter 5).
spontaneous abortion. Any number that is not an exact
 Many of the disease-associated polymorphisms are in
multiple of n is called aneuploid. The chief cause of aneu-
noncoding regions so they likely affect epigenetic regu-
 ploidy is nondisjunction of a hoimologous pair of chromo-
lation of gene expression.
somes at the first meiotic division or a failure of sister
chromatids to separate during the second meiotic divi-
 Several norimal phenotypic characteristics are governed
sion. The latter also may occur during mitosis in soimatic
by multigenic inheritance, such as hair color, eye color,
cells, leading to the production of two aneuploid cells.
skin color, height, and intelligence. These characteristics
Failure of pairing of homologous chroimosoimes followed
(also known as quantitative trait loci [QTLs]) show a con-
by randoim assortiment (anaphase lag) also can lead to
tinuous variation within, as well as across, all population
 aneuploidy. When nondisjunction occurs at the time of
groups. Environmental influences, however, significantly
Imeiosis, the gametes forimed have either an extra chroimo-
some (n + l) or one less chroimosoime (n - 1). Fertilization
example, type 2 diabetes mellitus has many of the features
 of such gaimetes by norimal gametes would result in two
of a complex multigenic disorder. It is well recognized
types of zygotes: trisoimic, with an extra chroimosoime (2n
clinically that affected persons often first exhibit clinical
+ 1), or monosoimic (2n - 1). Monosoiny involving an
manifestations of this disease after weight gain. Thus,
autosome is incoimpatible with life, whereas trisoimies of
obesity, as well as other environmental influences, unimasks
certain autosomes and monosomy involving sex chroimo-
the diabetic genetic trait. Assigning a disease to this mode
somes are compatible with life. These, as we shall see, are
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cytogenetic Disorders
263
Arm
Region
Band
Sub-band
3
2
3
10
12
2
3
2
3
13
14
15
16
18
5
19
20
21
22
X
√
只
X-CHROMOSOME
with nomenclature of arms,regions
bands, and subbands. (Karyotype courtesy of Dr. Stuart Schwartz, Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, linois.)
associated with variable degrees of phenotypic abnorimal.
involving the long arm (q) of chromosome 2 at region
ity. Mosaicism is a terim used to describe the presence of
3, band 1, and the short arim of chromosome 5, region 1,
two or imore populations of cells with different comple-
band 4. When the entire broken fragiments are exchanged,
ments of chromosomes in the same individual. In the
the resulting balanced reciprocal translocation (Fig. 7.14) is
context of chroimosoime numbers, postzygotic mitotic
not harmful to the carrier, who has the normal number
nondisjunction would result in the production of a triso-
of chroimosoimes and the full coimplement of genetic
mic and a monosomic daughter cell; the descendants of
 material. However, during gaimetogenesis, abnormal
these cells would then produce a mosaic. As discussed
(unbalanced) gametes are forimed, resulting in abnormal
later, mosaicisim affecting sex chromosoimes is coimnon,
zygotes. A special pattern of translocation involving
whereas autosomal mosaicisim is not.
two acrocentric chromosomes is called centric fusion
type, or robertsonian, translocation. The breaks typically
Structural Abnormalities
occur close to the centroimere, affecting the short arms
of both chromosoimes. Transfer of the segiments leads to
Structural changes in the chromosomes typically result
one very large chroimosoime and one extreimely simall
from chromosomal breakage followed by loss or rear-
one (Fig. 7.14). The short fragiments are lost, and the
rangement of material. Such changes usually are desig-
carrier has 45 chromosoimes. Because the short arms of
nated using a cytogenetic shorthand in which p (French,
all acrocentric chromosomes carry highly redundant
petit) denotes the short arm of a chromosome, and q, the
genes (e.g., ribosomal RNA genes), such loss is compat-
long arm. Each arm is then divided into numbered regions
ible with survival. However, difficulties arise during
(1, 2, 3, and so on) from centromere outward, and within
gainetogenesis, resulting in the forination of unbalanced
each region the bands are numerically ordered (Fig. 7.13).
 gametes that could lead to abnormal offspring.
Thus, 2q34 indicates chromosome 2, long arm, region 3,
 Isochromosomes result when the centromere divides hori-
 band 4. The patterns of chromosoimal rearrangement after
zontally rather than vertically. One of the two arims of
breakage (Fig. 7.14) are as follows:
the chromosome is then lost, and the remaining arm is
● Trarstocation implies transfer of a part of one chroimo-
duplicated, resulting in a chromosome with only two
soime to another chroimosoime. The process is usually
short arms or two long arms. The most coimmon iso-
reciprocal (i.e., fragiments are exchanged between two
 chromosoime present in live births involves the long arim
chromosomes). In genetic shorthand, translocations are
of the X chromosome and is designated i(Xq). When
indicated by t followed by the involved chromosomes
 e s   e q s 
in numeric order- for example, 46,XX,t(2;5)(q31;p14).
 X chroimosoime, the result is monosoiny for genes on Xp
This notation would indicate a reciprocal translocation
and trisoimy for genes on Xq.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
264
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
TRANSLOCATIONS
Balanced reciprocal
0
Centric fusion
CD
 Robertsonian 
Lost
ISOCHROMOSOMES
DELETIONS
TT
 Fragments 
INVERSIONS
RING CHROMOSOMES
TT
Paracentric
 Pericentric
Fragments
· Deletior involves loss of a portion of a chromosome. A
recurrence in siblings is low). The translocation forim of
 single break may delete a teriminal segiment. Two inter-
 Down syndroime (described later) exhibits an uncom-
stitial breaks, with reunion of the proximal and distal
 mon but important exception to this principle.
segiments, may result in loss of an internal segiment. The
isolated fragiment, which lacks a centromere, almost
 Some specific exaimples of diseases involving changes in
never survives, and thus many genes are lost.
the karyotype are presented next.
Inversiors occur when there are two interstitial breaks in
 a chroimosoime, and the segment reunites after a com-
Cytogenetic Disorders Involving Autosomes
plete turnaround.
· A ring chromosome is a variant of a deletion. After loss
Three autosomal trisomies (2l, 18, and 13) and one dele-
of segiments from each end of the chromosome, the arims
tion syndrome (cri du chat syndrome), which results
unite to form a ring.
froim partial deletion of the short arim of chroimosoine
5, were the first chromosoimal abnormalities identified.
General Features of Chromosomal Disorders
More recently, several additional trisomies and deletion
syndroimes (such as those affecting 22q) have been
· Chroimosomal disorders may be associated with absence
described. Most of these disorders are quite uncoimnon,
(deletion, monosomy), excess (trisomy), or abnorimal
but their clinical features should perimit ready recognition
rearrangeiments (translocations) of chroimosoimes.
(Fig. 7.15).
· In general, a loss of chromosomal material produces
Only trisomy 21 and 22q11.2 deletions occur with suf-
more severe defects than does a gain of chromosoimal
ficient frequency to merit further consideration.
material.
 Excess chromosoimal material may result from a com-
Trisomy 2I (Down Syndrome)
plete chroimosoime (as in trisomy) or from part of a chro-
 Down syndrome, characterized by extra copy of genes on
mosome (as in Robertsonian translocation).
chromosome 21, is the most common of the chromosomal
Inbalances of sex chromosomes (excess or loss) are tol-
disorders. About 95% of affected persons have trisomy 21,
erated much better than are similar imbalances of
so their chromosome count is 47. As mentioned earlier, the
autosomes.
most comunon cause of trisomy, and therefore of Down
 Sex chromosomal disorders often produce subtle abnor-
syndrome, is meiotic nondisjunction. The parents of such
 Imalities, soimetimes not detected at birth. Infertility,
children are norimal in all respects. Maternal age has a
a common manifestation, cannot be diagnosed until
strong influence on the incidence of Down syndrome. It
adolescence.
occurs in 1 in 1550 live births in women younger than 20
· In most cases, chromosomal disorders result from de
years, in contrast with 1 in 25 live births in women older
novo changes (i.e., parents are norimal, and risk of
 than 45 years. The correlation with maternal age suggests
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cytogenetic Disorders 
265
 Mental
Epicanthic
retardation 
folds and flat
Abundant~
facial profile 
TRISOMY 21: DOWN SYNDROME
neck skin
Simian
Incidence: 1 in 700 births
drease
Karyotypes:
Trisomy 21 type:
47,XX, +21
Translocation type:
46,XX,der(14;21)(q10;q10),+21
Mosaic type:
46,XX/47,XX, +21
 Congenital
heart
defects
Intestinal
Umbilical hernia
stenosis
Predisposition
to leukemia
 Prominent occiput
Mental retardation 
Hypotonia
Micrognathia
Gap between first and second toe
Low set ears-
Short neck-
Overlapping
fingers 
Congenital
TRISOMY 18: EDWARDS SYNDROME
heart defects
Incidence: 1 in 8000 births
Karyotypes:
Renal malformations
Trisomy 18 type: 47,XX, +18
Mosaic type: 46,XX/47,XX, +18
Limited hip abduction
Microphthalmia
 Microcephaly and 
Polydactyly
 mental retardation
Cleft lip and palate
Rocker-bottom feet
Cardiac
defects
Umbilical
hernia
-Renal defects
TrISoMY 13: PATAU SYNDROME
 Incidence: 1 in 15,000 births 
Karyotypes:
Trisomy 13 type:
47,XX,+13
Translocation type:
46,xX,+13,der(13:14)(q10;q10)
Mosaic type:
46,XX/47,XX, +13
Rocker-bottom feet
Fig. 7.15 Clinical features and karyotypes of the three most common autosomal trisomies.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
266
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
that in most cases the meiotic nondisjunction of chromo-
21 that is involved in the pathogenesis. Based on these
some 2l occurs in the ovum. Indeed, in 95% of cases the
studies, several gene clusters, each of which is predicted to
extra chromosome is of maternal origin. The reason for the
participate in the same biologic pathway, have been impli-
increased susceptibility of the ovum to nondisjunction
cated. For example, 16 genes are involved in the mitochon-
with aging is not fully understood. No effect of paternal
drial energy pathway, several are likely to influence CNS
age has been found in those cases in which the extra chro-
developiment, and one group is involved in folate metabo-
mosome is derived from the father.
lisim. It is not known how each of these groups of genes is
 In about 4% of all patients with trisoimy 2l, the extra
related to Down syndrome. Adding complexity is the fact
chromosoimal material is present as a translocation of
that several miRNA genes reside on chromosome 2l that
the long arm of chroimosoime 2l to chroimosoime 22 or
can shut down translation of genes that map elsewhere in
14. Such cases frequently (but not always) are familial,
the genome.
and the translocated chromosoime is inherited from one
Much progress is being made in the molecular diagnosis
of the parents, who typically is a carrier of a Robertso-
%01 o %s Alaeuxoddy Aeeuad aupus umoa jo
nian translocation. Approximately 1% of patients with
of the total cell free DNA in maternal blood is derived from
trisomy 2l are mosaics, usually having a mixture of 46-
the fetus and can be identified by polymorphic genetic
and 47-chroimosoime cells. These cases result from mitotic
markers. By using next-generation sequencing, the gene
nondisjunction of chroimosome 2l during an early stage
 dosage of chroimosoime 2i-linked genes in fetal DNA can
of embryogenesis. Clinical manifestations in such cases
be determined with great precision. This has eimerged as a
are variable and milder, depending on the proportion of
sensitive and specific noninvasivemethod ("liquid biopsy")
abnormal cells.
for prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 2l as well as other triso-
The diagnostic clinical features of this condition - flat
mies. Currently, all cases of trisomy 21 identified by such
facial profile, oblique palpebral fissures, and epicanthic
liquid biopsies are confirimed by conventional cytogenetics
folds (Fig. 7.15)- are usually readily evident, even at birth.
 on fetal cells obtained by amniocentesis.
Down syndroime is a leading cause of severe mental retar-
dation; approximately 80% of those afflicted have an IQ of
22g! I.2 Deletion Syndrome
25 to 50. By contrast, soime mosaics with Down syndroime
The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome encompasses a spectrum
have mild phenotypic changes and norimal or near-norimal
of disorders that result from a small interstitial deletion
intelligence. In addition to the phenotypic abnorimalities
of band 11 on the long arm of chromosome 22. The clinical
and the mental retardation already noted, some other clini-
features of this syndrome include congenital heart disease
cal features are worthy of mention:
affecting the outflow tracts, abnorimalities of the palate,
·Approximately 40% of the patients have congenital heart
facial dysmorphism, developmental delay, thyimic hypo-
disease, most comumonly defects of the endocardial
plasia with impaired T cell immunity (Chapter 5), and
cushion, including atrial septal defects, atrioventricu-
parathyroid hypoplasia resulting in hypocalcemia (Chapter
lar valve malforimations, and ventricular septal defects
 20). Previously, these clinical features were believed to rep-
(Chapter 1l). Cardiac problems are responsible for a
resent two different disorders: DiGeorge syndrome and
imajority of the deaths in infancy and early childhood.
velocardiofacial syndrome. However, it is now known
Several other congenital malforimations, including
that both are caused by 22q11.2 deletion. Variations in
atresias of the esophagus and simall bowel, also are
the size and position of the deletion are thought to be
comimon.
responsible for the differing clinical manifestations. When
Children with trisoimy 2l have a tenfold- to twentyfold
 T cell imnunodeficiency and hypocalcemia are the domi-
increased risk of developing acute leukemia. Both acute lym-
nant features, the patients are said to have DiGeorge syn-
phoblastic leukeimias and acute myeloid leukemias
drome, whereas patients with the so-called zelocardiofacial
occur (Chapter 12).
syndrome have mild imnunodeficiency and pronounced
Virtually all patients with trisomy 2l older than age
dysimorphology and cardiac defects. In addition to these
40 develop neuropathologic changes characteristic
of
 malforimations, patients with 22q11.2 deletion are at high
Alzheiimer disease, a degenerative disorder of the brain
risk for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. In fact, it is
(Chapter 23)
estimated that schizophrenia develops in approximately
 Patients with Down syndrome demonstrate abrormal
25% of adults with this syndrome. Conversely, deletions
of the region can be found in 2% to 3% of individuals
tions, particularly of the lungs, and to thyroid auto-
with childhood-onset schizophrenia. The molecular basis
immunity (Chapter 20). Although several abnormalities)
for this syndrome is not fully understood. The affected
affecting mainly T cell functions, have been reported,
region of chromosoime ll encodes many genes. Among
the basis for the immunologic disturbances is not clear.
 these, a transcription factor gene called TBX1 is suspected
to be one of the responsible candidates, because its loss
Despite all of these problems, improved medical care
seeims to correlate with the occurrence of DiGeorge syn-
has increased the longevity of persons with trisomy 21.
drome. Clearly there are other genes that contribute to
Currently the median age at death is 60 years (up froim 25
 the behavioral and psychiatric disorders that remain to be
years in 1983). Although the karyotype of Down syndrome
identified.
has been known for decades, the molecular basis for this
 The diagnosis of this condition may be suspected on
disease remains elusive. Studies of humans with partial
clinical grounds but can be established only by detection
 trisoimy of chroimosoime 2l and imouse imodels of trisomy
-iay nis ui auasanon aq aed oap a jo
have identified the critical region of human chromosoime
tion (FISH) (see Fig. 7.38B).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Cytogenetic Disorders
267
monosomic X chroimosome disorders, or Turner syndroime,
SUMMARY
as discussed later.
CYTOGENETIC DISORDERS
Extra Y chromosomes are readily tolerated because the
INVOLVING AUTOSOMES
 only inforimation known to be carried on the Y chroimo-
· Down syndrome is associated with an extra copy of genes on
soime seeins to relate to male differentiation. Of note, what-
chromosome 2l, most commonly due to trisomy 2l and less
ever the number of X chromosomes, the presence of a Y
a ro a a aad a a s 
frequently from translocation of extra chromosomal material
from  chromosome 2l to other chromosomes or  from
differentiation (SRY, sex-deterimining region of Y chroimo-
soime) is located on the short arim of the Y.
mosaicism.
+ Patients with Down syndrome have severe mental retardation,
Described briefly next are two disorders, Klinefelter
flat facial profile, epicanthic folds, cardiac malformations, higher 
 syndroime and Turner syndrome, that result from aberra-
tions of sex chroimosoimes.
risk of leukemia and infections, and premature development of
Alzheimer disease.
Klinefelter Syndrome
+ Deletion of genes at chromosomal locus 22q ll.2 gives rise to
 Klinefelter syndrome is defined as male hypogonadism
malformations affecting the face, heart, thymus, and parathy-
roids. The resulting disorders are recognized as (l) DiGeorge 
that develops when there are at least two X chromosomes
and one or more Y chromosomes. It is the most coimnon
syndrome (thymic hypoplasia with diminished T-cell immunity
and parathyroid hypoplasia with hypocalcemia), and (2) velo-
cause of hypogonadisim in males. Most affected patients
cardiofacial syndrome (congenital heart disease involving
have a 47,XXY karyotype. This karyotype results from non-
disjunction of sex chromosoimes during meiosis. The extra
outflow tracts, facial dysmorphism, and developmental delay).
[d ro ar  jo aq  oso x
origin. Advanced maternal age and a history of irradiation
in either parent may contribute to the meiotic error result-
Cytogenetic Disorders Involving
ing in this condition. Approxiimately 15% of the patients
Sex Chromosomes
showmosaic
 patterns,
including
46,XY/47,XXY,
47,XXY/48,XXXY, and variations on this theime. The pres-
A number of abnormal karyotypes involving the sex chro-
ence of a 46,XY line in mosaics usually is associated with
mosomes, ranging from 45,X to 49,XXXXY, are compatible
a milder clinical condition.
with life. Indeed, phenotypically normal males with two
 Klinefelter syndrome is associated with a wide range of
and even three Y chromosoimes have been identified. Such
clinical manifestations. In some persons it may be expressed
extreme karyotypic deviations are not encountered with the
only as hypogonadisim, but most patients have a distinctive
 autosomes. In large part, this latitude relates to two factors:
body habitus with an increase in length between the
(1)
lyonization
of
X
 chromosomes
 and
soles and the pubic bone, which creates the appearance
(2) the simall amount of genetic inforimation carried by the Y
 of an elongated body. Also characteristic is eunuchoid
chromosome. The consideration of lyonization must begin
 body habitus. Reduced facial, body, and pubic hair and
with Mary Lyon, who in 1962 proposed that in feimales, only
 gynecoimastia also are frequently seen. The testes are mark-
one X chroimosome is genetically active. X inactivation
isaan un u z Ao on saaos 'azis ui panan ie
occurs early in fetal life, about 16 days after conception.
dimension. In keeping with the testicular atrophy, the
Either the paternal or the maternal X chromosome is ran-
serum testosterone levels are lower than norimal, and
 doimly inactivated in each cell of the developing einbryo.
urinary gonadotropin levels are elevated.
Once inactivated, the same X chromosome reimains inactive
 Only rarely are patients with the Klinefelter syndrome
in all of the progeny of these cells. Moreover, all but one X
fertile, and presuimably such persons are mosaics with a
chroimosome is inactivated, and so a 48,XXXX feimale has
large proportion of 46,XY cells. The sterility is due to
only one active X chromosoime. This phenomenon explains
impaired sperimatogenesis, sometimes to the extent of total
why normal females do not have a double dose (compared
azoosperimia. Histologic exaimination shows hyalinization
with males) of phenotypic attributes encoded on the X chro-
of tubules, which appear as ghostlike structures on tissue
mosoime. The Lyon hypothesis also explains why norimal
section. By contrast, Leydig cells are prominent, as a result
feinales are in reality mosaics, containing two cell popula-
tions: one with an active maternal X, theother with an active
of tubules. Although Klinefelter syndroime may be associ-
 paternal X. The inolecular basis of X inactivation involves a
ated with mental retardation, the degree of intellectual
long non-coding RNA that is encoded by the XIST gene.
impairment typically is mild, and in some cases, no deficit
This non-coding RNA is retained in the nucleus, where it
is detectable. The reduction in intelligence is correlated
"coats" the X chromosome that it is transcribed from and
with the number of extra X chromosoines. Klinefelter syn-
silences the genes on that chroimosoime. The other XIST
drome is associated with a higher frequency of several
 allele is switched off in the active X, allowing genes encoded 
disorders, including breast cancer (seen 20 times more
one one X chromosoime to be expressed.
commonly than in normal males), extragonadal germ-cell
Although essentially accurate, the Lyon hypothesis sub-
tumors, and autoimnune diseases such as systemic lupus
sequently has been soimewhat modified. Most important,
erythematosus.
the initial presumption that all of the genes on the inactive
Jo %iz Anoi se pastaan uaaq sey Jo pauims, ane x
Turner Syndrome
genes on Xp, and a smaller number (3%) on Xq, escape X
Turner syndrome, characterized by primary hypogo-
inactivation. This observation  has  implications  for
nadism in phenotypic females, results from partial or
http://ebooksmedicine.net
268
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
complete monosomy of the short arm of the X chromo-
to develop norimal secondary sex characteristics; the geni-
some. With routine cytogenetic methods, the entire X
talia reimain infantile, breast development is minimal, and
chromosome is found to be missing in 57% of patients,
litle pubic hair appears. Most patients have primary amenor-
resulting in a 45,X karyotype. These patients are the most
mea,and morphotogic examination shows transformation of the
severely affected, and the diagnosis often can be made at
owaries into white streaks offibrous stroma devoid of follicles. The
mental status of these patients usually is normal, but subtle
defects in visual-spatial inforimation processing have been
tion, leading to abnorimally short stature (below the third
noted. Curiously, hypothyroidism caused by autoantibod-
percentile); swelling of the nape of the neck because of
ies occurs, especially in women with isochromosome Xp.
distended lymphatic channels (in infancy) that is seen as
As many as 50% of these patients develop clinical hypothy-
webbing of the neck in older children; low posterior hair-
roidism. In adult patients, a combination of short stature
line; cubitus valgus (an increase in the carrying angle of the
uidsns buons jdunond pinoqs eaqouae Areud pu
for
r Turner syndrome. The diagnosis is established by
arched palate; lymphedema of the hands and feet; and
karyotyping.
a variety of congenital malforimations such as horseshoe
Approximately 43% of patients with Turner syndrome
kidney, bicuspid aortic valve, and coarctation of the aorta
either are mosaics (one of the cell lines being 45,X) or have
(Fig. 7.16). Cardiouascular abnormalities are the most common
structural abnorimalities of the X chromosoine. The most
Quse of death in chilcdhood. In adolescence, affected girls fail
common is deletion of the short arim, resulting in the for-
mation of an isochromosome of the long arm, 46,X,i(X)
(q10). The net effect of the associated structural abnor-
malities is to produce partial monosoimy of the X chro-
mosoime. Coimbinations of deletions and mosaicisim also
occur. It is important to appreciate the karyotypic hetero-
geneity associated with Turner syndrome because it is
responsible for significant variations in the phenotype. In
Short stature
Low posterior hairline
contrast with the patients with monosoimy X, those who
Webbing of neck -
are mosaics or have deletion variants may have an almost
Ard ym Auo juasad Aeu pue auereadde leuou
 Coarctation of 
amenorrhea.
aorta
The molecular pathogenesis of Turner syndrome is not
Broad chest
completely understood, but studies have begun to shed
 and widely
some light. As mentioned earlier, both X chromosomes are
spaced nipples 
active during oogenesis and are essential for norimal devel-
Cubitus valgus
opiment of the ovaries. During norimal fetal developiment,
ovaries contain as imany as 7 million oocytes. The oocytes
Streak ovaries,
gradually disappear so that by menarche their numbers
infertility,
have dwindled to a mere 400,000, and when menopause
amenorrhea
occurs fewer than 10,000 reimain. In Turner syndrome, fetal
ai iq sisqa ui Aa au doaap sa
absence of the second X chromosoime leads to an acceler-
ated loss of oocytes, which is complete by age 2 years.
Pigmented nevi -
In a sense, therefore,
, “menopause occurs before men-
arche," and the ovaries are reduced to atrophic fibrous
strands, devoid of ova and follicles (streak ouaries). Because
patients with Turner syndrome also have other (nongo-
nadal) abnormalities, it follows that genes required for
norimal growth and development of soimatic tissues also
Peripheral
must reside on the X chroimosoime. Aimong the genes
lymphedema
involved in the Turner phenotype is the short stature
at birth 
homeobox (SHOX) gene at Xp22.33. This is one of the genes
TURNER SYNDROME
that remain active in both X chromosomes and is unique
 in having an active hoimologue on the short arin of the Y
Incidence: 1 in 3000 female births
Karyotypes:
chromosome. Thus, both norimal males and females have
45,X
two active copies of this gene. Loss of one copy of SHOX
Classic:
Defective
gives rise to short stature. Indeed, deletions of the SHOX
 second X
 gene are noted in 2% to 5% of otherwise norimal children
chromosome:
46,X,i(Xq)
with short stature. Whereas loss of one copy of SHOX can
46,xXq-
46,XXp-
explain the growth deficit in Turner syndrome, it cannot
46,X, r(X)
explain other important clinical features such as cardiac
Mosaic type:
45,X/46,XX
 malformations and endocrine abnorimalities. Clearly,
 several other genes located on the X chroimosoime also are
Fig. 7.16 Clinical features and karyotypes of Turner syndrome.
involved.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Single-Gene Disorders With Atypical Patterns of Inheritance
269
impairiment is highly variable. It is not unusual for some chil-
SUMMARY
dren to initially be diagnosed with autisim-like syimptoms.
CYTOGENETIC DISORDERS INVOLVING
The typical physical phenotype includes a long face with a
SEX CHROMOSOMES
large mandible, large everted ears, and large testicles (mac-
· In females, one X chromosome, maternal or paternal, is ran-
roorchicdism). Although characteristic of fragile X syndrome,
these abnorimalities are not always present or inay be quite
domly inactivated during development (lyon hypothesis).
· In Klinefelter syndrome, there are two or more X chromo-
subtle. The only distinctive physical abnorimality that can be
somes with one Y chromosome as a result of nondisjunction
detected in at least 90% of postpubertal males with fragile X
syndrome is macroorchidism.
of sex chromosomes. Patients have testicular atrophy, sterility,
As with all X-linked diseases, fragile X syndroime pre-
reduced body hair, gynecomastia, and eunuchoid body habitus.
doiminantly affects males. Analysis of several pedigrees,
It is the most common cause of male sterility.
however, shows some patterns of transimission not typi-
+ In Turner syndrome, there is partial or complete monosomy
cally associated with other X-linked recessive disorders
of genes on the short arm of the X chromosome, most com-
(Fig. 7.17). These include the following:
monly caused by the absence of one X chromosome (45,X)
Carrier males. Approximately 20% of males who, by
and less commonly by mosaicism, or by deletions involving the
 x ar e  o    a
short arm of the X chromosome. Short stature, webbing of
the neck, cubitus valgus, cardiovascular malformations, amen-
tion do not manifest the typical neurological symptoms
orrhea, lack of secondary sex characteristics, and fibrotic
or physical characteristics of fragile X during childhood.
ovaries are typical clinical features.
As discussed below, these carrier males (also known as
"transimitting males") harbor a detectable molecular
abnormality at the FMR1 locus but not the full-fledged
mutation observed in symptomatic children.
SINGLE-GENE DISORDERS WITH
Affected females. From 30% to 50% of carrier woimen with
ATYPICAL PATTERNS OF
the fragile X mutation on one chromosoime might show
features of mild cognitive impairiment or other behav-
INHERITANCE
ioral disturbances. Approxiimately 20% develop features
of premature reproductive failure (see below). The pres-
 Three groups of diseases resuling froim mutations affect-
ence of symptoms in carrier females, albeit mild, is
ing single genes do not follow the mendelian rules of
unusual for an X-linked recessive disease.
inheritance:
Anticipatior. This terim refers to the phenomenon
● Diseases caused by triplet repeat mutations
whereby clinical features of fragile X syndroime worsen
● Diseases caused by mutations in mitochondrial genes
with each successive generation, as if the mutation
● Diseases associated with alteration of imprinted regions
becoimes increasingly deleterious as it is transimitted 
of the genoime
froim a iman to his grandsons and great-grandsons.
Triplet Repeat Mutations
These unusual features have been related to the dynamic
nature of the mutation. In the norimal population, the
FragileX Syndrome
number of repeats of the sequence CGG in the FMR1 gene
Fragile X syndrome is the prototype of diseases in which
is simall, averaging around 29, whereas affected persons
the causative mutation occurs in a long repeating sequence
have 200 to 4000 repeats. These s0-called "full mutations"
of three nucleotides. Other exaimples of diseases associated
are believed to arise through an interimediate stage of pre-
with trinucleotide repeat mutations are Huntington disease
 mutations characterized by 52 to 200 CGG repeats. Carrier
and myotonic dystrophy. This type of mutation is now
 males and feinales have preinutations. During oogenesis
known to cause about 40 diseases, and all disorders discov-
(but not sperimatogenesis), the premutations can be con-
 ered so far are associated with neurodegenerative changes.
verted to full mutations by further aimplification of the
In each of these conditions, aimplification of specific sets of
CGG repeats, which can then be transimitted to both the
three nucleotides within the gene disrupts its function.
sons and the daughters of the carrier female. These obser-
 Certain unique features of trinucleotide repeat imutations,
vations provide an explanation for why some carrier males
described later, are responsible for the atypical pattern of
are unaffected (they have premutations), and certain carrier
inheritance of the associated diseases.
females are affected (they inherit full mutations).
Fragile X syndrome results from a mutation in the FMR1
 gene, which maps to Xq27.3 and is the second most common
Pathogenesis
 genetic cause of mental retardation, after Down syndrome.
The molecular basis for fragile X syndroime is beginning to
It has a frequency of 1 in 1550 for imales and 1 in 8000 for
be understood and relates to silencing of the product of the
feimales. The syndroime derives its name froim the karyotypic
FMR1 gene, familial mental retardation protein (FMRP).
appearance of the X chromosome in the original imethod
The norimal FMR1 gene contains CGG repeats in its 5'
of diagnosis. Culturing patient cells in a folate-deficient
untranslated region. When the number of trinucleotide
medium typically showed a discontinuity of staining or con-
repeats exceeds approximately 230, the DNA of the entire 5'
striction in the long arim of the X chroimosoime. This method
region of the gene becoimes abnorimally methylated. Meth-
 laldin jo sisAieue paseq-vNI Aq pauelddns uaaq mou sey
ylation also extends upstreaim into the proimoter region of
 repeat size, as discussed later. Clinically affected males have
the gene, resulting in transcriptional suppression of FMR1.
 moderate to severe mental retardation, although the extent of
The resulting absence of FMRP is believed to cause the
http://ebooksmedicine.net
270
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
CARRIER MALE
 NORMAL FEMALE
X Chromosomes
Premutation
Normal
Phenotype
 Normal
 Normal
CARRIER FEMALE
CARRIER FEMALE
UNRELATED
5C
SC
X Chromosomes
 Normal
 Premutation/mutation
Normal
 Premutation/mutation
Normal
Phenotype
Normal
Normal
 Normal
 Normal
Normal
5C
X Chromosomes
 Full mutation
 Normal/full mutation 
Normal
 Normal
50% of females
Phenotype
Affected 
affected, often mildly
Normal
Normal
Fig. 7.17 Fragile X pedigree. X andY chromosomes are shown. Note that in the first generation, all sons are normal and all females are carriers (harbor a
premutation). During oogenesis in the carrier female, premutation expands to full mutation; hence, in the next generation, all males who inherit the X with
full mutation are affected. However, only 50% of fermales who inherit the full mutation are affected, and often only mildly. (Bosed on on original sketch courtesy
of Dr. Nancy Schneider, Departrment of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestem Medical School, Dallas, Texas.)
phenotypic changes. FMRP is widely expressed in norimal
tissues, but higher levels are found in the brain and the
testis. Itis an RNA-binding protein that is transported from
the cytoplasim to the nucleus, where it binds specific mRNAs
and transports theim to the axons and dendrites (Fig. 7.18).
It is in the synapses that FMRP-imRNA complexes perforim
critical roles in regulating the translation of specific mRNAs
involved in control of synaptic functions. The absence of
DENDRITE
this finely coordinated "shutle" function seems to underlie
the fragile X syndrome.
Fragile X Tremor/Ataxia
FMRP
Ribosomes
Although initially assumed to be innocuous, CGG premu-
 Dendritic
proteins
tations in the FMR1 gene can cause a disease that
FMRP-mRNA
is phenotypically different  from  fragile  X syndrome
complex
through a distinct mechanism involving a toxic "gain-of-
function." This disease was discovered when it was noted
 that approximately 20% of females carrying the preimutation
Ribosomes
(carrier females) have mild cognitive impairment and pre-
AXON
mature ovarian failure (before the age of 40 years), and more
Axonal proteins
than 50% of premutation-carrying males (transimitting
Fig. 7.l8 A model for the action of familial mental retardation protein
starting in their sixth decade. This syndrome, referred to as
(FMRP) in neurons.FMRP plays a αitical role in regulating the translation of
fragile X tremor/a taxia, is characterized by intention tremors
axonal proteins from bound RNAs.These locally produced proteins, in turn,
 and cerebellar ataxia and may progress to parkinsonisim.
play diverse roles in the microenvironment of the synapse. (Adapted from
How do preimutations cause disease? In these patients,
Hin P, Warren ST: New insights into fragile X syndrome: from molecules to neu-
 the FMR1 gene instead of being methylated and silenced
robehovior, Trends Biochem Sci 28:152,2003.)
continues to be transcribed.
CGG-containing  FMR1
mRNAs so forimed are “toxic." They accumulate in the
 nucleus and form intranuclear inclusions. In this process
the aggregated mRNA recruits RNA-binding proteins.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Single-Gene Disorders With Atypical Patterns of Inheritance
271
 Perhaps sequestration of these proteins at abnorimal loca-
When full mutations are transmitted to progeny, fragile X
tions leads to events that are toxic to the cell.
As noted, earlier many other neurodegenerative dis-
 syndrome occurs.
 eases related to trinucleotide repeat expansions are recog-
· Fragile X tremor/ataxia resulting from expression of a FMR!
 nized. Soime general principles follow:
 gene bearing premutation develops in some males and females.
oisuedxa ue Aq parae are suonsung aua 'sases le u ·
The accumulation of corresponding mRNA in the nucleus
of the repeats, but the precise threshold at which pre-
binds and sequesters certain proteins that are essential for
 normal neuronal functions 
mutations are converted to full mutations differs with
each disorder.
Whereas the expansion in fragile X syndrome occurs
during oogenesis, in other disorders such as Huntington
Diseases Caused by Mutations in
disease, premutations are converted to full mutations 
Mitochondrial Genes
 during spermatogenesis.
 The expansion may involve any part of the gene, and
Mitochondria contain several genes that encode enzymes
the range of possibilities can be divided into two broad
involved in oxidative phosphorylation. Inheritance of mito-
categories: those that affect untranslated regions (as in
chondrial DNA differs from that of nuclear DNA in that the
fragile X syndroime) and those that affect coding regions
former is associated with maternal inheritance. The reason
(as in Huntington disease) (Fig. 7.19). When mutations
for this peculiarity is that ova contain the norimal comple-
affect noncoding regions, there is "loss of function,"
ment of mitochondria within their abundant cytoplasim,
because protein synthesis is suppressed (e.g., FMRP). By
whereas sperimatozoa contain few, if any, mitochondria. The
contrast, mutations involving translated parts of the
mitochondrial DNA of the zygote is therefore derived
gene give rise to misfolded proteins (e.g., Huntington
entirely from the ovum. Thus, only mothers transimit mito-
-o-u xon, pas-os as jo Au (asas
chondrial genes to their offspring, both male and female.
function" mutations involve CAG repeats that encode
Diseases caused by mutations in mitochondrial genes
polyglutaimine tracts, and the resultant diseases are
 are rare. Because mitochondrial DNA encodes enzyimes
sometimes referred to as polyglutamine diseases, affect-
involved in oxidative phosphorylation, diseases caused by
ing primarily the nervous systen. Accumulation of mis-
mutations in such genes affect organs most dependent on
folded proteins in aggregates within the cytoplasim is a
oxidative phosphorylation (CNS, skeletal muscle, cardiac
 comunon feature of such diseases.
is the prototypical disorder in this group. This neurodegen-
 erative disease manifests as progressive bilateral loss of
central vision that leads in due course to blindness.
SUMMARY
FRAGILE X SYNDROME AND FRAGILE X
Diseases Caused by Alterations of lImprinted
TREMOR/ATAXIA
Regions: Prader-Willi and Angelman Syndromes
+ Pathologic amplification of trinucleotide repeats causes loss-
All humans inherit two copies of each gene (except, of
of-function (fragile X syndrome) or gain-of-function mutations
(Huntington disease). Most such mutations produce neuro-
course, the sex chromosoime genes in males), carried on
degenerative disorders.
homologous maternal and paternal chroimosomes. It was
long assumed that there was no difference between norimal
· Fragile X syndrome results from loss of FMRi gene function
 hoimologous genes derived from the mother and the father.
and is characterized by mental retardation, macroorchidism,
and abnormal facial features.
Indeed, this is true for most genes. It has been established,
however, that functional differences exist between the
· In the normal population, there are about 29 CGG repeats in
paternal and the maternal copies of soime genes. The dif-
the FMRi gene. The genomes of carrier males and females
ferences arise from an epigenetic process called genomic
contain premutations with 52 to 200 CGG repeats that can
expand to 40o0 repeats (full mutations) during oogenesis.
imprinting, whereby certain homologous genes are dif-
ferentially "inactivated" during paternal and maternal
Promoter
UTR
Intron 
Exon
UTR
5
E xpansions
Sequences
CCCCGCCCCGCG
CGG
GAA
CAG
CTG
12 mer
triplet
triplet
triplet
triplet
Disease
Myoclonus*
Fragile X
Friedreich
 Huntington
Myotonic
epillepsy
syndrome
ata xia
disease
dystrophy
Fig. 7.19 Sites of expansion and the affcted sequence in selected diseases caused by nucleotide repeat mutations. UTR, Untranslated region.*Although not
strictly a trinucleotide-repeat disease, progr essive myoclonus epilepsy is caused,like others in this gr oup,
p, by a heritable DNA expansion.The expanded segment
is in the promoter region of the gene.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
272
CHAPTER７
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
 gametogenesis. Thus, maternal inprinting refers to tran-
froim these deletions would be expected to be identical
scriptional silencing of the maternal allele, whereas pater-
 regardless of the parental origin of chromosoime 15.
nal imprinting implies that the paternal allele is inactivated.
The molecular basis of these two syndroimes can be
 At the molecular level, imprinting is associated with meth-
understood in the context of imprinting (Fig. 7.20). A set of
 ylation of the gene promoter, as well as related events such
 genes on the maternal chromosoime at 15q12 is inprinted
as modification of DNA-binding histone proteins, the sum
(and hence silenced), so the paternal chroimosoime provides
total effect of which is to silence the gene. Imprinting
the only functional alleles. When these are lost as a result of
occurs in ova or sperim and is then stably transimitted to all
 a deletion (in the paternal chromosoime), the patient devel-
 somatic cells derived froin the zygote.
 ops Prader-Willi syndroime. Among the set of genes that are
Genomic imprinting is best illustrated by considering
deleted in Prader-Willi syndrome, the most likely culprit is
two uncoimmon genetic disorders, Prader-Willi syndrome
believed to be a gene cluster encoding multiple distinct
and Angelman syndrome.
small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), which are involved in
 Mental retardation, short stature, hypotonia, obesity.
 Imessenger RNA processing. Conversely, a distinct gene,
 small hands and feet, and hypogonadism characterize
LIBE3A, that also maps to the same region of chroimosome
Prader-Willi syndrome. In 60% to 75% of cases, an intersti-
15 is imprinted on the paternal chroimosome. LIBE3A encodes
tial deletion of band ql2 in the long arim of chroimosome
for a ubiquitin ligase, a family of enzymes that targets other
15- del(15)(q1l;q13)-can be detected. In many patients
cellular proteins for proteasomal degradation (Chapter 1)
through the addition of ubiquitin moieties. Only the mater-
shows sinaller deletions within the saime region. It is striking
nally derived allele of the gene norimally is active. Deletion
that in all cases, the deletion affects the paternally derived
 of this maternal gene on chroimosoime 15 gives rise to the
chromosome 15. In contrast to Prader-Willi syndroime,
Angeliman syndrome. The neurologic manifestations 
of
 patients with the phenotypically distinct Angelinan syn-
n ro  e jo asnaq Aiud ae r
drome are born with a deletion of the saime chromosoimal
 expression in specific regions of the brain.
region derived from their mothers. Patients with Angelman
 Molecular studies of cytogenetically norimal patients with
syndrome also are mentally retarded, but in addition they
Prader-Willi syndroime have shown that in soime cases, both
 present with ataxic gait, seizures, and inappropriate laugh-
of the structurally norimal copies of chromosome 15 are
ter. Because of the laughter and ataxia, this syndrome has
derived from the mother. Inheritance of both chromosomes
been called the happy puppet syndroime. A comparison of
 of a pair from one parent is called uriparental tisomy. The net
these two syndromes clearly demonstrates the “parent-of-
 effect is the same (ie., the patient does not have a functional
origin" effects on gene function. If all the paternal and
set of genes from the [noninprinted] paternal chromosoime
maternal genes contained within chroimosoime 15 were
15). Angelinan syndroime, as might be expected, also can
 expressed in an identical fashion, clinical features resulting
result from uniparental disomy of paternal chromosome 15.
MATERNAL PATERNAL
(M)
(P)
Imprinted Prader-willi 
ActivePrader-Willi
genes
genes
Active Angelman
 Imprinted Angelman
gene
gene
 Deletion in maternal 
 Deletion in paternal 
chromosome
chromosome
(M)
(P)
(M)(P)
Active Prader-Willi
Imprinted Prader-willi
Site of deletion
genes
genes
  Site of deletion
 Imprinted Angelman
Active Angelman
gene
gene
ANGELMAN SYNDROME
PRADER-WILLI SYNDROME
Fig. 7.20 Genetics of Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Congenital Anomalies
273
SUMMARY
· Prader-Willi syndrome results from deletion of paternal chro-
GENOMIC IMPRINTING
mosomal region I5q 12 and is characterized by mental retarda-
tion, short stature, hypotonia, obesity, and hypogonadism.
+ Angelman syndrome results from deletion of maternal chro-
 maternal copies of certain genes during gametogenesis. For
mosomal region I5q 12 and is characterized by mental retarda-
such genes only one functional copy exists in the individual.
tion, ataxia, seizures, and inappropriate laughter.
Loss of the functional allele (not imprinted) by deletions gives
rise to diseases.
Pediatric Diseases
As mentioned earlier and as illustrated by several exam-
 ples, many diseases of infancy and childhood are of genetic
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
origin. Others, although not genetic, either are unique to
children or take distinctive forims in this patient population
Congenital anomalies are structural defects that are present
 and thus merit the designation pediatric diseases. During
at birth, although some, such as cardiac defects and renal
anomalies, may not becoime clinically apparent until years
to a somewhat different group of diseases (Table 7.5).
later. As will be evident from the ensuing discussion, the
Clearly, diseases of infancy (ie., in the first year of life)
 term congenital does not imply or exclude a genetic basis.
pose the highest risk of death. During this phase, the neo-
It is estimated that about 120,000 babies are born with a
natal period (the first 4 weeks of life) is unquestionably the
birth defect each year in the United States, an incidence of
most hazardous time.
1 in 33. As indicated in Table 7.5, congenital anomalies are
After the infant survives the first year of life, the outlook
an important cause of infant mortality. Moreover, they con-
brightens considerably. However, it is sobering to note that
tinue to be a significant source of illness, disability, and
between l year and 14 years of age, injuries resulting froim
death throughout the early years of life.
accidents are the leading cause of death. Not all conditions
Before considering the etiology and
 pathogenesis of
listed in Table 7.5 are described in this chapter; only a select
congenital anoimalies, it is essential to define soime of the
few that are most coimmon are considered here. Although
terms used to describe errors in morphogenesis.
 general principles of neoplastic disease and specific tumors
Malformations are primary errors of morphogenesis. In other
are discussed elsewhere, a few tumors of children are
words, there is an intrinsically abnorimal developmental
described, to highlight the differences between pediatric
process. Malformations usually are multifactorial, rather
and adult neoplasims.
than the result of a single gene or chromosomal defect.
Table 7.5 Causes of Death by Age
Causes*
Ratet
Causes*
Ratet
Younger than I year
582.1
1-4Years-
cont'd
28.3
 Congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal
 Malignant neoplasrms
anomalies
Diseases of the heart
 Disorders related to short gestation and low birth weight
5-9Years
 Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
12.5
Newborn affected by maternal complications of pregnancy
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Malignant neoplasms
 Newborn affected by complications of placenta, cord, and
 Congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal
membranes
abnormalities
 Bacterial sepsis of newborn 
Assault (homicide)
 Respiratory distress of newborn
 Influenza and pneumonia
Diseases of the circulatory system
10-14 Years
 Neonatal hemorrhage 
15.7
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
I-4Years
24
Malignant neoplasms
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
Intentional self-harm (suicide)
Congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal
Assault (homicide)
Congenital malformations, deformations, and chromosomal
abnormalities
Assault (homicide)
anomalies
*Causes are listed in decreasing order of frequency All causes and rates are based on 2008 (final) and 2009 (preliminary) data.
fRates are expressed per I00,000 population from all causes within each age group.
Excludes congenical heart disease.
Data sourte: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/NCHS, National Vital Statistics System: mortality, 2014. www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/lewk1_2014.pdf.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
274
CHAPTER 7 
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
Fig. 7.2l Examples of malformations. Malformations can range in severity from the incidental to the lethal. (A) Polydactyly (one or more extra digits) and
syndactyly (fusion of dgits) have little functional consequence when they occur in isolation. (B) Smilarly, cleft lip, with or without associated cleft palate,is
compatible with life when it occurs as an isolated anomaly; in this case, however, the child had an underlying malformation syndrome (trisomy I3) and expired
because of severe cardiac defects.(C) Stillbirth associated with a lethal malformation,in which the midface structures are fused or ill-formed; in almost all
cases, this degree of external dysmorphogenesis is associated with severe internal anomalies such as maldevelopment of the brain and cardiac defects. (A ond
C, Courtesy of Dr. Reade Quinton, Department of Pathology, University ofTexas Southwestem Medical Cernter, Dallas, Texos. B, Courtesy of Dr. Bevery Rogers, Department
of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestem Medical Center, Dallos, Texas.)
They may manifest in any of several patterns. In some
orgarogenesis. The initiating event may be a malforma-
presentations, such as congenital heart diseases, single
tion, deformation, or disruption. An excellent exainple
body systeims may be involved, whereas in others, mul-
is the oligohydramnios (or Potter) sequence (Fig. 7.23A).
 tiple malformations involving many organs and tissues
Oligohydramnios (decreased amniotic fluid) may be
may coexist (Fig. 7.21).
caused by a variety of maternal, placental, or fetal
Disruptions result from secondary destruction of an organ or
abnormalities, including chronic leakage of aimniotic
body region that was previously normal in development;
fluid because of rupture of the amnion; uteroplacental
thus, in contrast with malformations, disruptions arise
insufficiency resulting from maternal hypertension or
from an extrinsic disturbance in morphogenesis. Aimni-
severe toxeimia; and renal agenesis in the fetus (because
otic bands, stemning from rupture of aimnion with
fetal urine is a major constituent of amniotic fluid). The
resultant formation of "bands" that encircle, coimpress,
fetal compression associated with oligohydraimnios in
or attach to parts of the developing fetus, constitute the
turn results in a classic phenotype in the newborn infant
classic example of a disruption (Fig. 7.22). A variety of
consisting of flattened faces and positional abnorimali-
environimental agents may cause disruptions (see later).
ties of the hands and feet (Fig. 7.23B). The hips may be
Disruptions are not heritable, of course, and thus are not
dislocated. Growth of the chest wall and the lungs also
associated with risk of recurrence in subsequent
is coimproimised, soimetimes to such an extent that
pregnancies.
Deformations, like disruptions, also represent an extrinsic
disturbance of development rather than an intrinsic error of
morphogenesis. Deforimations are common, affecting
approximately 2% of newborn infants to various degrees.
-sanduos pazenauan ro paziesol Aq pasnes are Aau
sion of the growing fetus by abnorimal biomechanical
forces, leading _eventually to a variety of structural
abnorimalities. The most common cause of deforimations
is uterine constraint. Between weeks 35 and 38 of gesta-
tion, rapid increase in the size of the fetus outpaces the
growth of the uterus, and the relative amount of aimni-
otic fluid (which norimally acts as a cushion) also
decreases. Thus, even the norimal fetus is subjected to
some degree of uterine constraint. However, several
variables increase the likelihood of excessive compres-
sion of the fetus, including maternal conditions such as
first pregnancy, small uterus, malformed (bicornuate)
uterus, and leiomyoimas. Causes relating to the fetus,
such as presence of multiple fetuses, oligohydraimnios,
Fig. 7.22 Disruption due to amniotic bands. In the specimen shown, the
and abnorimal fetal presentation, also may be involved.
placenta is at the right, and the band of armnion exten ds from the top portion
Sequence refers to multiple congenital anomalies that result
of the amniotic sac to encircle the leg of the fetus. (Courtesy of Dr Theonia
from secondary effects of α singlelocalized aberration in
Boyd, Children's Hospital of Boston, Boston, Massochusetts.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Congenital Anomalies
275
Renal
 Amniotic
Etiology
agenesis
leak
Others
IT
IT
 Known causes of errors in human malforimations can be
Amnion
 grouped into three major categories: genetic, environmen-
nodosum
OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS
tal, and multifactorial (Table 7.6). The cause has not been
identified for alimost half of the reported cases.
Geretic causes of malforimations include all of the previ-
ously discussed mechanisims of genetic disease. Virtually
 FETAL COMPRESSION
all chromosomal syndromes are associated with congenital
malforimations. Examples are Down syndrome and other
trisoimies, Turner syndrome, and Klinefelter syndrome.
Pulmonary
Positioning
Most chromosoimal disorders arise during gaimetogenesis
Altered
Breech
hypoplasia
facies
defects
presentation
 and hence are not familial. Single-gene inutations, charac-
of feet,
terized by mendelian inheritance, may underlie major mal-
A
hands
forimations. For example, holoprosencephaly is the most
common developimental defect of the forebrain and midface
 in humans (see Chapter 23). The Hedgehog signaling
pathway plays a critical role in the morphogenesis of these
structures, and loss-of-function mutations of individual
 components within this pathway are reported in faimilies
with a history of recurrent holoprosencephaly.
Environmentat influences, such as viral infections, drugs,
and radiation to which the mother was exposed during
 pregnancy, may cause fetal malformations (the appellation
of “malforimation" is used loosely in this context, because
technically, these anomalies represent disruptions). Among
the viral infections listed in Table 7.6, rubella was a major
Table 7.6 Causes of Congenital Malformations in Humans
Frequency of
Cause
Malformations* (%)
Genetic
 Chromosomal aberrations
10-15
 Mendelian inheritance 
2-10
Environmental
 Maternal' placental infections
2-3
Rubella
Toxoplasmosis
Syphilis
Cytomegalovirus infection 
Fig. 7.23 (A) Pathogenesis of the oligohydramnios (Potter) sequence.
Human immunodeficiency virus
(B) Infant with oligohydramnios (Potter) sequence. Note flattened facial
infection
features and deformed foot (talipes equinovarus).
 Zika virus infection 
Maternal disease states
6-8
survival is not possible. If the embryologic connection
Diabetes
between these defects and the initiating event is not
 Phenylketonuria
 En docrinopathies
recognized, a sequence may be mistaken for a malfor-
 Drugs and chemicals 
mation syndrome.
Malformation syndrome refers to the presence of several
Alcohol
Folic acid antagonists
defects that cannot be explained on the basis ofa single local-
Androgens
izing initiating error in morphogenesis. Syndromes most
 Phenytoin 
 often arise from a single causative condition (e.g., viral
 Thalidomide
 infection or a specific chromosomal abnorimality) that
Warfarin
simultaneously affects several tissues.
13-Cis-retinoic acid
In actdition to these global definitions,some general terms are
Others
applied to organ-specific malformations. Agenesis refers to
Ilrradiation
the complete absence of an organ or its anlage, whereas
 Multifac torial
20-25
Unknown
40-60
*Live births.
describes the absence of an opening, usually of a hollow
Data from Stevenson RE, Hall JG, Goodman RM, editors: Human mafommations and
visceral organ or duct such as intestines and bile ducts.
related anormalies, New York, I993, Oxford University Press, p I15.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
276
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
scourge of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Fortunately,
 In the early embryonic period (first 3 weeks after fertil-
 maternal rubella and the resultant rubella embryopathy
ynoua iaua saseuep juase snonju ue (uonezi
have been virtually eliminated in developed countries as a
cells to cause death and abortion or only a few cells,
result of vaccination. As mentioned later, maternal infec-
presumably allowing the embryo to recover without
tion with Zika Virus can give rise to severe imalformations
developing defects. Between the third and the ninth
of the central nervous systeim. A variety of drugs and chemi-
ueeks,the embryo is extremely susceptible to teratogene-
cals have been suspected to be teratogenic, but perhaps less
sis, with the peak sensitivity occurring between the
than 1% of congenital malforimations are caused by these
fourth and the fifth weeks. During this period organs
agents. The list includes thalidoimide, alcohol, anti-
are being crafted out of the germ-cell layers.
convulsants, warfarin (oral anti-coagulant), and 13-cis-
The fe tal period that follows organogenesis is marked
retinoic acid, which is used in the treatnent of severe acne.
chiefly by the further growth and maturation of the
For example, thalidomide, formerly used as a tranquilizer in
Organs, with greatly reduced susceptibility to terato-
Europe and currently used for treatinent of certain cancers,
genic agents. Instead, the fetus is susceptible to
causes an extreimely high incidence (50% to 80%) of limb
growth retardation or injury to already formed
malforimations. Alcohot, perhaps the most widely used
organs. It is therefore possible for a given agent to
agent today, is an important environmental teratogen.
produce different anomalies if exposure occurs at dif-
Infants born of mothers who abuse alcohol show prenatal
ferent times of gestation.
and postnatal growth retardation, facial anoimalies (micro-
2.7
The complex interplay between environmental terato-
cephaly, short palpebral fissures, maxillary hypoplasia),
gens and intrinsic genetic defects is exemplified by the
and psychoimotor disturbances. These features in coimbina-
fact that features of dysmorphogenesis caused by envi-
tion are designated the fetal alcohot syndrome. Although
ronimental insults often can be recapitulated by genetic
cigarette smoke-derived nicotine has not been convincingly
defects in the pathways targeted by these teratogens.
deinonstrated to be a teratogen, there is a high incidence
Soime representative exaimples follow:
of spontaneous abortions, premature labor, and placental
 Cyclopamine is a plant teratogen. Pregnant sheep that 
abnormalities among pregnant sinokers, and babies born
feed on plants containing cyclopamine give birth to
to mothers who simoke often have a low birth weight and
lambs that have severe craniofacial abnorimalities
may be prone to the sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
including holoprosencephaly and cyclopia (single
In light of these findings, it is best to avoid nicotine expo-
fused eye- hence the origin of the moniker cyclopa-
sure altogether during pregnancy. Among maternal condi-
Soapan jo ioqyu ue st punoduro su (au
tions listed in Table 7.6, diabe tes mellitus is a coimnon entity,
signaling in the enbryo, and, as stated previously,
and despite advances in antenatal obstetric monitoring and
mutations of Hedgehog genes are present in subsets
glucose control, the incidence of major malformations in
of fetuses with holoprosencephaly.
infants of diabetic mothers stands between 6% and 10% in
 Valproic acid is an anti-epileptic and a recognized
most reported series. Maternal hyperglycemia-induced
teratogen. Valproic acid disrupts expression of a
fetal hyperinsulinemia results in fetal macrosomia (organo-
family of highly conserved developmentally criti-
 megaly and increased body fat and muscle mass); cardiac
cal transcription factors known as homeobox (HOX)
anomalies, neural tube defects, and other CNS malforma-
proteins. In vertebrates, HOX proteins have been
tions are some of the major anomalies seen in diabetic
implicated in the patterning of limbs, vertebrae, and
eimbryopathy.
craniofacial structures. Not surprisingly, mutations
Multifactorial inheritance, which implies the interaction
in the HOX gene faimily are responsible for con-
 of environimental influences with two or more genes of
 simall effect, is the most coimunon genetic cause of con-
valproic acid embryopathy.
The vitamin A (retinol) derivativeall-trans-retinoic acid
 dn  s s so  
is essential for norimal development and differentia-
palate and neural tube defects. The importance of envi-
tion, and its absence during eimbryogenesis results in
ronmental contributions to multifactorial inheritance is
a constellation of malformations affecting multiple
underscored by the draimatic reduction in the incidence of
 organ systems, including the eyes, genitourinary
neural tube defects by periconceptional intake of folic
system, cardiovascular system, diaphragim, and lungs
acid in the diet. The recurrence risks and mode of trans-
(see Chapter 8 for vitamin A deficiency in the postna-
 mission of multifactorial disorders are described earlier in
tal period). Conversely, excessive exposure to retinoic
this chapter.
acid also is teratogenic. Infants born to mothers treated
with retinoic acid for severe acne have a predictable
Pathogenesis
phenotype (retinoic acid embryopathy), including CNS,
The pathogenesis of congenital anomalies is complex and
cardiac, and craniofacial defects, such as cleft lip and
-an ae sadrud leal omi ig oisaun aood is
cleft palate. The last entity may stem from retinoic
evant regardless of the etiologic agent:
acid-mediated deregulation of components of the
1.The timing of the prenatal teratogenic insulthas animportant
transforiming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling
pathway, which is involved in palatogenesis. Mice
The intrauterine development of humans can be divided
with knockout of the TGFB3 gene uniforimly develop
into two phases: (1) the embryonic period, occupying
cleft palate, once again illustrating the functional rela-
the first 9 weeks of pregnancy, and (2) the fetal period,
tionship between teratogenic exposure and signaling
terminating at birth.
 pathways in the causation of congenital anoimalies.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Prematurity and Fetal Growth Restriction
277
pneumonia, and myocarditis). More recently, Zika virus
SUMMARY
psun aq r j pe raoue se para s
CONGENITAL ANOMALIES
by pregnant feimales to their offspring with devastating
+ Congenital anomalies result from intrinsic abnormalities (mal.
formations) as well as extrinsic disturbances (deformations,
disruptions).
PREMATURITY AND FETAL GROWTH
· Congenital anomalies can result from genetic (chromosomal
RESTRICTION
abnormalities, gene mutations), environmental (infections,
drugs, alcohol), and multifactorial causes.
+ The timing of the in utero insult has profound influence on the
Prematurity is defined by a gestational age less than 37
extent of congenital anomalies, with earlier events usually
weeks and is the second most common cause of neonatal
having greater impact.
mortality (second only to congenital anomalies). As might
+ The interplay between genetic and environmental causes of
 be expected, infants born before completion of gestation
also weigh less than norimal (<2500 gim). The major risk
factors for prematurity include preterm premature rupture
target signaling pathways in which mutations have been
 of membranes; intrauterine infection leading to inflamna-
reported as a cause for the same anomalies.
tion of the placental membranes (chorioamnionitis); struc-
tural abnormalities of the uterus, cervix, and placenta; and
multiple gestation (e.g, twin pregnancy). Children born
PERINATAL INFECTIONS
before coimpletion of the full period of gestation have
higher morbidity and mortality rates than full-term infants.
 Infections of the fetus and neonate may be acquired trans-
The immaturity of organ systems in preterm infants makes
cervically (ascending infections) or transplacentally (hema-
then
especially
vulnerable   to    several   important
tologic infections).
complications:
· Respiratory distress syndroime, also called hyaline
of microbes from the cervicovaginal canal and may be
membrane disease
acquired in utero or during birth. Most bacterial infec-
 Necrotizing enterocolitis
tions (e.g, α-heimolytic streptococcal infection) and a
·
Sepsis
few viral infections (e.g., herpes simplex) are acquired
 Intraventricular and  geriminal matrix  hemorrhage
in this manner. In general, the fetus acquires the infec-
(Chapter 23)
ssun au ojut png snoruure pasajun sugequ, kq uon
 Long-terim sequelae, including developmental delay
or by passing through an infected birth canal during
delivery. Fetal infection usually is associated with
Although birth weight is low in preterin infants, it
inflaimmation of the placental membranes (chorioaim-
usually is appropriate after adjustiment for gestational age.
nionitis) and inflamnation of the umbilical cord (funisi-
By contrast, as many as one-third of infants who weigh less
tis). This mode of spread is typical for pneumonia and,
than 2500 gm are born at term and are therefore under-
in severe cases, sepsis and meningitis.
 Transplacental infectiors gain access to the fetal blood-
age (SGA) infants suffer from fetal growth restriction. Fetal
streain by crossing the placenta via the chorionic
 growth restriction may result from fetal, maternal, or pla-
villi, and may occur at any time during gestation or
cental abnorimalities, although in many cases the specific
occasionally, as may be the case with hepatitis B and
cause is unknown.
human imnunodeficiency virus, at the time of delivery
 Fetal abnormalities: This category consists of conditions
via maternal-to-fetal transfusion. Most parasitic (e.g-
that intrinsically reduce growth potential of the fetus
toxoplasima, malaria) and viral infections, and a few
despite an adequate supply of nutrients from the mother.
bacterial infections (i.e., Listeria and Treponema), follow
Proiminent among such fetal conditions are chromo-
this mode of hematogenous transimission. The clinical
somal disorders, congenital anoimalies, and congenital
manifestations of these infections are highly variable,
infections. Chromosomal abnormalities may be detected
depending largely on the gestational timing and the
in as many as 17% of fetuses evaluated for fetal growth
microorganisim involved. The most important trans-
restriction and in as many as 66% of fetuses with docu-
placental infections can be conveniently remeimbered
 mented ultrasonographic malforimations. Fetal infection
by the acronym TORCH. The elements of the TORCH
should be considered in all growth-restricted neonates,
complex are Toxoplasima (T), rubella virus (R), cyto-
with the TORCH group of infections (see earlier) being
megalovirus (C), herpesvirus (H), and any of a number
a comumon cause. When the causation is intrinsic to the
of other (O) microbes such as Treponema pallicdum. These
fetus, fetal growth restriction is symmetric (i.e., affects
agents are grouped together because they imay evoke
 all organ systems equally).
similar clinical and pathologic manifestations. TORCH
Placental abnormalities: Placental causes include any
infections occurring early in gestation may cause chronic
factor that compromises the uteroplacental blood
sequelae in the child, including growth restriction,
supply. Examples include placenta previa (low implan-
mental retardation, cataracts, and congenital cardiac
tation of the placenta), placental abruption (separation
anomalies, whereas infections later in pregnancy result
of placenta from the decidua by a retroplacental clot),
-ueu Aq pauduoe Ainui anssn u Aiueurd
 or placental infarction. With placental (and maternal)
tion (encephalitis, chorioretinitis, hepatosplenomegaly,
abnorimalities, the fetal growth restriction is asymunetric
http://ebooksmedicine.net
278
CHAPTER７ 
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
(i.e., the brain is spared relative to visceral organs such
respiratory failure in neonates with congenital deficiency
as the liver)
of surfactant caused by mutations in the corresponding
·Materral factors: This category coimprises by far the most
genes. Surfactant is synthesized by type II pneuimocytes
common causes of the growth deficit in SGA infants.
and, with the healthy newborn's first breath, rapidly coats
Important exaimples are vascular diseases such as pre-
the surface of alveoli, reducing surface tension and thus
pue (al rande) (,Aouuaid go enuraxon,) wisdua
 decreasing the pressure required to keep the alveoli open.
chronic hypertersion. Another class of maternal diseases
 In a lung deficient in surfactant, alveoli tend to collapse,
increasingly being recognized in the setting of fetal
growth restriction is acquired or inherited diseases of
 each breath to open the alveoli. The infant rapidly tires
hypercoagulability (i.e., thrombophilias) (Chapter 4). The
from breathing and generalized atelectasis sets in. The
list of other maternal conditions associated with fetal
resulting hypoxia sets into motion a sequence of events
growth restriction is long, but some of the avoidable
that leads to epithelial and endothelial damage and even-
influences are maternal narcotic abuse, alcohol intake,
tually to the formation of hyaline membranes (Fig. 7.24).
and heavy cigarette simoking (as noted previously, many
As discussed later, this classical picture of surfactant defi-
of these saine causes also are involved in the pathogen-
 is    si s
mons eag sn s (saeuoue riuauos go sisa
Hormones regulate surfactant synthesis. Corticosteroids
restriction in similar fashion include teratogens, such as
stimulate the formation of surfactant lipids and associated
the commonly adiministered anti-convulsant phenytoin
 proteins. Therefore, conditions associated with intrauter-
(Dilantin), as well as nonteratogenic agents. Maternal
ine stress and fetal growth restriction, which increase cor-
malnutrition (in particular, prolonged hypoglycemia)
ticosteroid release, lower the risk of developing RDS.
also may affect fetal growth.
Conversely, the compensatory high blood levels of insulin
in infants of diabetic mothers can suppress surfactant syn-
 Not only is the growth-restricted infant handicapped in
thesis, counteracting the effects of steroids. This may
the perinatal period, but the deficits persist into childhood
explain, in part, why infants of diabetic mothers are at
and adult life. Affected persons are thus more likely to
higher risk for developing RDS. Labor is known to increase
have cerebral dysfunction, learning disabilities, and
surfactant synthesis; accordingly, cesarean section per-
sensory (i.e., visual and hearing) impairment.
forined before the onset of labor also may be associated
with increased risk for RDS.
RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
OFTHE NEWBORN
MORPHOLOGY
The lungs in infants with RDS are of normal size but are heavy
 The most common cause of respiratory distress in the
and relatively airless. They have a mottled purple color, and on
newborn is respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), also
microscopic examination the tissue appears solid, with poorly
know as hryaline membrane disease because of the forma-
developed, generally collapsed (atelectatic) alveoli. If the infant
tion of "membranes" in the peripheral air spaces observed
dies within the first several hours of life, only necrotic cellular
in infants who succumb to this condition. An estimated
debris will be present in the terminal bronchioles and alveolar
24,000 cases of RDS are reported annually in the United
ducts. Later in the course, characteristic eosinophilic hyaline
States. Improveiments in management of this condition
 membranes line the respiratory bronchioles,alveolar ducts, and
have sharply decreased deaths due to respiratory insuffi-
random alveoli (Fig. 7.25). These "membranes" contain necrotic 
ciency froim as many as 5000 per year a decade ago to fewer
epithelial cells admixed with extravasated plasma proteins. There
than 900 cases yearly. It is primarily a disorder of preina-
is a remarkable paucity of neutrophilic inflammatory reaction
hure infants. Less comumon causes include excessive seda-
 associated with these membranes. The lesions of hyaline mem-
tion of the mother, fetal head injury during delivery,
 brane disease are never seen in stillborn infants or in live-born
aspiration of blood or amniotic fluid, and intrauterine
infants who die within a few hours of birth. If the infant with
hypoxia secondary to compression from coiling of the
RDS dies after several days, evidence of reparative changes,
unbilical cord about the neck.
including proliferation of type ll pneumocytes and interstitial
fibrosis, is seen.
Pathogenesis
RDS occurs in about 60% of infants born at less than
Clinical Features
28 weeks' gestation, 30% of those born between 28 to 34
weeks' gestation, and less than 5% of those born after 34
The classic clinical presentation before the era of treatiment
weeks gestation. There are also strong though not invari-
with exogenous surfactant was described earlier. Cur-
able associations with male gender, maternal diabetes, and
rently, the actual clinical course and prognosis for neonatal
delivery by cesarean section.
 RDS vary, depending on the maturity and birth weight of
The fundamental defect in RDS is the inability of the
the infant and the promptness of therapy. The control of
immature lung to synthesize sufficient surfactant. Surfac-
RDS focuses on prevention, either by delaying labor until
tant is a complex of surface-active phospholipids, princi-
 the fetal lung reaches maturity or by inducing maturation
pally dipalimitoylphosphatidylcholine (lecithin)  and  at
of the lung in the at-risk fetus. Critical to these objectives
least two groups of surfactant-associated proteins. The
is the ability to assess fetal lung maturity accurately.
importance of surfactant-associated proteins in normal
Because pulmonary secretions are discharged into the
lung function can be gauged by the occurrence of severe
anniotic fluid, analysis of ainniotic fluid phospholipids
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Necrotizing Enterocolitis
279
PREMATURITY
In uncomplicated cases, recovery begins to occur within
IIT
3 or 4 days. In affected infants, oxygen is required. Use of
Reduced surfactant synthesis, storage, and release 
prolonged periods, however, is associated with two well-
ITI
known complications: retrolental fibroplasia (also called
retinopathy of preimaturity) in the eyes; and bronchopul-
Decreased alveolar surfactant 
monary dysplasia. Fortunately, both complications are
now significantly less common as a result of gentler venti-
lation techniques, antenatal glucocorticoid therapy, and
Increased alveolar surface tension
prophylactic
surfactant treatiments. Hence they are
ITI
described briefly:
Atelectasis
· Retinopathy of prematurity has a two-phase pathogen-
 esis. During the hyperoxic phase of RDS therapy (phase 
 Uneven perfusion 
Hypoventilation
 I), expression of the proangiogenic vascular endothelial
ITI
growth factor (VEGF) is markedly decreased, causing
endothelial cell apoptosis. VEGF levels rebound after
 Hypoxemia + CO2 retention 
return to relatively hypoxic room air ventilation (phase
 I), inducing retinal vessel proliferation (neovascuiariza-
IT
tion) characteristic of the lesions in the retina.
Acidosis
 The major abnorimality in bronchopulnonary dysplasia
IT
is a striking decrease in alveolar septation (imanifested
 Pulmonary vasoconstriction
as large, simplified alveolar structures) and a dysimor-
IT
phic capillary configuration. Multiple factors - hyperox-
Pulmonary hypoperfusior
emia, hyperventilation,
 prematurity, i
inflammatory
Increased
cytokines, and vascular maldevelopment - contribute to
diffusion
bronchopulmonary dysplasia and probably act addi-
gradient
Endothelial
Epithelial
tively or synergistically to proimote injury.
damage
damage
Infants who recover from RDS also are at increased
risk for developing a variety of other complications
 associated with preterin birth; most important among
 Fibrin + necrotic cells
these are patent ductus arteriosus, intraventricular hemor-
Plasma leak
into alveoli
(hyaline membrane)
mage, and necrotizing enterocolitis. Thus, although tech-
nologic advances help save the lives of many infants
with RDS, they also bring to the surface the exquisite
fragility of the immature neonate.
SUMMARY
NEONATAL RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
· Neonatal RDS (hyaline membrane disease) is a disease of
prematurity; most cases occur in neonates born before 28
weeks' gestational age.
+ The fundamental abnormality in RDS is insufficient pulmonary
surfactant, which results in failure of lungs to inflate after birth.
+ The characteristic morphologic pattern in RDS is the presence
of hyaline membranes (consisting of necrotic epithelial cells
 and plasma proteins) lining the airways.
· RDS can be ameliorated by prophylactic administration of
steroids, surfactant therapy, and by improved ventilation
techniques.
+ Long-term sequelae associated with RDS therapy include reti-
Fig. 7.25 Hyaline membrane disease (hematoxylin-eosin stain). Alternating
atelectasis and dlation of the alveoli can be seen.Note the eosinophilic thick
nopathy of prematurity and bronchopulmonary dysplasia; the
hyaline membranes lining the dilated alveoli.
incidence of both complications has decreased with improve-
ments in management of RDS.
provides a good estimate of the level of surfactant in the
alveolar lining. Prophylactic administration at birth of
NECROTIZING ENTEROCOLITIS
exogenous surfactant to extremely preimature infants (born
before 28 weeks' gestational age) has proven very benefi-
 Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) most commonly occurs
cial, such that it is now uncomnon for infants to die of
 in premature infants, with the incidence of the disease
acute RDS.
being inversely proportional to the gestational age. It
http://ebooksmedicine.net
280
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
---      s
SUDDEN INFANT DEATH
infants (<1500 gin). In addition to preimaturity, most cases
are associated with enteral feeding, suggesting that some
SYNDROME (SIDS)
postnatal insult (such as the introduction of bacteria)
sets in motion the cascade culiminating in tissue destruc-
According to the National Institute of Child Health and
tion. Although infectious agents are likely to play a role
Human Development, SIDS is defined as "the sudden
in NEC pathogenesis, no single bacterial pathogen has
death of an infant under 1 year of age which remains
been linked to the disease. A large number of inflaimma-
unexplained after a thorough case investigation, includ-
tory mediators have been associated with pathogenesis of
 ing performance of a complete autopsy, examination of
 NEC. One particular mediator, platelet-activating factor,
the death scene, and review of the clinical history." It is
has been implicated in increasing mucosal perimeabil-
inportant to einphasize that imany cases of sudden death
in infancy are found to have an anatomic or biochemical
o lang suppe, Aqaran suonsun! nuon rnau bu
basis at autopsy (Table 7.7); these should not be labeled as
the fire.
SIDS, but rather as sudden unexpected infant death (SUID).
NEC typically involves the teriminal ileum, cecum,
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates
and right colon, although any part of the simall or large
that SIDS accounts for approximately half of the cases of
intestine may be involved. The involved segiment typi-
SUID in the United States. An aspect of SIDS that is not
cally is distended, friable, and congested (Fig. 7.26), or
stressed in the definition is that the infant usually dies
it can be frankly gangrenous; intestinal perforation with
while asleep - hence the lay terims crib death and cot death.
accoimpanying peritonitis may be seen. On microscopic
SIDS is the leading cause of death between the ages of 1
exaimination, mucosal or transimural coagulative necro-
month and 1 year in US. infants, and the third leading
sis, ulceration, bacterial colonization, and submucosal gas
cause of death overall in this age group, after congenital
bubbles are all features associated with NEC. Evidence
anomalies and diseases of prematurity and low birth
of reparative changes, such as granulation tissue and
weight. In 90% of cases, the infant is younger than 6
fibrosis, 1may be seen shortly after resolution of the acute
 months; most are between the ages of 2 and 4 months. SIDS
episode.
in an earlier sibling is associated with a fivefold relative
The clinical course is fairly typical, with the onset of
risk of recurrence; traumatic child abuse must be carefully
bloody stools, abdominal distention, and development of
excluded under these circumstances.
circulatory collapse. Abdominal radiographs often dem-
onstrate gas within the intestinal wall (preuma tosis intes-
Pathogenesis
tinalis). When detected early, NEC often can be managed
SIDS is multifactorial condition, with a mixture of con-
conservatively, but many cases (20% to 60%) require opera-
 tributing causes in a given case. Three interacting vari-
tive intervention including resection of the necrotic seg-
ables have been proposed: (1) a vulnerable infant, (2) a
   sse    go s
critical developmental period in homeostatic control, and
mortality; infants who survive often develop post-NEC
(3) one or more exogenous stressors. According to this
 strictures froim fibrosis caused by the healing process.
model, several factors make the infant vulnerable to sudden
A
B
Fig. 7.26 Necrotizing enterocolitis. (A) At postrmortem examination in a severe case, the entire small bowel was markedly distended and perilously thin
(usualy this appearance irmplies impending perforation). (B) The congested portion of the ileum corresponds to areas of hemorrhagic infarction and transmural
necrosis. Subrmucosal gas bubbles (pneumatosis intestinalis) can be seen in several areas (arrows).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS)
28
Table 7.7 Factors Associated With Sudden Infant Death
as respiratory drive, blood pressure, and upper airway
Syndrome (SIDS)
reflexes. Abnorimalities in serotonin-dependent signaling
 Parental
in the brain stein may be the underlying basis for SIDS in
 Young maternal age (age younger than 20 years)
soime infants.
Maternal smoking during pregnancy
 Ainong the potential emvirormertal causes, prone sleep-
 Drug abuse in either parent, specificaly paternal marijuana and
ing position, sleeping on soft surfaces, and therimal stress
maternal opiate, cocaine use
are possibly the most important modifiable risk factors for
 Short intergestational intervals
SIDS. Many studies have clearly shown increased risk for
Late or no prenatal care
SIDS in infants who sleep in a prone position, proimpting
Low socioeconomic group
the  American Academy of Pediatrics to recommend
 African-American and American Indian ethnicity (socioeconomic
factors)
 placing healthy infants on their backs when laying them
down to sleep. This "Back to Sleep" campaign has
 Infant
 resulted in substantial decreases in SIDS-related deaths
Brain stem abnormalities, associated with delayed development of
 since its inception in 1994. The prone position increases
 arousal and cardiorespiratory control
the infant' s vulnerability to one or more recognized noxious
 Prematurity and/or low birth weight
stimuli (hypoxia, hypercarbia, and therimal stress) during
Male sex
 Product of a multiple birth
sleep. In addition, the prone position also is associated
 SIDS in a previous sibling 
with decreased arousal responsiveness compared with the
 Antecedent respiratory infections
supine position.
 Germline polymorphisms in autonomic nervous system genes
Of note, SIDS is not the only cause of sudden unex-
Environment
pected death in infancy. Therefore, SIDS is a diagnosis of
 Prone or side sleep position
exclusion,requiring careful examination of the death scene and
 Sleeping on a soft surface
Q complete postmortem examination. The latter can show an
Hyperthermia
unsuspected cause of sudden death in as many as 20% or
Cosleeping in first 3 months of life
more of babies presumed to have died of SIDS (Table 7.7).
 Postmortem Abnormalities Detected in Cases of
 Infections (e.g, viral myocarditis or bronchopneumonia)
 Sudden Unexpected Infant Death (SUID)
are the most comumon causes of SUID, followed by a con-
Infections
genital anomaly. As a result of advanceiments in molecular
Viral myocarditis
diagnostics, several genetic causes of SUID have emerged.
 Bronchopneumonia
For exaimple, fatty acid oxidation disorders, characterized
 Unsuspected congenital anomaly
by defects in mitochondrial fatty acid oxidative enzyimes,
Congenital aortic stenosis
 Anomalous origin of the left coronary artery from the pulmonary
 may be responsible for as many as 5% of sudden deaths in
artery
-o ur-upau u Auaap e asa jo u
 Traumatic child abuse
 Intentional suffocation (flicide)
spective analyses in cases of sudden infant death originally
Genetic and metabolic defects 
designated SiDS also have revealed mutations of cardiac
 Long QT syndrome (SCN5A and KCNQI mutations) 
sodium and potassium channels, which result in a form of
Fatty acid oxidation disorders (MCAD, LCHAD, SCHAD mutations)
cardiac arrhythmia characterized by prolonged QT inter-
Histiocytoid cardiomyopathy (MTCYB mutations)
vals; these cases account for no more than 1% of SUIDs.
Abnormal inflammatory responsiveness (partial deletions in C4a and 
（4b)
*SIDS is not the only cause of SUIDs, but rather is a dagnosis of exdusion. Therefore,
MORPHOLOGY
performance of an autopsy may ofcen show findings that would explain the cause of
an SUID.These cases should mot, striccly speaking, be labeled as "SIDS."
 Anatomic studies of victims have yielded inconsistent histologic
SCN5A, Sodium channel, volcage-gated, type V alpha polypeptide; KCNQ1, potassium
findings. Multiple petechiae are the most common finding in
coenzyme A dehydrogenase; CHAD, long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl coenzyme A
the typical SIDS autopsy (in approximately 80% of cases); these
dehydrogenase; SCHAD, short-chain 3-hydroxyacy coenzyme A dehydrogenase;
usually are present on the thymus, visceral and parietal pleura,
MTCYB, mitochondrial cytochrome b; C4, complement component 4.
 and epicardium. The lungs usually are congested, and vascular 
engorgement with or without pulmonary edema is present in 
death during the critical developmental period (i.e., 1
a majority of cases. Sophisticated morphometric studies have
month to 1 year). These vulnerability factors may be spe-
shown quantitative brain stem abnormalities such as hypoplasia
cific to the parents or the infant, whereas the exogenous
of the arcuate nucleus or a subtle decrease in brain stem
stressor or stressors are attributable to the environment
 neuronal populations in several cases; these observations are not
(Table 7.7). Although numerous factors have been pro-
uniform, however, and the use of such studies is not feasible in 
posed to account for a vulnerable infant, the most compelling
most "routine" autopsy procedures.
mypothesis is that SIDS reflects a delayed development of arousal
and cardiorespiratory controt. The brain stem and, in particu-
lar, the medulla oblongata play a critical role in the body's
SUMMARY
"arousal" response to noxious stimuli such as episodic
SUDDEN INFANT DEATH SYNDROME
hypercarbia, hypoxia, and therimal stress encountered
+ SIDs is a disorder of unknown cause, defined as the sudden
during sleep. The serotonergic (5-HT) system of the
death of an infant younger than I year of age that remains 
am se sasuodsar ,lesnore, asau u pajesidurt st enpau
unexplained after a thorough case investigation including
as regulation of other critical homeostatic functions such
http://ebooksmedicine.net
282
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
Table 7.8 Major Causes of Fetal Hydrops*
performance of an autopsy. Most SIDs deaths occur between 
the ages of 2 and 4 months.
Cardiovascular
+ The most likely basis for SIDS is a delayed development of
 Malformations
arousal reflexes and cardiorespiratory control.
Tachyarrhythmia
+ Numerous environmental risk factors have been proposed, of
High-output filure
which the prone sleeping position is best recognized—hence
 Chromosomal
the success of the "Back to Sleep" program in reducing the
Turner syndrome
incidence of SIDS.
Trisomy 21,trisomy 18
 Thoracic Causes
 Cystic adenomatoid malformation 
 Diaphragmatic hernia
FETAL HYDROPS
Fetal Anemia
 Homozygous α-thalassemia 
Fetal hydrops refers to the accumulation of edema fluid
 Parvovirus Bl9
in the fetus during intrauterine growth. The causes of
Immune hydrops (Rh and ABO)
fetal hydrops are manifold; the most important are listed
 Twin Gestation
in Table 7.8. In the past, hemolytic aneimia caused by Rh
Twin-to-twin transfusion
 blood group incompatibility between mother and fetus
Infection (excluding parvovirus)
(immune hydrops) was the most coimnon cause, but with
Cytomegalovirus
the successful prophylaxis of this disorder during preg-
 Syphilis
nancy, other causes of nonimunune hydrops have eimerged
Toxoplasmosis
as the principal culprits. The fluid accuimulation can be
Genitourinary Tract Malformations
quite variable, ranging in degree from progressive, gener-
Tumors
alized
edema
of
the
fetus
(hycdrops
fetalis),
 Genetic/Metabolic Disorders
a usually lethal condition, to more localized and less 
 Imarked edematous processes, such as isolated pleural and
*The cause of fetal hydrops may be undetermined ("idiopathie") in up to 20% of
peritoneal effusions or postnuchal fluid collections (cystic
cases.
Data from Machin GA: Hydrops,cystic hygroma, hydrothorax, pericardial efusions,
hrygroma), that often are compatible with life (Fig. 7.27). The
and fetal ascites. In Gilbert-Barness E, et al, editors: Potters pathofogy of the fetus,
mechanisim of immune hydrops is discussed first, followed
infant, and child, St. Louis, 2007, Mosby, pp 33.
by other important causes of fetal hydrops.
B
Fig. 7.27 Hydrops fetalis. (A) Generalized accumulation of fluid in the fetus. (B) Fluid accumulation particularly prominent in the soft tissues of the neck.
such as 45,X karyotypes. (Courtesy of Dr. Beverty Rogers, Departrment of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestem Medical Center, Dallos, Texas.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Fetal Hydrops
283
Immune Hydrops
and B antigens on imany cells other than red cells which act
like sponge for the transferred antibody. ABO hemolytic
 Immune hydrops results from an antibody-induced
disease occurs almost exclusively in infants of blood group
hemolytic disease in the newborn that is caused by blood
A or B who are born to mothers of blood group O. The
 group incompatibility between mother and fetus. Such an
O dnono un surunnoseuaosi g-hue pue v-gue deou
incompatibility occurs when the fetus inherits red cell anti-
mothers usually are of the IgM type and therefore do not
genic deteriminants froim the father that are foreign to the
cross the placenta. However, for reasons not well under-
mother. The most coimmon antigens to result in clinically
stood, certain group O women possess IgG antibodies
significant hemolysis are the Rh and ABO blood group
directed against group A or B antigens (or both) even
antigens. Of the numerous antigens included in the Rh
without
previous sensitization. Therefore, the firstborn
systeim, only the D antigen is a major cause of Rh incoimpat-
 Imay be affected. There is no effective method of preventing
ibility. Fetal red cells may reach the maternal circulation
hemolytic disease resulting from ABO incompatibility.
during the last trimester of pregnancy, when the cytotro-
phoblast is no longer present as a barrier, or during child-
Nonimmune Hydrops
birth itself (fetomaternal bleed). The mother then becomes
sensitized to the foreign antigen and produces antibodies
The major causes of nonimmune hydrops include those
that, in future pregnancies, can freely traverse the placenta
disorders associated with cardiovascular defects, chro-
to the fetus, in which they cause red cell destruction. With
mosomal anomalies, and fetal anemia.
initiation of immune heimolysis, progressive aneimia in the
Structural cartiouascular defectsandfunctional abnormali
fetus leads to tissue ischemia, intrauterine cardiac failure,
ties (i.e., arrhythmias) may result in intrauterine cardiac
and peripheral pooling of fluid (edeima). As discussed
failure and hydrops. Among the chromosomal anoma-
later, cardiac failure may be the final pathway by which
edema occurs in many cases of nonimunune hydrops as
and 18 are associated with fetal hydrops; the basis for
well.
this disorder usually is the presence of underlying struc-
Several factors influence the imumune response to
tural cardiac anomalies, although in Turner syndrome
Rh-positive fetal red cells that reach the maternal
      
circulation:
from the neck leading to postnuchal fluid accumulation
· Concurrent ABO incompatibility protects the mother
(resulting in cystic hygromas).
against Rh immunization, because the fetal red cells are
Fetal anemias resulting froim causes other than Rh or
promptly coated by isohemagglutinins (preforimed
ABO incompatibility also may result in hydrops. In fact,
anti-A or anti-B antibodies) and removed from the
in some parts of the world (e.g., Southeast Asia), severe
maternal circulation.
fetal anemia caused by hoimozygous c-thalassemia
 The antibody response depends on the dose of immu-
probably is the most comunon cause of fetal hydrops.
nizing antigen, so hemolytic disease develops only
Transplacental infection by parvovirus B19 is increasingly
when the mother has experienced a significant transpla-
recognized as an important cause of fetal hydrops. The
cental bleed (1more than 1 mL of Rh-positive red cells).
virus gains entry into erythroid precursors (normo-
The isotype of the antibody is important, because imnu.
blasts), where it replicates. The ensuing cellular injury
noglobulin G (IgG) (but not IgM) antibodies can cross
leads to the death of the norimoblasts and aplastic
the placenta. The initial exposure to Rh antigen evokes
anemia. Parvoviral intranuclear inclusions can be seen
Aa si assip y os 'sapognue i go uoog a
within circulating and marrow erythroid precursors
 uncoimunon with the first pregnancy. Subsequent expo-
(Fig. 7.28).
sure during the second or third pregnancy generally
leads to a brisk IgG antibody response.
Appreciation of the role of previous sensitization in
the pathogenesis of Rh-heimolytic disease of the newborn
has led to its therapeutic control. Currently, Rh-negative
mothers are given Rh iinnune globulin (Rhig) at 28 weeks
and within 72 hours after delivery of an Rh-positive baby.
The Rhlg imasks the antigenic sites on the fetal red cells
that may have leaked into the maternal circulation during
childbirth, thus preventing long-lasting sensitization to Rh
antigens.
As a result of the reinarkable success achieved in pre-
vention of Rh hemolysis, fetomaternal ABO incompatibil-
ity currently is the most common cause of imimune
hemolytic disease of the newborn. Although ABO incom-
patibility occurs in approximately 20% to 25% of pregnan-
cies, hemolysis develops in only a sinall fraction of infants
born subsequently, and in general the disease is much
Fig. 7.28 Bone marrow from an infant infected with parvovirus B19. The
milder than Rh incompatibility. In part the less severe
course of disease can be attributed to the expression of A
nuclear inclusions and a surrounding peripheral rim of residual chromatin.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
284
CHAPTER 7 
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
 The basis for hydrops in fetal anemia of imnune and
 nonimmune causes is tissue ischeimia with secondary imyo-
cardial dysfunction and circulatory failure. Additionally,
secondary liver failure may occur, with loss of synthetic
function contributing to
hypoalbuminemia, reduced
plasima osimotic pressure, and edeima.
MORPHOLOGY
The anatomic findings in fetuses with intrauterine fluid accumula-
tion vary with both the severity of the disease and the underly-
ing etiology. As previously noted, hydrops fetalis represents
the most severe and generalized manifestation (Fig. 7.27), and
lesser degrees of edema such as isolated pleural, peritoneal,
or postnuchal fluid collections can occur. Accordingly, infants 
Fig. 7.29 Numerous islands of extramedullary hematopoiesis (small blue
may be stillborn, die within the first few days, or recover com-
cels) are scattered among mature hepatocytes in this histologic preparation
apun sisans saunieay srdiowsap jo asuasaud aul kaald
from an infant with nonimmune hydrops fetalis.
lying constitutional chromosomal abnormalities; postmortem
examination may show a cardiac anomaly. In hydrops associated
with fetal anemia, both fetus and placenta are characteristically
the umbilical cord and early delivery. Postnatally, pho
pale; in most cases, the liver and spleen are enlarged as a con-
totherapy is helpful, because visible light converts biliru-
sequence of cardiac failure and congestion. Additionally, the
bin to readily excreted dipyrroles. As already discussed,
bone marrow shows compensatory hyperplasia of erythroid pre-
in an overwhelming majority of cases, adiministration of
cursors (parvovirus-associated aplastic anemia being a notable
Rhlg to the mother can prevent the occurrence of imimune
exception), and extramedullary hematopoiesis is present
hydrops in subsequent pregnancies. Group ABO hemo
in the liver, the spleen, and possibly in other tissues such as the
Apeai si ina ioipaid on hnoyp arou si aseasip on4
kidneys, the lungs, the lymph nodes,and even the heart (Fig. 7.29).
anticipated by awareness of the blood incompatibility
The increased hematopoietic activity accounts for the presence
 pue uqoouaq Aq pue raqey pue raqou uaamiag
in the peripheral circulation of large numbers of normoblasts,
rubin determinations in the vulnerable newborn. In fatal
and even more immature erythroblasts (erythroblastosis
cases of fetal hydrops, a thorough postinortem examina-
fetalis).
tion is imperative to deterimine the cause and to exclude
The presence of hemolysis in Rh or ABO incompatibility is
a potentially
 recurring cause such as a chromosomal
associated with the added complication of increased circulating
abnormality.
bilirubin from the red cell breakdown.The CNS may be damaged
dL in full-term infants, but often less in premature infants). The
circulating unconjugated bilirubin is taken up into the brain, on
which it apparently exerts a toxic effect. The basal ganglia and
brain stem are particularly prone to deposition of bilirubin
pigment, which imparts a characteristic yellow hue to the paren-
chyma (kernicterus) (Fig. 7.30).
Cinical Course
 Early recognition of fetal hydrops is imperative, because
even severe cases can soimetimes be salvaged with timely
therapy. Immune hydrops that results froim Rh incoimpat-
ibility can be predicted with reasonable certainty, because
its severity correlates well with rapidly rising Rh antibody
fication and management of the at-risk fetus have been
facilitated by aimniocentesis and the advent of chorionic
villus and fetal blood saimpling. The direct anti-globulin
test (direct Coombs test) (Chapter 12) using fetal cord
51
blood yields a positive result if the red cells have been
MM
coated by maternal antibody. In addition, cloning of the
RHD gene has resulted in efforts to determine fetal Rh
Fig. 7.30 Kernicterus. Severe hyperbilirubinemia in the neonatal period-
for exarmple, secondary to immune hydrolysis—results in deposition of bili-
status by sequencing cell free DNA in maternal blood.
rubin pigment (arrows) in the brain parenchyma. This occurs because the
When identified, cases of severe intrauterine heimolysis
may be treated by fetal intravascular transfusions via
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tumors and Tumorlike Lesions of Infancy and Childhood
285
located in the skin, particularly on the face and scalp,
SUMMARY
where they produce flat to elevated, irregular, red-blue
 FETAL HYDROPS
masses; the flat, larger lesions are referred to as port-wine
q 'sae pis an se areua a souea sus
· Fetal hydrops refers to the accumulation of edema fluid in the
 many instances they spontaneously regress (Fig. 7.31). The
fetus during intrauterine growth.
vast majority of superficial hemangioimas have no more
+ The degree of fluid accumulation is variable, from generalized
hydrops fetalis to localized cystic hygromas.
than a cosimetic significance; rarely, they may be the mani-
+ The most common causes of fetal hydrops are nonimmune
festation of a hereditary disorder associated with disease
s nu-ladd uoa a se yns suno ru u
(chromosomal abnormalities, cardiovascular defects, and fetal
drome (Chapter 10). A subset of CNS cavernous hemangio-
anemia), whereas immune hydrops has become less frequent
as a result of Rh antibody prophylaxis.
mas can occur in the faimilial setting; affected faimilies
+ Erythroblastosis fetalis (circulating immature erythroid precur-
harbor mutations in one of three crebral cavernous malfor-
mation (CCM) genes.
sors) is a characteristic finding of fetal anemia-associated
 Lymphangiomas represent the lymphatic counterpart
hydrops.
+ Hemolysis-induced hyperbilirubinemia can result in bilirubin
of hemangiomas. Microscopic exaimination shows cystic
toxicity (kernicterus) in the basal ganglia and brain stem, par-
 and cavernous spaces lined by endothelial cells and sur-
Ansn saoeds au rsaebaose proydul Aq papunon
ticularly in premature infants.
contain pale fluid. They may occur on the skin but, more
importantly, they also are encountered in the deeper
regions of the neck, axilla, mediastinum, and retroperito-
TUMORS AND TUMORLIKE LESIONS
 neum. Although histologically benign, they tend to increase
 in size after birth and may encroach on imediastinal struc-
OE INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD
 tures or nerve trunks in axilla.
Teratomas may occur as benign, well-differentiated
Malignant neoplasms constitute the second most common
cystic lesions (mature teratomas), as lesions of indetermi-
cause of death in children between the ages of 4 and 14
nate potential (immature teratomas), or as unequivocally
years; only accidents exact a higher toll. Benign tumors are
even imore coimumon than cancers.
 It is sometimes difficult to segregate, on morphologic
grounds, true tumors froim tunorlike lesions in the infant
 and child. In this context, two special categories of tumor-
like lesions should be recognized:
He terotopia or choristoma refers to microscopically normal
cells or tissues that are present in abnorimal locations.
Examples are a pancreatic tissue "rest" found in the wall
of the stomach or simall intestine and a simall mass of
adrenal cells found in the kidney, lungs, ovaries,
or
elsewhere. Heterotopic rests usually are of little clinical
Aau aoueeadde ia jo siseq au uo inq aousais
can be confused with neoplasims.
Hamartoma refers to an excessive but focal overgrowth
of cells and tissues native to the organ in which it occurs.
Although the cellular elements are mature and identical
to those found in the reimainder of the organ, they do
not reproduce the normal architecture of the surround-
ing tissue. The line of demarcation between a haimar-
 toima and a benign neoplasim frequently is tenuous and
is variously interpreted. Hemangiomas, lymphangio-
mas, rhabdomyomas of the heart, and adenomas of the
liver are considered by some researchers to be hamarto-
mas and by others to be true neoplasims.
Benign Neoplasms
-lipad a u paraunosua aq Aeur usedoau Aue Aen
Hemangiomas are the most common neoplasms of
infancy. Both cavernous and capillary heimangiomas inay
B
be encountered (Chapter 10), although the latter often are
h z ne (a) pue yg e () eouay Aeide peauo Ie'z 
-dasap readde Aeur snu pue snpe u ue reins anoul
of age after the lesion had undergone spontaneous regression. (Courtesy of
tively worrisome. In children, most hemangiomas are
Dr. Eduardo Yunis, Chidren's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
286
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
malignant teratomas (usually admixed with another
Table 7.9 Common Malignant Neoplasms of Infancy
 germ cell tumor component such as an endodermal sinus
and Childhood
tumor). Sacrococcygeal teratoimas are the most coimmon
10-I4 Years of
teratoimas of childhood, accounting for 40% or more of
 0-4 Years of Age
 5-9 Years of Age
Age
cases (Fig. 7.32). In view of the overlap in the mechanisims
Leukemia
Leukemia
Hepatocellular
underlying congenital malforimations and oncogenesis,
Retinoblastoma
Retinoblastoma
carcinoma
it is interesting that approximately 10% of sacrococcy-
 Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma
 Soft tissue sarcoma
geal teratomas are associated with congenital anoimalies,
Wilms tumor
Hepatocellular
Osteogenic sarcoma
primarily defects of the hindgut and cloacal region and
Hepatoblastoma
carcinoma
Thyroid carcinoma 
 Soft tissue sarcoma
 Soft tissue sarcoma
other midline defects (e.g., meningocele, spina bifida) not
Hodgkin disease 
(especially
Ewing tumor
 believed to result from local effects of the tumor. Approxi-
 rhabdomyosarcoma)
CNS tumors
mately 75% of these tumors are mature teratomas with a
Teratomas
Lymphoma
benign course, and about 12% are unimistakably malig-
CNS tumors
nant and lethal (Chapter 18). The reimainder are desig-
CNS, Central nervous system.
nated immature teratomas, and their malignant potential
correlates with the aimount of immature tissue eleiments
present. Most of the benign teratomas are encoun-
 Better survival or cure of many childhood tumors, so
tered in younger infants (4 imonths of age or younger),
that much attention is now paid to minimizing the
whereas children with malignant lesions tend to be
adverse delayed effects of cheinotherapy and radiother-
somewhat older.
 apy in survivors, including the developimnent of second
malignancies
Malignant Neoplasms
Many malignant pediatric neoplasims are histologically
 The organ systeims involved most coimnonly by inalignant
unique. In general, they tend to exhibit a primitive (embryo-
 neoplasms in infancy and childhood are the heimatopoietic
ral) rather than pleomorphic-anaplastic microscopic appear-
system, neural tissue, and soft tissues (Table 7.9). This dis-
 ance, and frequently they exhibit features of organogenesis
tribution is in sharp contrast with that in adults, in whom
specific to the site of tumor origin. Because of their primi-
epithelial tumors of the lung, heart, prostate, and colon are
tive histologic appearance, many childhood tumors have
the most coimunon forims. Malignant neoplasims of infancy
been collectively referred to as small, round, blue-cell
and childhood differ biologically and histologically from
tumors. Sheets of cells with simall, round nuclei characterize
those in adults. The main differences are as follows:
these tumors, which include neuroblastoma, lymphoma,
· Relatively frequent demonstration of a close relation-
rhabdomyosarcoima, Ewing sarcoima (peripheral neuroecto-
ship between abnorimal development (teratogenesis)
dermal tumor), and some cases of Wilms tumor. Sufficient
and tumor induction (oncogenesis),
 suggesting a
distinctive features usually are present to perimit definitive
 common stem cell defect.
diagnosis on the basis of histologic exaimination alone, but
 Prevalence of genetic abnorimalities or faimilial syn-
molecular studies are becoming increasingly useful, both for
dromes that predispose to cancer
diagnosis and prognosis of childhood cancers. Three
common tumors—neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, and
 spontaneously or to undergo 
“differentiation"
into
Wilims tumor - are described here to highlight the differ-
mature elements
ences between pediatric tumors and those in adults.
Neuroblastoma
The term neuroblastic includes tumors of the sympa-
thetic ganglia and adrenal medulla that are derived from
primordial neural crest cells populating these sites; neu-
roblastoma is the most important member of this family.
It is the second most comimon solid malignancy of child-
hood after brain tumors, accounting for 7% to 10% of all
pediatric neoplasims, and as many as 50% of malignancies
 diagnosed in infancy. Neuroblastomas denonstrate several
unique features in their natural history, including sponta-
neous regression and spontaneous or therapy-induced
maturation. Most occur sporadically, but 1% to 2% are
familial, with autosomal dominant transimission, and in
such cases the neoplasims may involve both of the adrenals
or multiple primary autonomic sites. Germline mutations
 in the anaplastic lyinphoma kinase (ALK) gene have been
linked to the familial predisposition to neuroblastoma.
Soimatic gain-of-function ALK imutations are also observed
in 8% to 10% of sporadic neuroblastoimas, and are markers
Fig. 7.32 Sacrococcygeal teratoma. Note the size of the lesion compared
of adverse prognosis. Clinical trials using inhibitors that
with that of the infant.
 target the inutated ALK tyrosine kinase are underway.
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tumors and Tumorlike Lesions of Infancy and Childhood
287
MORPHOLOGY
In childhood, about 40% of neuroblastomas arise in the adrenal
medulla. The remainder occur anywhere along the sympathetic
chain, with the most common locations being the paravertebral
region of the abdomen (25%) and posterior mediastinum (15%).
Macroscopically, neuroblastomas range in size from clinically
 silent minute nodules (in situ lesions) to large masses weighing
more than I kg. In situ neuroblastomas are reported to be 40
times more frequent than tumors with clinical symptoms. The
great majority of these silent lesions spontaneously regress,
leaving only a focus of fibrosis or calcification in the adult. Some
neuroblastomas are sharply demarcated with a fibrous pseudo-
capsule, but others are infiltrative and invade surrounding struc-
tures, including the kidneys, renal vein, and vena cava,and envelop
the aorta. On transection, they are composed of soft, gray-tan,
brainlike tissue. Larger tumors have areas of necrosis, cystic
 softening, and hemorrhage.
Histologically, classic neuroblastomas are composed of small,
 primitive-appearing cells with dark nuclei, scant cytoplasm, and
poorly defined cell borders growing in solid sheets (Fig. 7.33A).
Mitotic activity, nuclear breakdown ("karyorrhexis"), and pleo-
morphism may be prominent. The background often demon-
strates a faintly eosinophilic fibrillary material (neuropil) that
corresponds to neuritic processes of the primitive neuroblasts.
Typically, so-called Homer-Wright pseudorosettes can be
found, in which the tumor cells are concentrically arranged about
a central space filled with neuropil (the absence of an actual
 central lumen garners the designation pseudo-). Other helpful
features include immunochemical detection of nerual markers,
B
such as neuron-specific enolase, and demonstration on ultra-
Fig. 7.33 (A) Neuroblastoma.This tumor is composed of small cells embed-
structural studies of small, membrane-bound, cytoplasmic 
ded in a finely fibrillar matrix (neuropil. A Homer-Wright pseudorosette
 catecholamine-containing secretory granules.
(tumor cells arranged concentrically around a central core of neuropil) is
Some neoplasms show signs of maturation, either sponta-
seen in the upper right corner. (B) Ganglioneuromas, arising from spontane-
neous or therapy-induced. Larger cells having more abundant
ous or therapy-induced maturation of neuroblastomas, are characterized by
cytoplasm with large vesicular nuclei and a prominent nucleolus,
clusters of large ganglion cells with vesicular nucleiand abundant eosinophilic
representing ganglion cells in various stages of maturation, may
ground stroma.
be found in tumors admixed with primitive neuroblasts (gan-
glioneuroblastoma). Lesions that are even better differenti-
ated contain many more large cells resembling mature ganglion
present with stage 3 or 4 tumors, and only 20% to 40%
cells in the absence of residual neuroblasts; such neoplasms merit
present with stage 1, 2A, 2B, or 4S neuroblastomas.
the designation ganglioneuroma (Fig. 7.33B). Maturation of neu-
Age is the other important determinant of outcome. The
roblasts into ganglion cel usually is accompanied by the appear-
 outlook for children younger than 18 months is much
ance of Schwann cells.
more favorable than for older children at a comparable
 stage of disease. Most neoplasms diagnosed in children
during the first 18 months of life are stage 1 or 2, or stage
Cinical Course and Prognosis
4S (low" risk category in Table 7.10), whereas neo-
Many factors influence prognosis, but the most important
plasms in older children fall into the “intermediate" or
are the stage of the tumor and the age of the patient.
"high" category of risk.
 Staging of neuroblastomas (Table 7.10) assumes great
 Histology is an independent prognostic variable in neu-
inportance in establishing a prognosis. Special note
roblastic tumors; evidence of schwannian stroma and
should be taken of stage 4S (S means special), because
 gangliocytic differentiation is indicative of a favorable
the outlook for these patients is excellent, despite the
prognosis.
spread of disease. As noted in Table 7.10, the primary
Amplification of the MYCN oncogene has profound
a roy inq 7 1o 1 abeis se payissep aq pinom roun
inpact on prognosis. MYCN is located on the distal
 presence of metastases, which are limited to liver, skin,
short arm of chromosome 2. MYCN amplification is
and bone marrow, without bone involvement. Infants
present in about 25% to 30% of primary tumors, 1most in
with 4S tumors have an excellent prognosis with
advanced-stage disease; the greater the number of
minimal therapy, and it is not uncoiminon for the
copies, the worse the prognosis. Amplification of MYCN
does not karyotypically manifest at the resident 2p23-
regression. The biologic basis for this welcoine behavior
p24 site, but rather as extrachromosoimal double minute
is not clear. Unfortunately, most (60% to 80%) children
chromosomes or homogeneously staining regions on
http://ebooksmedicine.net
288
CHAPTER７ 
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
Table 7.10 International Neuroblastoma Staging System
 Stage I
 Localized tumor completely excised, with or without 
microscopic residual disease; representative ipsilateral
nonadherent ymph nodes negative for tumor (nodes
 adherent to the primary tumor may be positive for
tumor)
Stage
 Localized tumor resected incompletely grossly;
2A
 representative ipsilateral nonadherent lymph nodes
 negative for tumor microscopically
Stage
Localized tumor with or without complete gross excision,
2B
ipsilateral nonadherent lymph nodes positive for tumor;
enlarged contralateral lymph nodes, which are negative
for tumor microscopically
Stage 3
 Unresectable unilateral tumor infiltrating across the
midline with or without regional lymph node 
involvement; or localized unilateral tumor with
contralateral regional lymph node involvement
Stage 4
Any prirmary tumor with dissemination to distant lymph
 nodes, bone, bone marrow, liver, skin, and/or other 
0.9
 organs (except as defined for stage 4S)
No amplification
0.8
Stage 45
 Localized primary tumor (as defined for stage I, 2A, or 
 2B) with dissemination limited to skin, liver, and/or bone 
0.7
survi
marrow (<l0% of nucleated cells are constituted by 
neoplastic cells; >l0% involvement of bone marrow is
0.6-
considered as stage 4); stage 45 limited to infants
卡
0.5
younger than I year of age
 Event
0.4-
S, Special.
Adapced from Brodeur GM,Pritchard J, Berthold F,et al: Revisions of the
%
0.3-
international neuroblastoma diagnosis,stagingand response to treatment,j Cin Oncof
11: 1466, 1 993.
0.2-
 MYCN amplification 
0.1-
other chromosomes (Fig. 7.34). MYCN amplification is
currently the most important genetic abnormality
4
B
Years from diagnosis
used in risk stratification of neuroblastic tumors and
automatically renders a tumor as "high" risk, irrespec-
Fig. 7.34 (A) FISH using a fluorescein-labeled cosmid probe for N-myc on
tive of stage or age.
a tissue section containing neuroblastoma attached to the kidney. Note the
DNA ploidy is another prognostic factor, with tumors
neuroblastoma cells on the upper half of the photo with arge areas of stain-
having more favorable prognosis than tumors that are
the photograph show no nuclear staining and background (green) cytoplasmic
near-diploid. The latter subset, although closer to dip-
loidy on absolute nuunber, tends to have multiple struc-
age with metastatic neuroblastoma. The 3-year event-free survival of infants 
tural rearrangements between, and within,chroimosomes
whose tumors lacked MYCN armplification was 93%, whereas those with
that can result in adverse molecular events, such as
tumors that had M YCN amplification had only a I0% event-free survival. (A,
MYCN amplification.
 Although age, stage, MYCN status, and ploidy are used
duiced with pemission from Brodeur GM: Neuroblastoma: biological insights into a
clinically for assigning prognostication, many other
clinical enigma, Nat Rev Cancer 3:203-216, 2003.)
"experimental" molecular aberrations have been identi-
fied that might also have prognostic bearings, or be
potential candidates for targeted therapy. For example,
from an abdominal mass, fever, and weight loss. In older
expression of TrkA, a high-affinity receptor for nerve
 children the neuroblastomas may reinain unnoticed until
 metastases cause hepatoimegaly, ascites, and bone pain.
sympathetic ganglia lineage, is associated with favor-
Neuroblastomas may1
 metastasize widely through the
 able prognosis. Overall, besides MYCN amplification
 r    
and ALK mutations (latter in ~10%), de novo neuroblas-
liver, lungs, bones, and the bone marrow. In neonates, dis-
tomas have few recurrent "hotspot" mutations. How-
seminated neuroblastomas may manifest with multiple
ever, a very high frequency of relapsed neuroblastomas
cutaneous metastases associated with deep blue discolor-
(>75%) have imutations in the RAS-MAP kinase signal-
ation to the skin (earning the rather unfortunate moniker
ing pathway, suggesting that relapsed tunors might
of "blueberry muffin baby"). About 90% of neuroblasto-
mas, regardless of location, produce catecholaimines
pathways.
(similar to the catecholamines associated with pheochro-
mocytomas), which constitutes an important diagnostic
Children younger than 2 years with neuroblastomas
feature (i.e., elevated blood levels of catecholamines and
elevated urine levels of catecholaimine metabolites such as
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Tumors and Tumorlike Lesions of Infancy and Childhood
289
vanillylimandelic  acid  [VMA]  and  homovanillic  acid
Clinical Features
[HVA]). Despite the elaboration of catecholaimines, hyper-
The presenting findings include poor vision, strabismus,
tension is much less frequent with these neoplasims than
a whitish hue to the pupil ("cat's eye reflex"), and pain
with pheochromocytomas (Chapter 20).
 and tenderness in the eye. The imedian age at presenta-
tion is 2 years, although the tumor may be present at
birth. Untreated, the tumors usually are fatal, but when
SUmMARY
 treated with chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and (in locally
NEUROBLASTOMA
advanced tumors) enucleation, survival is the rule. As
noted earlier, some tumors spontaneously regress, and
+ Neuroblastomas and related tumors arise from neural crest-
 patients with familial retinoblastoma are at increased risk
derived cells in the sympathetic ganglia and adrenal medulla.
for the development of osteosarcoma and other soft tissue
+ Neuroblastomas are undifferentiated, whereas ganglioneuro-
tumors.
blastomas and ganglioneuromas demonstrate evidence of
diferentiation (schwannian stroma and ganglion cells). Homer-
Wilms Tumor
Wright pseudorosettes are characteristic of neuroblastomas.
Wilms tumor, or nephroblastoma, is the most common
+ Age, stage, and MYCN amplification and ploidy are the most 
primary tumor of the kidney in children, with most cases
important prognostic features; children younger than 18
occurring in children between 2 and 5 years of age. This
months usually have a better prognosis than older children,
tumor illustrates several important concepts of childhood
tumors: the relationship between congenital malformation
tion fare worse.A high frequency of relapsed neuroblastomas
and increased risk of tumors; the histologic similarity
 have mutations in the RAS-MAP kinase pathway.
between tumor and developing organ; and finally, the
· Neuroblastomas secrete catecholamines, whose metabolites
reimarkable success in the treatiment of childhood tumors.
(VMA/HVA) can be used for screening patients.
Each of these concepts is presented in the following
discussion.
 Three groups of congenital malforimations are associated
Retinoblastoma
with an increased risk for Wilims tumor. These are WAGR
 Retinoblastoma is the most common primary intraocu-
syndrome (i.e.,Wilms tumor,aniridia, genital abnormalities,and
lar malignancy of children. The molecular genetics of
mental retardation); Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), and Beck-
retinoblastoima has been discussed previously (Chapter
with-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). Of patients with WAGR
6). Approximately 40% of the tumors are associated with
a gerimline mutation in the RB gene and are therefore her-
this tumor. Another group of patients, those with so-called
itable. The remaining 60% of the tumors develop sporadi-
"Denys-Drash syndrome" (DDS), have an even higher risk
cally, and these have somatic RB gene mutations. Faimilial
(approximately 90%) of Wilms tumor. Patients with the
-u jo juadonaaap yim paeiosse ae Asid sasi
WAGR syndrome, as the name indicates, have Wilms
ple tumors that are bilateral, although they may be unifo-
tumor, aniridia, genital abnormalities and mental retarda-
cal and unilateral. All of the sporadic, nonheritable
tion. DD syndrome is characterized by gonadal dysgenesis
tumors are unilateral and unifocal. Patients with familial
and early onset nephropathy leading to renal failure. Both
retinoblastoina also are at increased risk for the develop-
of these conditions are associated with abnorimalities of
ment of osteosarcoma and other soft tissue tumors.
the Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) gene, located on 1llpl3. The
nature of the genetic aberration differs, however: Patients
with WAGR syndrome deinonstrate loss of genetic mate-
MORPHOLOGY
rial (ie., deletions) of WT1, while persons with DDS harbor
a dominant negative inactivating mutation in WT1 that
 Retinoblastomas tend to be nodular masses, usually in the pos-
interferes with the function of normal WTl protein made
terior retina, often with satellite seedings (Fig. 7.35A). On micro-
 scopic examination, undifferentiated areas of these tumors are
from the other WT1 allele. WT1 is critical to norimal renal
and gonadal development; it is not surprising, therefore,
found to be composed of small, round cells with large hyper.
that constitutional inactivation of one copy of this gene
chromatic nuclei and scant cytoplasm, resembling undifferenti-
 results in genitourinary abnormalities in humans.
ated retinoblasts.
A third group of patients, those with Beckwith-
 Differentiated structures are found within many retinoblas-
  as  are oe m s u
tomas, the most characteristic of these being Flexner-
Wintersteiner rosettes (Fig. 7.35B). These structures consist
the development of Wilms tumor. These patients exhibit
enlargement of individual body organs (e.g., tongue,
of clusters of cuboidal or short columnar cells arranged around
arr) suas Ao aua o (ai no sa
a central lumen (in contrast with the pseudorosettes of neuro-
phy); enlargeiment of adrenal cortical cells (adrenal cyto-
blastoma, which lack a central lumen). The nuclei are displaced
 megaly) is a characteristic microscopic feature. BWS is an
away from the lumen, which by light microscopy appears to have
example of a disorder of genomic imprinting (see earlier).
a limiting membrane resembling the external limiting membrane
The genetic locus that is involved in these patients is in
 of the retina.
band p15.5 of chroimosome 1l distal to the WT1 locus.
Tumor cells may disseminate beyond the eye through the
Although this locus is called "WT2" for the second Wilms
 optic nerve or subarachnoid space. The most common sites of
 distant metastases are the CNS, skull, distal bones, and lymph
tumor locus, the gene involved has not been identified.
This region contains at least 10 genes that normally are
nodes.
 expressed from only one of the two parental alleles, with
http://ebooksmedicine.net
290
CHAPTER７ 
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
A
Fig. 7.35 Retinoblastoma. (A) Poorly cohesive tumor in retina is seen abutting the optic nerve. (B) Higher-power view showing Flexner-Wintersteiner
rosettes (arrow) and numerous mitotic figures.
transcriptional silencing of the other parental homologue
"rests" in the kidney (see the following), which evolve
by methylation of the proimoter region located upstream of
into Wilms tumors. Finally, tumors with TP53 mutations
the transcription start site. Of all candidate "WT2” genes,
are associated with an especially poor prognosis and
imprinting abnorimalities of insulinlike growth factor-2
 often have a distinctive anaplastic histologic appearance,
(IGF2) have the strongest relationship to tumor predispo-
described later.
sition in persons with BWS. IGF2 norimally is expressed
solely from the paternal allele, whereas the maternal allele
is inprinted. In some Wilms tumors, loss of imprinting
MORPHOLOGY
(i.e., reexpression of IGF2 by the imaternal allele) can be
Wilms tumor typically is a large, solitary, welcircumscribed
deinonstrated, leading to overexpression of the IGF2
mass, although l0% are either bilateral or multicentric at the
protein, which is postulated to result in both organ enlarge-
ment and tumorigenesis. Thus, these associations suggest
time of diagnosis. On cut section, the tumor is soft, homoge-
neous, and tan to gray, with occasional foci of hemorrhage,
that in some cases, congenital malforimations and tumors
cystic degeneration, and necrosis (Fig. 7.36).
 represent related manifestations of genetic lesions affect-
On microscopic examination, Wilms tumors are character-
 uone u saual pau Aaso no aua anus e u
 ized by recognizable attempts to recapitulate different stages of
Wilms tumors, patients with BWS also are at increased
nephrogenesis.The classic triphasic combination of blastemal,
risk for the development of hepatoblastoima, adreno-
stromal, and epithelial cell types is observed in most lesions,
cortical tumors, rhabdomyosarcoinas, and pancreatic
 although the percentage of each component is variable (Fig
tumors.
7.37A). Sheets of small blue cells, with few distinctive features,
 In contrast to syndromic Wilms tumors, the molecular
characterize the blastemal component. Epithelial "differentia-
abnormalities underlying sporadic (i.e, nonsyndromic)
 tion" usually takes the form of abortive tubules or glomeruli.
   s   rg n  s
 Stromal cells are usually fibrocytic or myxoid in nature, although
dren, are only recently being elucidated. Some of them
 skeletal muscle “differentiation" is not uncommon. Approxi-
are associated with specific histologic features described
 mately 5% of tumors contain foci of anaplasia (cells with large,
later. For example, gain-of-function imutations of the gene
hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei and abnormal mitoses) (Fig.
encoding B-catenin (Chapter 6) have been demonstrated
7.37B). The presence of anaplasia correlates with the presence
in approximately 10% of sporadic Wilms tumors. Other
of acquired TPs3 mutations and the emergence of resistance to
recurrent mutations occur in genes encoding proteins
chemotherapy. The pattern of distribution of anaplastic cells
involved in microRNA processing (DROSHA, DGCR8,
within the primary tumor (focal versus diffuse) has important
and DICER1); these are seen in 15% to 20% of Wilms
 implications for prognosis (see further text).
tumors with predominantly blastemal histology (see later).
Nephrogenic rests are putative precursor lesions of
It is postulated that aberrations in microRNA process-
Wilms tumors and are sometimes present in the renal paren-
ing lead to reduced levels of many mature microRNAs,
chyma adjacent to the tumor. Nephrogenic rests have a spectrum
in particular in the miR-200 family, which is involved
of histologic appearances, from expansile masses that resemble
Wilms tumors (hyperplastic rests) to sclerotic rests consisting
renal morphogenesis. The lack of mesenchyimal to epi-
 predominantly of fibrous  tissue  with  occasional  admixed
thelial transforimation likely leads to persistent blasteimal
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Molecular Diagnosis of Mendelian and Complex Disorders
291
SUMMARY
WILMS TUMOR
+ Wilms tumor is the most common renal neoplasm of
childhood.
+ Patients with three syndromes are at increased risk for Wilms
tumors: Denys-Drash, Beckwith-Wiedemann, and Wilms
 tumor, aniridia, genital abnormalities, and mental retardation 
(WGAR) syndrome.
· WAGR syndrome and DDS are associated with WTI inactiva-
 tion, whereas Beckwith-Wiedemann arises through imprinting
abnormalities at the WT2 locus, principally involving the IGF2
gene.
+ The morphologic components ofWilms tumor include blastema
(small, round blue cells) and epithelial and stromal elements.
+ Nephrogenic rests are precursor lesions ofWwilms tumors.
Fig. 7.36 Wilms tumor in the lower pole of the kidney with the character-
 istic tan to gray color and well-circurmscribed margins.
speciimen, the outcome is no different fron that for tumors
without evidence of anaplasia.
immature tubules or glomeruli. It is important to document the
presence of nephrogenic rests in the resected specimen, because 
MOLECULAR DIAGNOSIS OF
these patients are at an increased risk for the development of
MENDELIAN AND COMPLEX
Wilms tumors in the contralateral kidney.
DISORDERS
 In the era predating the ready availability of molecular
Clinical Course
diagnostic assays, rendering the diagnosis of a genetic dis-
 Patients typically present with a palpable abdominal mass,
order depended on the identification of abnorimal gene
which may extend across the midline and down into the
products (e.g, mutant hemoglobin or abnormal metabo-
pelvis. Less often, the presenting features are fever and
lites) or their clinical effects, such as mental retardation
abdominal pain, hematuria or, occasionally, intestinal
(e.g., in PKU). Several factors have since enabled the rapid
obstruction as a result of pressure from the tumor. The
expansion of molecular diagnostics froim the realim of
 prognosis for Wilms tumor generally is very good, and
research to an alimost ubiquitous presence in both acadeimic
excellent results are obtained with  a combination  of
and commercial pathology laboratories. These include (1)
nephrectoimy and chemotherapy. Anaplasia is a harbinger
the sequencing of the huinan genoine and the deposition
of adverse prognosis, but only if it is diffuse. If the anapla-
of these data in publicly available databases; (2) the
 sia is focal and confined within the resected nephrectoimy
Fig. 7.37 (A) Wilms tumor with tightly packed blue cells consistent with the blastemal component and interspersed primitive tubules,representing the epithelial 
component. (B) Focal anaplasia was present in other areas within this Wilms tumor, characterized by cells with hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei, and an
abnormal mitosis (center of field).Predominance of blastermal morphology and diffuse anaplasia are associated with specific molecular lesions (see text).
http://ebooksmedicine.net
292
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
reaction (PCR) kits tailor-made for the identification of spe-
molecular diagnostics laboratories, especially with the
cific genetic disorders; (3) the availability of high-resolution
advent of targeted therapies. Although single gene tests
microarrays ("gene chips") that can interrogate both DNA
(mutations of EGFR or BRAF, amplification of HER2) have
 and RNA on a genoimewide scale using a single platforim;
been used for a while to inform treatiment decisions, the
and, finally, (4) the emergence of autoimated, high-
advent of
cost-effective  next-generation  sequencing
throughput, next-generation (*NextGen") sequencing tech-
nologies. The last two advances have been especially useful 
numbers of coding genes (often in the 100s), as well as
in the context of new research to elucidate the genetic basis
cancer-relevant translocations, in a single assay. The clini-
for both mendelian and complex disorders. Although a
 , e    l
on
detailed discussion of molecular diagnostics is beyond the
the patient's cancer, including potential molecularly tar-
scope of this book, some of the better-known approaches
 geted treatinent recoimumendations. Another major focus of
are highlighted in the ensuing paragraphs. Irrespective of
molecular diagnostics has been the rapid identification of
the technique used, the genetic aberration being queried
infectious diseases, such as suspected tuberculosis or viru-
can be either in the germline (i.e., present in each and every
lent pathogenssuch as Ebola, using DNA-based approaches.
cell of the affected person, as with a CFTR mutation in a
 In general, these approaches have cut down the time
patient with CF) or somatic (i.e., restricted to specific tissue
required for diagnosis from weeks to a matter of days.
types or lesions, as with MYCN amplification in neuroblas-
Besides de novo identification of pathogens, molecular
toima cells). This consideration determines the nature of the
diagnostics laboratories can also contribute to the identifi-
sample (e.g peripheral blood lymphocytes [PBLs], saliva,
cation of treatiment resistance (e.g., acquired mutations in
tumor tissue) used for the assay.
influenza viruses that render them resistant to anti-virals),
sAesse Suisn Asa juauean jo Suonuoui a on pue
-Inseaur) siaaureed rens pooq a u ,peo rena, 1o
Indications for Genetic Analysis
 ing efficacy of therapy and emergence of resistance) are
In general, indications for genetic analysis can be divided
also widely used in cancer patients.
into inherited conditions and acquired conditions. Within
Because of the rapid advances in molecular diagnostics,
 inherited conditions, genetic testing can be offered at either
terms such as " personalized therapy" and " precision imedi-
the prenatal or postnatal stages. It may involve conven-
cine" are being increasingly used to indicate therapy tai-
tional cytogenetics, FISH, molecular diagnostics, or a com-
lored to the needs of the individual patient. It is hoped that
bination of these techniques.
such expectations will be met in the foreseeable future. We
 Prenatal genetic analysis should be offered to all patients
will now discuss some of the coimmon approaches used in
molecular diagnostics laboratories for assessiment of inher-
It can be performed on cells obtained by amniocentesis, on
ited and acquired indications.
chorionic villus biopsy material, or increasingly in "liquid
biopsies" on maternal blood paired with next-generation
Molecular Diagnosis of Copy
sequencing. Soime important indications are the following:
Number Abnormalities
· Advanced maternal age (beyond 34 years), which is
associated with greater risk of trisomies
As already discussed in this chapter, various diseases may
 Confirimed carrier status for a balanced reciprocal trans-
occur as a result of copy number abnorimalities, at the level
location, robertsonian translocation, or inversion
(in
of the entire chroimosoime (trisoimy 2l), chromosomal seg-
such cases, the gaimetes may be unbalanced, so the
ments (22q1l deletion syndrome), or subimicroscopic intra-
 progeny would be at risk for chroimosoimal disorders)
 genic deletions (WAGR syndroine). Karyotype analysis of
 Fetal abnorimalities observed on ultrasound, or 
an
chromosoimes by G banding renains the classic approach
 abnorimal result on routine maternal blood screening
for identifying changes at the chromosomal level; however,
· A chromosomal abnormality or mendelian disorder
as might be expected, the resolution with this technique is
 affecting a previous child
fairly low. To identify subchromosomal alterations, both
 Deterimination of fetal sex when the patient or partner
focused analysis of chromosomal regions by FISH and
is a confirmed carrier of an X-linked genetic disorder
global genomic approaches such as comparative genoimic
hybridization (CGH) are coinnonly used.
Postnatal genetic analysis usually is perforimed on
 peripheral blood lymphocytes. Indications are as follows:
Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization
 Multiple congenital anomalies
 FISH uses DNA probes that recognize sequences specific
 Suspicion of a metabolic syndrome
to chroimosoimal regions of greater than 100 kilobases in
 Unexplained mental retardation and/or developmental
size, which defines the limit of resolution with this tech-
delay
nique for identifying chromosomal changes. Such probes
 Suspected aneuploidy (e.g., features of Down syn-
are labeled with fluorescent dyes and are applied to meta-
drome) or other syndromic chromosomal abnormality
phase spreads or interphase nuclei. The probe hybridizes
(e.g, deletions, inversions)
to its complementary sequence on the chromosome and
 Suspected monogenic 
disease,
whether previously
thus labels the specific chromosoimal region that can then
 described or unknown
be visualized under a fluorescence microscope. The ability
of FISH to circumvent the need for dividing cells is invalu-
Acquired genetic alterations, such as somatic mutations
able when a rapid diagnosis is warranted (e.g, in a criti-
 in cancer, are increasingly becoming a large focus area in
 cally ill infant suspected of having an underlying genetic
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Molecular Diagnosis of Mendelian and Complex Disorders
293
[uand uo paunoad aq ues sisieue yons (rapnos
of the labeled DNA froim the two saimples is coimpared. If
saimples (e.g., cells obtained by ainniocentesis, chorionic
the two samples are equal (i.e., the test sample is diploid),
villus biopsy, or umbilical cord blood), peripheral blood
then all spots on the array will fluoresce yellow (the result
lymphocytes, and even archival tissue sections. FISH is
of an equal admixture of green and red dyes). In contrast,
used for the detection of numeric abnorimalities of chromo-
if there is even a focal deletion or duplication, the probe
soimes (aneuploidy) (Fig. 738A), subte microdeletions
spots corresponding to it will show skewing toward red or
(Fig. 7.38B) and complex translocations not indentifiable by
green (depending on gain or loss of material), allowing
routine karyotyping, and gene amplification (e.g., MYCN
highly accurate deteriminations of copy number variants
amplification in neuroblastomas).
across the genoime.
Newer types of "SNP chips" are based on a similar
Array-Based Genomic Hybridization
concept, but the probes are designed to identify SNP sites
 FISH requires previous knowledge of the one or few spe-
genomewide, which has a number of advantages over
u parae Suaq jo paoadsns suonan leurosouonro o
CGH. As discussed in Chapter 1, SNPs are the most
the test sample. However, genomic abnormalities can also
common type of DNA polymorphisim, occurring approxi-
be detected without previous knowledge by using micro-
mately every 10o0 nucleotides throughout the genome
(e.g., in exons, introns, and regulatory sequences). Thus,
First-generation platforms were designed for comparative
SNPs serve both as a physical landimark within the genoime
genomic hybridization (CGH), whereas newer platforims
as well as a genetic marker whose transmission can be fol-
incorporate single nucleotide polymorphisin (SNP) geno-
lowed from parent to child. There are several testing plat-
typing approaches, offering multiple benefits.
forms that allow SNPs to be analyzed genoimewide on
arrays. Like CGH probes, methods involving SNPs can be
the test DNA and a reference (norimal) DNA are labeled
used to determine copy number variations. In addition, by
with two different fluorescent dyes that fluoresce red and
discriminating between SNP alleles at each particular loca-
green, respectively. The differentially labeled samples are
tion, they also provide zygosity data (Fig. 7.39). This means,
then cohybridized to an array spotted with DNA probes
for exaimple, that SNP chips can identify uniparental
that span the hunan genome at regularly spaced intervals,
 disomy, in which loss of heterozygosity is seen within an
and usually cover all 22 autosomes and the sex chromo-
 affected region having diploid DNA content. The current
 soimes. At each chromosomal probe location, the binding
generation of SNP arrays is quite coimprehensive, with the
A
B
Fig. 7.38 FISH.(A) Interphase nucleus from a male patient with suspected trisomy I8.Three different fluorescent probes have been used in a “FISH cocktail";:
the green probe hybridizes to the X chromosome centromere (one copy), the red probe to the Y chromosome centromere (one copy), and the aqua probe
to the chromosome I8 centromere (three copies). (B) A metaphase spread in which two fluorescent probes have been used, one hybridizing to chromosome
region 22q13 (green) and the other hybridizing to chromosome region 22qll.2 (red).There are two 22q 13 signals. One of the two chromosomes does not
stain with the probe for 22qll.2,indicating a microdeletion in this region.This abnormality gives rise to the 22ql 1.2 deletion syndrome (DiGeorge syndrome).
(Courtesy of Dr. Nancy R. Schneider and Jeff Doolittle, Cytogenetics Laboratory, University of Texas Southwesterm Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.)
http://ebooksmedicine.net
294
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
2.00
Genomic DNA
1.00
Copy
0.00
number
-1.00
-2.00
1.0
AA
0.8
Zygosity
0.6
AB
0.4
0.2
BB
0.0
SNP array hybridization
12
p13.31
p12.3
p12.1
Fig. 7.39 Analysis of copy number variation via SNP cytogenomic array. Genomic DNA is labeled and hybridized to an array containing potentialy millions
of probe spots. Copy number is determined by overallintensity and genotype is determined by allelic ratio.The example shown is the p arm of chromosome
12 in a pediatric leukemia. Here, the normal areas (green) show neutral (diploid) DNA content and the zygosity plot shows the expected ratio of AA, AB,
and BB SNP genotypes.The anomalous area (red) shows decreased overallintensity, and the zygosity plot shows loss of heterozygosity (the AB genotype);
together, these findings indicate the presence of a deletion on one copy of chromosome I2p. (Modified from Paulsson K, et al: Genetic londscope of high hyper-
largest containing greater than 4 imillion SNP probes. As a
of one of the terminator nucleotides. After size separa-
result, this technology is the mainstay of genoimewide
tion by capillary electrophoresis, the exact sequence can
association studies (GWASs, described later).
be “read" and compared with the norimal sequence to
detect the presence of mutations. Many applications of
Sanger sequencing (and other PCR-based approaches)
Direct Detection of DNA Mutations by
Busunbas uonerau-ixau o Aem aai o Suris ane
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Analysis
(discussed later), particularly when the analysis of large
 genes or multiple genes is required. Nonetheless, even
 PCR analysis, which involves exponential amplification of
,pepuis pios, a sureuan buanbas aues 'gtoz u
DNA, is now widely used in molecular diagnosis. If RNA
for many genotyping assays.
is used as the substrate, it is first reverse-transcribed to
 Another approach for identifying mutations at a specific
obtain cDNA and then anplified by PCR. This method
nucleotide position (say, a codon 12 mutation in the
involving reverse trarscription (RT) often is abbreviated as
KRAS oncogene that converts glycine [GGT] to aspartic
RT-PCR. To amplify a DNA segiment of interest, two
acid [GAT]] would be to add fluorescently labeled
primers that bind to the 3' and 5′ ends of the norimal
nucleotides C and T to the PCR mixture, which are
-Alod vNq aienndoidde Suisn Ag pausisap are aouanbas
complementary to either the wild-type (G) or mutant
merases and therimal cycling, the target DNA is greatly
(A) sequence, respectively. Because these two nucleo-
anplified, producing millions of copies of the DNA
tides are labeled with different fluorophores, the fluo-
sequence between the two primer sites. The DNA sequence
rescence eimitted by the resulting PCR product can be of
of the PCR product can then be analyzed in several ways:
one or another color, depending on whether a C or a T
 Sanger sequencing, named after its inventor, Nobel-
becoimes incorporated in the process of primer exten-
laureate Frederick Sanger, has for many years been the
sion (Fig. 7.40). The advantage of this allele-specific
"workhorse” of genoine sequencing, including the orig-
extension strategy is that it is more sensitive than Sanger
inal Human Genome Project. Here, the amplified DNA
sequencing, allowing for the identification mutated
 is imixed with a DNA polymerase, a DNA primer, nucle-
 DNA sequences even if they imake up a simall fraction
otides, and four dead-end (di-deoxy terminator) nucleo-
(-1%) of the total DNA (as may be the case in clinical
tides (A, T, G, and C) labeled with different fluorescent 
specimens obtained from patients suspected of harbor-
tags. The ensuing reaction produces a series of DNA
 ing a malignancy). An ultrasensitive variant of this
molecules of all possible lengths up to a kilobase or so,
assay, known as droplet digital PCR, literally separates
each labeled with a tag that corresponds to the base at
the template DNA (or cDNA) into thousands to millions
which the reaction stopped because of the incorporation
  r s ao,  os jo
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Molecular Diagnosis of Mendelian and Complex Disorders
295
 Point mutation
"read" of sufficient length is generated to map each read
back to the human genome using sophisticated bioinfor-
Imatics. In addition to differences of time and scale, another
DNA
key difference between NGS and traditional Sanger
G/A
sequencing is the ability of the forimer to detect variant
alleles that occur at low frequency in saimples that contain
Primer
a heterogeneous mixture of cells. With Sanger sequencing,.
the lower limit of detection for variant allele frequency is
Q
20% or more, thus requiring either homogeneous samples
Fluorescently
(such as germline DNA) or some forim of enrichiment, such
labeled nucleotides
as microdissection of tumor cells from a biopsy that also
contains norimal tissue. The ability of NGS to "read" the
same region of the genome multiple times (from 100- to
1000-fold redundancy) allows detection of allele frequen-
cies as low as 1%, making NGS particularly useful when
 more nonneoplastic stroma than the tumor cells.
Wild-type DNA
Mutant DNA
Clinical and research applications of NGS (which can be 
performed on either gerimline or somatic DNA, or both)
include targeted sequencing (typically a panel of a few to
Mixed wild-type
several hundred genes); whole exoime sequencing (WES),
and mutant DNA
Fig. 7.40 Allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for muta-
and whole genome sequencing (WGS), which includes the
tion detection in a heterogeneous sample containing an admixture of normal
remaining 99% of the human genome, including regions
and mutant DNA. Nucleotides complementary to the mutant and wild-type
that express noncoding RNAs. In addition to DNA, NGS
nucleotides at the queried base position are labeled with different fluoro-
can also be used for measuring the transcriptome (RNA-
phores such that incorporation into the resulting PCR product yields fluo-
rescent signals of variable intensity in accordance with the ratio of mutant
Seq) and genoimewide binding sites for transcription
to wild-type DNA present.
factors or histones (chromatin immunoprecipitation and
sequencing, or ChIP-Seq).
droplet contains no more than one strand of template
Linkage Analysis and Genomewide
DNA, along with requisite PCR reagents. Each such
Association Studies
"minireactor" then generates its own PCR product,
which can be digitally integrated and analyzed for the
 Direct diagnosis of mutations is possible only if the gene
presence of mutant alleles. By assessing each template
 responsible for a genetic disorder is known and its sequence
individually in parallel, rather than in a single PCR reac-
has been identified. In several diseases that have a genetic
tion, droplet digital PCR has exquisite sensitivity, being
basis, including some comimon disorders, direct genetic
able to detect as little as 1 mutant DNA strand in 10,000
diagnosis is not possible, either because the causal gene has
or more wild-type molecules.
not been identified or because the disease is multifactorial
'sss qns un 'aaoai si a aus ou ue (nod)
Next Generation Sequencing
two types of analyses can be perforimed for unbiased iden-
Increasingly, nearly all of molecular diagnostics applica
tions requiring assessiment of DNA (or RNA) are being
and GWASs. In both instances, surrogate markers in the
Suuanbas uonerauas-jxau, panes-os Kq pauerddns
 genoime, also known as imarker loci, nust be used to local-
(NGS) technologies, so named because the Sanger sequenc-
ize the chromosoimal regions of interest, based on their
ing mentioned earlier is now considered "first generation."
linkage to one or more putative disease-causing genes. The
The availability of NGS technology has the potential to
marker loci used are naturally occurring variations in DNA
alter molecular diagnostics radically, by the sheer volume
sequences known as polyinorphisims, typically SNPs, as
of sequencing data (more than 1 gigabase pairs
or
described previously.
1,000,000,000 base pairs of DNA per day!) at relatively low
Two technologic breakthroughs have enabled the appli-
costs. The entire human genome has a little more than 3
cation of SNPs to high-throughput "gene hunting." First is
gigabases, so true "whole genoime sequencing” can be per-
the coimpletion of several large genomic sequencing proj-
forimed several times in a matter of days. In contrast with
 a  a e d  a) 
Sanger sequencing, NGS technologies use platforims in
that have provided linkage disequilibrium patterns in mul-
which sequencing of multiple fragiments of the human
tiple ethnoracial groups, based on genoimewide SNP
genome (DNA or cDNA) can occur in parallel ("massively
mapping. The entire human genome can now be divided
parallel sequencing"), significantly enhancing its speed
(Fig. 7.41). Fluorescently labeled nucleotides are incorpo-
 numbers of contiguous SNPs on the saime chromosoime
rated that are complementary to the template DNA strands,
that are in linkage disequilibrium and hence inherited
which are imnobilized on a solid phase, with one nucleo-
together as a cluster. As a result, rather than querying
tide added per template per cycle. An image is captured at
every single SNP in the human genoime, comparable infor-
the end of each cycle, and the cycles are repeated until a
mation about shared DNA can be obtained simply by
http://ebooksmedicine.net
296
CHAPTER7
Genetic and Pediatric Diseases
回O
回O
O
O
O
HC
HT
Add all four nucleotides, 
Wash, four-color imaging  (
 Cleave dye and terminating
Repeat
groups, wash
c
AO
Top: CATCGT
TO
Bottom: CCCCCC
B
G
Fig. 7.4l Principle of next-generation sequencing. Several alternative approaches currently are available for “NextGen" sequencing, and one of the more
commonly used platforms is ilustrated. (A) Short fragments of genomic DNA ('template") between I00 and 500 base pairs in length are irmmobilized on a
solid phase platform such as a glass slide, using universal capture primers that are complermentary to adapters that have previously been added to ends of
the template fragments. The addition of fluorescently labeled complementary nucleotides, one per template DNA per cycle, occurs in a “massively parallel"
fashion, at millions of templates irmmobilized on the solid phase at the same time.A four-color imaging camera captures the fluorescence emanating from
each template location (corresponding to the specific incorporated nucleotide), following which the fluorescent dye is cleaved and washed away, and the
entire cycle is repeated. (B) Powerful computational programs can decipher the irmages to generate sequences complermentary to the template DNA at the
end of one “run," and these sequences are then mapped back to the reference genomic sequence, to identify alterations. (Reproduced with permission from 
Metzker M: Sequencing technologiesthe next generotion, Nat Rev Genet I1:31-46, 2010, @ Noture Publishing Group,)
looking for shared haplotypes, using single or a simall
disease. This identifies regions of the genome that contain
adaiondey oads e Auai ro ,n, e sns jo raqunu 
a variant gene or genes that confer disease susceptibility.
 Second, it is now possible to genotype imillions of SNPs
The causal variant within the region is then provisionally
simultaneously, in a cost-effective way, using high-density
identified using a "candidate gene" approach, in which
SNP arrays, as described earlier.
genes are selected based on how tightly they are associated
with the disease and whether their biologic function seeims
Linkage Analysis
likely to be involved in the disease under study. In addition
Linkage analysis deals with assessing shared marker loci
to polygenic diseases, GWASs also have led to the identi-
(i.e., SNPs) in faimily meimbers exhibiting the disease or
fication of genetic loci that modulate coimunon quantitative
trait of interest, with the assumption that SNPs in linkage
 traits in hunans, such as height, body mass, hair and eye
disequilibrium with the disease allele are transimitted
color, and bone density.
through pedigrees. With time it becoimes possible to define
We end this chapter to reflect on the current genomic
J e 'sINS jo qaued e uo paseq adAondey aseasip, 
era of medicine. Advances in understanding the molecu-
which cosegregate with the putative disease allele. Eventu-
lar basis of human disease are taking place at a breathtak-
ally, linkage analysis facilitates localization and cloning of
ing pace, as are molecular diagnostic techniques.
the disease allele. Linkage analysis is most useful in men-
Throughout this book we willillustrate how these changes
delian disorders that are related to one gene with profound
have impacted on the manageiment of certain diseases
effects and high penetrance.
in the clinic. By the time this book reaches the reader
aoan lm sanduixa yns arou Aun ien ado am
Genomewide Association Studies (GWASs)
coimmonplace.
It is now established that some of the most common human
diseases, such as hypertension, diabetes, mental disorders,
and asthima, have a polygenic basis, with multiple genetic
SUGGESTED READINGS
loci contributing simall independent effects, resulting in a
Bianchi DW, Parker RL, Wentworth J, et al: DNA sequencing versus
disease phenotype. Conventional linkage analyses lack the
statistical power to detect such genetic variants. In GWASs,
2014.Seminat study that demonstrated potentiat superiority ofmaternal
large cohorts of patients with and without a disease (rather
 than faimilies) are exaimined across the entire genoime for
diagnosisoftrisomiesin thefetus,wohen compared to conventionat prenatat
variant SNPs that are overrepresented in persons with the
tests.!
http://ebooksmedicine.net
Suggested Readings
297
Bresler SC, Weiser DA, Huwe PJ, et al: ALK mutations confer differ-
state-of-the-art review on mechanisms of cholesterol regutation by PCSK9,
and how inhibition of thisprotein isbeingleveragedin theclinieforaug-
in neuroblastoma, Cancer Cell 26(5):682-694, 2014. [Ar important
menting statin effects.!
Robinson JG, Farnier M, Krempf M, et al: Efficacy and safety of ali-
harboring ALK mutations, using small molecule ALK inhibitors.
rocumab in reducing lipids and cardiovascular events, N Engl Med
Cuting GR: Cystic fibrosis genetics from molecular understanding to
372(16):1489-1499, 2015. {Seminal study establishing the benefits of
clinical application, Nat Rev Genet 16:45-56, 2015.↓An outstanding
PCSK9inhibitors in hypertipidemia.
review oncysticfibrosis byoneofthedoyensinthefield,ithaparticular
Stoltz DA, Meyerholz DK, Welsh MJ: Origins of cystic fibrosis lung 
focus on genetic and environmentat modifiers of the disease.
disease, N Engl ↓ Med 372:351-362, 2015. {An exhaustioe review on
Eleveld TF, Oldridge DA, Bernard V, et al: Relapsed neuroblastomas 
pathophysiologicamechanismsthatcontributetothe panoramaofpumo-
show frequent RAS-MAPK pathway mutations, Nat Genet 47:864-
nary diseases in cystic fibrosis, with numerous exceltent iltustrations.
871,2015. A tandmark study demonstrating a high frequency of attera-
Trachtenberg FL, Haas EA, Kinney HC, et al: Risk factor changes for
tionsin the RAS-MAPK pathwayin treated neurobtastomas,providingα
sudden infant death syndrome after initiation of Back-to-Sleep cam-
new opportunity for targeted therapy in this lethat fumor of childhood.!
paign, Pediatrics 129:630-638,2012. [An important study that measures
Gudbjartsson DF, Helgason H, Gudjonsson SA, et al: Large-scale
u punausaisuoududaaisog yngafoondu
whole-genome sequencing of the Icelandic population, Nat Genef
additionat risk factors have emerged since then.!
Wainwright CE, TRAFFIC Study Group, TRANSPORT Study Group:
day next-generation sequencing, wherein the zwhole genomes of ooer 2600
Lumacaftor-Ivacaftor in patients with cystic fibrosis homozygous
celandicnativesvere seuencedforidentficationofgeneticariantshat
for Phe508del CFTR, N Engl J Med 373:220-231, 2015. [Seminal study
might influence genetic dioersity as zuell as risk for multifactoriat
diseases.!
foacaftor, zwhich enhance mutant Phe508del CFTR function in cystic fibro-
 Hagerman PJ, Hagerman RJ: Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syn-
sis; foacaffor alone is approoed for another variant of CFTR.$
drome (FTAS), Ann N Y Acad Sei 1338:58-70, 2015. [An authorifatioe
Walz AL, Ooms A, Gadd S, et al: Recurrent DGCR8, DROSHA, and
review on FMR1 protein,and the role ofpremutations at the fragile X loci
SIX homeodomain mutations in favorable histology Wilms tumors,
icausing thesymptomaticeurodegenerative condition,FTAS.
s s
tumors identifying mutations of genes inooloed in microRNA processing
atic, and promising, N Engt J Med 372:2229-2234, 2015. [An insightfu!
and consequent microRNA deregulation.
review on the challenges and opportunities of personalized medicine, also
Wong LC, Behr ER: Sudden unexplained death in infants and chil-
known as precision medicine,in the modern era of genomics and high
dren: the role of undiagnosed inherited cardiac conditions, Europace 
throughput sequencing.!
16:1706-1713, 2014. {An insightful review on how unsuspected cardiac
Kalsner L, Chamberlain SJ: Prader-Willi, Angelman, and 15qll-q13
conditions, specifically“channelopathies,”leading to sudden death in
duplication syndromes, Pediatr Clin North Am 62:587-606, 2015. fAn
infancy might be erroneousty diagnosed as SiDS.!
up-to-date review on the genetics,clinicatfindings,and naturathistory of
d  sg  e a ' x a A ' s
children with these tuo imprinting disordes.
referred for linical whole exome sequencing JAMA 312:1870-1879,
Page MM, Stefanutti C, Sniderman A, et al: Recent advances in the
2014. fAn elegant study highlighting the prowess of next-generation tech-
understanding and care of familial hypercholesterolemia: signifi-
niques, zherein 2oo0 consecutive patients zith suspected genetic disor-
cance of the biology and therapeutic regulation of proprotein con-
ders underwent germline whole exome sequencing,leading to the discovery
        
of causat pathogenic mutations in as many as 25% of patients.!
http://ebooksmedicine.net