David E. Noakes
Timothy J.Parkinson
Gary C.W. Ennland
Veterinary
Reproduction
and
Obstetrics
SAUNDERS
Veterinary
Reproduction
and Obstetrics
NINTH EDITION
Commissioning Editor:Robert Eduards
DevelopmentEditor:LotisaWelcht
ProjectManager:JaneDingiuall
Designer:Charles Gray
llustrator:Oxfordllustrators
Illustration Managers:KirsteenWriglit and Gillian Richurds
Veterinary
Reproduction
Obstetrics
and
NINTH
EDITION
Edited by
David E.Noakes BVetMed,PhD,DSc,DVRep,DipECAR,FRCVS
70,WhitneyDrive,Stevenage,Herts.,UK
Timothy J. Parkinson BVSc,DBR,Dip ECAR,MEd, PhD,FRCVS
InstituteofVeterinary,Animal&BiomedicalScience,MasseyUniversity,PalmerstonNorth,NewZealand
and
Gary C.W.England BVetMed,PhD,DVetMed,DVR,DVRep,DipECAR,DipACT,FRCVS
SchoolofVeterinaryMedicine&Science,Universityof Nottingham,SuttonBonington Campus,
Loughborough,UK
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
An Imprint of Elsevier Lid.
Elsevier Limied 2009
TherightsofDavidNoakes,TimoyParkinson and CaryEnglandtobe identifiedas authorsof thiswork have
been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
No pait of thispublication may bereproducedor ansmitted in anyform orby anymeans,electronicormechanical.
including photocopying recording or any information storage and retrieval system,without permission in writing
complete your request on-linevia the Elsevierwebsite at hup://vvw.elsevier.com/permissions.
First published1938asVeterinaryObstetrics by E: Benesch
Second edition1951 asVeterinary Obstetrics by F. Benesch and 1.G.Wright
Thirdcdition 1964 as Wrighut'sVeterinaryObstetrics by G.H.Arthur
Fourth edition 1975asVeterinryReproduction and Obstetrics by G.H.Arthur
Fifth cdition I982 as Veterinary Reprodction dnd Obstetrics by G.H.Arthut,D.E.Noakes and H.Pearson
Sixt edition 1989asVeterinary Reproductionand Obsteirics by G.H.Arthur,D.E.Noakes andH.Pearson
Seventh edition 1996 as Veterinary Reprotuction and Obstctrics by G.H.Arthur, D.E.Noakes,H.Pearson and
T.J.Parkinson
Eighth edition 2001 as Arthur's Veterinary Reproduction and Obstetrics by D.E.Noakes,T.1.Parkinson and G.C.W.
England
Ninth edition 2009 as Veterinary Reproduction and Obstetrics by D.E. Noakes,T.1.Parkinson and G.C.W.
England
ISBN:978-0-7020-2887-8
British Library Cataloguing in PublicationData
Acataloguerecord forthisbook is availablefrom theBritish Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Acatalogrecord for thisbook isavailablefrom theLibrary of Congress
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in his field are constantly changing.As newresearch and experience broaden
our knowledge changes in practice treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or appropriale Readers are
acdvisedtocheck themost curentinformationprovided(ion proceduresfeatured or(i)by themanufacturerofeach
producttobeadministeredoverifytherecommendeddoseorformulathemethodanddurationofadministration
and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the practitione, relying on their own experience and knowledge
of the patient,o make diagnoses,todeterminedosages andthe besttreatment for each individualpatientand to
take allappropriatesafetyprecautions.Tothefullestextentof thelaw,neitherthePublishernorthe Editors assumes
anyliabilyforanyinjuryand/rdamagetperonsorproperyarisingouforrelatdnyusefthemateal
contained in this book.
The Publisher
your source for bools,
ELSEVIER
journalsandmultimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
The
Working together to grow
publisher's
libraries in developing countries
policy is touse
papermanufactured
from sustainableforests.
ELSEVIERBOOKAIDSabre Foundation
Printed in China
contents
Contributors.....
vii
PartThree:Dystocia and other
Preface.
ix
disorders associated with parturition
8.
General considerations..
.209
David Noakes
Part One:Normal cyclical ovarian
9. The approach to an obstetric case....: 223
activity and its control
David Noakes
10.Maternal dystocia: causes and
1.Endogenous and exogenous control
treatment
232
ofovariancyclicity..
3
David Noakes
David Noakes
11.Fetal dystocia: aetiology,incidence
andprevention
247
Part Two:Pregnancy and
David Noakes
parturition
12.Manipulative delivery pervaginam
in farm animals and horses.....
..266
2.Development of the conceptus.
61
David Noakes
David Noakes
13.Vaginal manipulations and delivery
3.Pregnancy and its diagnosis..
in the bitch and queen cat.
.275
MarcelTaverneandDavidNoakes
David Noakes
4.
Abnormal developmentof the
14.
Dystociaduelofetomaternal
conceptus and its consequences......123
disproportion: treatment ..
.280
Susan Long
David Noakes
5.Prolapseof thecervix and vagina....146
15.Dystocia due to postural defects:
David Noakes
treatment.
286
6.Parturition and the care of parturient
David Noakes
animals,including the newbon..
.154
16.Dystocia due to faulty position and
MarcelTaverneandDavidNoakes
presentation, twins and fetal
7.The puerperium.
.194
monsters
297
David Noakes
David Noakes
V
Contents
17. Injuries and diseases incidental to
Part Six: The male animal
parturition....
.306
David Noakes
29. Normal reproduction in male
18. Postparturient prolapse of the uterus ..319
animals
G81
David Noakes
Tim Parkinson
19.Fetotomy.
.326
30.Fertility, subfertility and infertility
Jos Vermunt
in male ainimals
.705
Tim Parkinson
Part Four: Operative interventions
31.Artificialinsemination.
.765
Tim Parkinson
20. The caesarean operation and the
surgical preparation of teaser males .. 347
Part Seven: Exotic species
JosVermuntandDavidNoakes
21. Genital surgery in the bitch
32. Reproduction in Camelidae..
809
and queen...
.376
MarzookAl-Eknah
Gary England
33. Reproduction in the buffalo
824
NazirAhmad and
Part Five: Subfertility and infertility
David Noakes
34.Nornal reproduction,reproductive
22.Infertility and subfertility in the cow:
disease and infertility in pet small
structural and functional abnormalities,
mammals
.836
management deficiencies and
Sharon Redrobe
non-specific infections..
393
Tim Parkinson
Part Eight: Assisted reproduction
23. Specific infectious diseases cauusing
infertility and subfertility in cattle.....476
35. Assisted reproductive technologies....855
Tim Parkinson
IngridBrilckBogh and Torben Greve
24.Veterinary control ofherd fertility...,517
TimParkinson and David Barrett
Appendix
25.Infertility and subfertility in the ewe
Hormones, related substances and vaccines
and doe (female goat)
.559
used in reproduction..
Keith Smith
David Noakes
26. Infertility and subfertility in the mare.. 582
Dale Paccamonti and
Jonathan Pycock
Index..
27.Infertility and subfertility in the gilt
and sow...
632
Olli Pelioiemi and Bas Kemp
28.Infertility and subfertility in the bitch
and queen..
Gury England
vi
Contributors
ProfessorNazirAhmad
Professor BasKemp
Professor of Animal Reproduction,
Professor of Aclaptation Physiology.
Department of Animal Reproduction,
Department of Animal Sciences,
University of Agriculure,
Wageningen University,
Faisalabad,Pakistan
Wageningen,Netherlands
Professor MarzookAl-Eknah
Dr Susan E.Long
Professor of Theriogenology.
Honorary Senior Lecturer
College ofVeterinaryMedicine andAnimal Resources,
DepartmentofVeterinary Clinical Sciences,
King Faisal University,Al-Ahsa,
University of Bristol,
Kingdon of Saudi Arabia
Clarendon Veterinary Centre,
Weston-super-Mare,IK
Mr David C.Barrett
Senior Lecturer in FarmAnimal Health,
Professor David E. Noakes
Division of Veterinary Animal Production and Public Health.
ProfessorEmeritus ofVeterinary Obstetricsand
University of GlasgowVeterinary School,
Diseases of Reproduction,
Glasgow,UK
Royal Veterinary College,
University of London,London,UK;
Professor Ingrid Bruck Bogh
Special Professor of VeterinaryReproduction,
Professor of Veterinary Reproduction and Obsterics
University of Nottingham,
Department of Large Animal Sciences,
Loughborough,UK
Faculty of LifeSciences,
University of Copenhagen,
ProfessorDale L.Paccamonti
Fredericksberg,Denmark
Professor and Head,
Department ofVeterinary Clinical Sciences,
Professor Gary C.W.England
School ofVeterinary Medicine,
FoundingDean andProfessor of Veterinary Reproduction,
Louisiana State UIniversity Baton Rouge,LA,UISA
School ofVeterinary Medicine and Science,
LIniversity of Nottingham,
Professor TimothyJ.Parkinson
Loughborough,UIK
Professor of Farm Animal Reproduction and Health,
InstituteofVeterinary,Animal andBiomedical Science
Professor Torben Greve
MasseyUniversity,Palmerston North,NewZealand
Professorof DomesticAnimal Reproduction,
Departmentof LargeAnimal Sciences,
Faculty of Life Sciences,
University of Copenhagen,
Fredericksberg,Denmark
vii
Contributors
ProfessorolliPeltoniemi
Dr Keith C. Smith
Adjunct Professor of Dornestic Animal Reproduction,
Tiverton,Devon,UK
Department of ProductionAnimal Medicine,
University of Helsinki,
Professor Marcel A.M.Taverne
Saarentaus,Finland
Distinguished Professor of Fetal and Perinatal Biology.
Deparument ofFarmAnimal Health
Dr Jonathan F.Pycock
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Director,
urecht University,
EquineReproductive Services,Malton,
Ltecht,TheNetherlands
North Yorkshire,LIK
Dr JosJ.Vermunt
Ms Sharon P.Redrobe
Registered Veterinary Specialistin CattleMedicine.
Honorary Senior Lecturer.
Welington,NewZealand
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences,
UIniversity of Bristol;
Head of Veterinary Services,
Bristol Zoo Gardens,
Bristol,UIK
vili
Preface
totheninthedition
has been completed. It is sad that the late Professor Geoffrey Arthur did not live to see its completion; he
died in March 2007 having just celebrated his 9ist birthday. His contributions to the subject during his
nearly 70 years as a veterinarian, both as a stimulating teacher and mentor and as a pioneer in veterinary
clinical research, were immense. We dedicate this book to his memory.
It isperhapsfiting that one of thefeaures of thisninth edition is that more ofits contributors arefrom
outside theUIK than inprevious editions; we have tried tointernationalize'theconiributors,who are from
eight different countries.The conception of this textbook was based on the translation into English,in 1938
underthewatchful eyeofthe lateProfessorJohn GeorgeWright,ofwhat wasconsidered at the time tobethe
definitive text in the subject: Geburtshilfe bei Rindund Pferd by ProfessorFranz Benesch,who was Professor of
Obstetrics andDirector of the Obstetrical Clinic in the Veterinary High School in Vienna.Subsequently, I.G.
Wright became co-author of the book entitledVeterinary Obsteirics, which was very much a true description
of the book, since, in the first edition published in 1951 under the authorship of Benesch and Wright,55%
of the 455 pages was devoted to classical veterinary obstetrics. Despite many changes, we have still retained
some of the original diagrams.In thefirst edition there were some excellent drawings ofvariousfetal dispo-
sitions by the late Mr A.C. Shuttleworth, who was Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Anatomy at the University
of Liverpool under Professor l.G. Wright. Initially in half-tone and meticulously drawn from postmortem
specimensthiey havebeen copied and modified in many other textbooks.A.C.Shuttleworthwas avery fine
artist. and it is fitting to recognize his legacy as an illustrator. In addition, we have also retained many of the
photographs used by the late Professors Geoffrey Arthur and Harold Pearson in previous editions.
It is our intention that this new edition should primarily meet the needs of the veterinary undergraduale,
although no doubt it will be useful for others.All the chapters have been updated and in some cases com-
pletely revised and rewritten by new authors. Chapters 3 and 6, on pregnancy and parturition, respectively,
have had major input from Marcel Taverne, Chapter 20 on the caesarean operation in farm animals and horses
has had a major revision with substantial input from Jos Vermunt,who has also written a separate chapier
on the rapidly disappearing.but very useful, art of fetotomy. In the first edition of the book, published in
1951, 56 out of a total of 455 pages were devoted to this topic.New illustrations for these chapters, drawn by
Peter Parlinson,have completed the renewal of this section. The chapter on porcine infertility and subfer-
tility has been completely rewritten by Olli Peltoniemi andBas Kenp,as has Chapter 34,which deals with
normal reproduction and reproductive disease in small pel mammals, by Sharon Redrobe.Dale Paccamonti
has collaborated with Jonathan Pycock on infertility and subfertility in the mare, as has David Barrett with
TimParkinson on thechapter onveterinary control ofherd fertility.Finally,thelist of new authorsincludes
Ingrid Bruck Bogh and Torben Greve, who havewritten a new chapter on assisted reproductive technologies,
which has greatly expanded the original chapter in the eighih edition on embryo transfer.
ix
Preface
Finallywemust thanktheproduction team atElsevierforall theirhelpduringthepreparationof this
new edition.Changes in technology have enabled,most oftheillustrations tobereproduced in colour,
whichhasrequiredsubstantial'sheplierdingof the authors;we areparticularlygratefultoLouisaWelch,the
DevelopmentEditor,JaneDingwall,Project ManagcrSukieHunter,CopyEditor and manyothers for their
patienceandcourtesyinthisregard.
April 2009
David E.Noakes
Timothy J.Parkinson
Gary C.W. England
X
Part
I11
Normal cyclical ovarian
activity and its control
Endogenous and exogenouis control of
ovarian cyclicity
David Noakes
1
Chapter
David Noakes
Endogenous and exogenous control of
ovariancyclicity
In nature,it is the general rule that animals breed
sexuallymature andabletoreproduceisreferredto
once annually and parturition occurs in the spring,
as puberty.Among females of the domestic species,
the time most favourable to the progeny, since
pubertyprecedesthedevelopmentofphysical matu-
theearlyneonatalperiodof theirlifewill bedur-
rity and, although they become capable ofrepro-
ingtheperiodofincreasinglightandwarmth,and
ducingtheir efficiency,particularly with respect to
also at the time when food for themother ismost
their fecundity,has not reached its maximum.
abundant toensure adequatelactation.Under
The initiation ofpubertyis largely a function of
the conditions of feeding and housing provided
the animal's age andmaturity since the female is
by domesticationthebreedingseason tends tobe
born with a genetic potential for cyclic reproduc-
lengthened,and some ofour species,particularly
tive activity.Provided the environmental influences
cattle,may breed at any time during the year; all
are favourable at this time,then once thebiologi-
domesticated animals,however,show a constant
cal clock'is started it will continue for aslong as
tendencytorevertto thenaturalbreedingseason,
the environmentremains favourable.Innoneof
as evidenced by reduced fertility during summer
our domestic species is there a physiological change
and early autumn in sows.
comparablewith themenopauseofwomen.
Forananimal tobreed,itmustbemated and hence
Among non-seasonal polycyclic animals, such
must attract the male and be sexually receptive (in
as the cow and sow, therecurring cyclicactivity is
heatorinoestrus).All domesticspeciesshowrecur-
ring periods of sexual receptivity,or oestrous cycles,
cal conditions.In those species that are seasonally
whichareassociatedwithiheripeningintheovaries
polycyclic, the mare,ewe, doe(or nanny)goat and
of one or more graafian follicles (Fig. 1.1) and cul-
cat,ormonocylic,suchas thebith,thereareer
minatein the sheddingofoneormore ova.Ifafer-
odsofsexual quiescenceor anoestrus.
tile mating occurs then pregnanry may ensue.
When the female reaches puberty the geni-
tal organs increase in size. During the prepuberial
Puberty and the onset of cyclic
period the growth of the genital organs is very sim-
ilar to that ofother organ systems,but at puberty
activity
their growth rate is accelerated,a point well illus
tratedin thegilt,where themeanlengthof theuter
The young female animal shows no evidence of
ine horns is increased by 58%,themean weight
recurring or cyclicperiods of sexual receptivity.The
of the uterus by72% and themean weight of the
onset ofsuchchangeswhen the femalebecomes
 s
3
Part
1
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
Tunica albuginea
there were follicular waves in response to follicle-
 Surtace epithelium
stimulatinghormone(FSH) secretion that were simi
lar to those ofthie adult, and thatindividual follicular
Oocyte
developmcnt was characterized by growing, static and
Theca externa
regressing phases (Adans 1994).
Theca interna
The sheep has been used extensively for studying
Granulosa cells
many of the mechanisms involved in the initiation
Ovarianstroma
of puberty; however, it must be stressed that season-
ality will exert an overriding influence in this spe-
cies (see below). The onset of puberty is signalled
by either the occurrence ofthe first oestrus or the
first ovulation; in the ewe lamb these do not occur
simultaneously because the first ovulation is not
preceded by behavioural oestrus. A similar response
Fig. 1.1 Cross-section of a graafian follicle.
is seenin sexually mature ewes at theonsetofthe
normal breeding season.
(Lasley 1968). Females of domestic species reach the
The hormone that is primarily responsible for
age of puberty at the following times:
the onset of ovarian activity, and hence puberty, is
luteinizing hormone (LHl). In adult ewes during the
mare:1-2years
normal breeding season, basal LH concentrations
cow:7-18 months
·ewe:6-15months
per hour during the period of maximum follicular
doe or nanny goat: 4-8 months
growth. This results in the development of follicles to
· sow: 6-8 months
the preovulatory stage, and their secretion of oestra-
diol,which activates the LH surge causing ovulation
bitch:6-20months
and corpus luteum formation. In the prepubertal
queen cat:7-12months.
ewe lamb,L- pulses occur ai similaramplitudesbut
The changes that occur at puberty depend directly
much lower frequencies (one every 2-3 hours). As a
upon the activity of the ovaries, which have two
consequence,folliculargrowth isinsufficient to acti-
functions: the production of the female gametes
vate theLH surgenecessary forfinal follicular matui-
and the synthesis of hormones.Let us consider the
ration and ovulation.
changes that occur in the ovary of the young heifer
Experimental evidenceinprepubertalewelainbs
calf.At birth, each ovary may contain up to 150 000
has shown that ovarian follicles are capable of
primary or primordial follicles; each consists of an
responding to exogenous gonadotrophin stimula-
oocytesurroundedbyasinglelayerofepithelial
tion and the pituitary is capable of secreting LH at
cells but with no thecal cells. Soon after birth, the
a frequency to stimulate ovulation.The failure of
 ovaries start to develop and produce growing folli-
the prepubertal ewe lamb to undergo ovulation and
cles,which consist of an oocyte with two or more
exhibit oestrus is due to the high threshold for the
layers of granulosa cells and a basement rmembrane.
positive-feedback effect of oestradiol, and thus there
The stimulusfor thedevelopment ofthesefollicles
isno LH surge.At puberty, the threshold is lowered,
is intraovarian and, until the heifer reaches the age
thus allowing thepituitary to respond.This is some-
of puberty, they will develop only to the stage where
times referred to as the'gonadostat' theory.
they have a theca interna and then start toundergo
Other factors are also involved. The frequency of
atresia.Further development of these follicles to
LH secretion is dependent upon gonadotrophin-
produce mature graafian or antral follicles, of which
releasinghormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus,
there are about 200 growing follicles al puberty
which is controlled by an area in the hypothala
in the heifer,is dependent upon the stimulus of
mus referred to as the neural GnRH pulse genera-
gonadotrophic hormones (Fig. 1.1). Despite the
tor, Age-related changes in brain morphalogy and
absenceof oestrous cycles,there is follicular growth,
neuronal cytoarchitecture may also be important,
as has been shown using transrectal ultrasonogra-
since extrapolation from studies performed in rats,
phy in calves from 2 weeks of age. It was noted that
for example, has shown an increase in the number
4
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
of GnRHcellswith spine-likeprocessesonthesoma
the neuroendocrine axis.Although several studies
and dendrites.In addition,the inhibitory effect of
haveshown thatleptintreatmentcan advancethe
opioid peptides onLH secretion is reduced with age,
onsetofpubertyinbothrestrictedandadlibfed
which may provide a neurochemical explanation
animals(Barash ctal1996,Ahima etal1997),and
for the changes in pituitary sensitivity to oestradiol
that serum leptin concentrations increased in pigs
feedbackthatoccuratpuberty(Bhanot&Wilkinson
(Qianetal 1999)and heifers(Garciaetal2002）,
1983,Wray&Hoffman-Small 1986).
it isgenerally accepted that leptinisnot the trigger-
The reason for the silent' first oestrus of the
ing signal for puberty but a permissive signal that
pubertal animal is believed to be because the cen-
enables puberty to 0ccur (Barb &Kraeling 2004).
tral nervous system requires to be primed with pro-
‘Leptin acts as a metabolic gate; as circulating leptin
gesterone before it will respond and the animal will
concentrations increase over thecourse ofpubertal
showbehavioural signs ofheat.Thefirst ovulatory
development,serum leptin levels reach a putative
cycle has been shown to be short in pubertal heif.
stimulatoryihresholdwhichpermits activation of
ers (7.7±0.2 days) and the first corpus luteum (CL)
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. This is
notonlyhasa shorter thannormal life spanbut is
associaiedwith a decreasein thenegativefeedback
alsosmallerinsize.Oneexplanationforthis is that
actionofoestradiolonhehypothalamic-pituitary
the dominant follicle,from which thefirst ovula-
axis, and stimulation of adipose leptin gene expres-
tion arises,has already entered the static phase of
sion'(Barb & Kraeling 2004).
growth. The subsequent interovulatory interval is
normal(Adams 1999).As will be discussed later
Season oftheyear
in this chapter,oncepubertyhas occurred,inmost
domesticspecies there arewavesoffollicular growth
In those species that are seasonal breeders, such
and regression.However, even in the prepubertal
as the ewe, mare and queen cat, the age at which
animals follicularwaves have been identified;these
puberty occurs will beinfluenced by the effect of
have been recordedin heifers(Evans et al 1994a,b)
season of the year.For instance,a filly born early
and fillies (Nogueira & Ginther 2000).
in the year,i.e.January or February,may have her
first oestrus in the May or June of the following
year, i.e.when she is 16or 17 months old.A filly
External factors influencing the
foal born late in theyear,July orAugust,may not
timeofonsetofpuberty
haveherfirstoestrusuntil sheis21or22months
old.The same is true of ewes,which,depending
Thetimeofonsetofpubertyisdeterminedbythe
upon the time ofyear at which they are born,may
individual'sgenotype,withsmallerbreedsof animal
reachpuberty asearly as 6monthsor aslateas 18
tending to be slightlyinore precocious.However,
monthsold.
this inherent timing is influenced by a number of
external factors.
Proximityof themale
Nutrition
Studies in sheep andpigs have shown that exposure
to the male of the species will advance the timing
There is good evidence that in most domestic spe-
of the onset ofpuberty.This so-called‘ram or boar
cies,the onset of puberty is closely linked to the
effect' is probably mediated by pheromonal and
attainment of a critical body weight as well as a
othersensorycuesinfluencinghypothalamic GnRH
minimum percentage body fat, or metabolic mass
secretion.
(Frisch 1984);thus nutrition is an important fac-
tor.Animalsthatarewellfedwithgoodgrowth
Climate
ratesreach puberty before those that are poorly fed
wih slow growth rates.However, unless the ani-
Anthropomorphicextrapolation has assumed that
malis severelymalnourished,cyclicalactivitywill
animalslivinginthe tropicsreachpuberty atan ear-
eventually occur. The protein leptin （see below),
lierage than thosein temperateclimates.Studies
secreted by white fat cells in adipose tissue,may
carriedoutinZambiahaveshown thatincattle this
wellprovidethelinkbetweenmetabolicstaiusand
is not true.
5
Part
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
Disease
Metoestrus
Any disease that can influence the growth rate,
The phase succeeding oestrus. The granulosa cells of
either directly or because of interference with feed-
the ovulated follicle giverise to lutein cells which are
ing and utilization of nutrients,will delay the onset
responsible for the formation of the corpus luteum.
of puberty.
There is a reduction in the amount of secretion from
the uterine, cervical and vaginal glands.
The oestrous cycle and its phases
Dioestrus
Traditionally, the oestrous cycle is divided into a
The period of the corpus luteum. The uterine glands
number of phases.
undergohyperplasia and hypertrophy the cervix
becomes constricted and the secretions of the gen-
ital tract are scant and sticky; the vaginal mucosa
Pro-oestrus
becomes pale. The corpus luteum is fully functional
The phase immediately preceding oestrus.It is
during this phase, and is secreting large amounts of
characterized by a marked increase in activity of
progesterone.
the reproductive svstem.There is follicular growth
The period of the oestrous cycle when there is a
functional corpus luteum is sometimes referred to as
and regression of the corpus luteum of the previ-
lhe luteal phase of the cycle, to differentiate it from
ous cycle (in polycyclic species). The uterus enlarges
very slightly; the endometrium becomes congested
the follicularphiase.Since inmost of our domestic
species oestrus is the only readily identifiable phase
and oedematous and its glands show evidence of
of the estrous cycle,there is some merit,in poly
increased secretory activity. The vaginal mucosa
becomes hyperaemic; the number of cell layers of
oestrous species, in dividing the cycle into oestrus
and interoestrus, the latter including pro-oestrus,
the epithelium starts to increase and the superficial
layers become cornified.The hitch shows external
metoestrus and dioestrus.Another alternative divi-
evidence ofpro-oestruswithvulval oedema,hyper-
sion can beinto follicular and luteal phases.
aemia and a sanguineous vulval discharge.
Anoestrus
Oestrus
The prolonged period of sexual rest duringwhich the
The period of acceptance of the male. The onset and
genital system is mainly quiescent.Follicular devel-
end of thephase arethe only accuratelymeasurable
opment is minimal;the corpora lutea,although
identifiable, have regressed and are non-functional.
points in tlie oestrous cycle and hence are used as
the reference points for determining cycle length.
Secretions are scanty and tenacious, the cervix is
The animal usually seeks out themale and‘stands
constricted and thevaginal mucosa ispale.
forhim fo mate her.The uterine, cervical and vaginal
glands secrete increased amounts of mucus; ihe vag-
Natural regulation ofcyclical
inal epithelium and endometrium become hyperae-
activity
mic and congested; the cervix is relaxed.
Ovulation occurs during this phase of the cycle
in all domestic species with the exception of the
Regulation of cyclical activity in the female is a com-
cow,where it occurs abou 12 hours after the end
plex process.With the development of new tech-
of oestrus. Ovulation is a spontaneous process in all
niques, particularly those involving hormone assays,
domesticspecies with the exception of the cat,rab-
andthe applicationofnewmolecularbiologi-
bit and camelids,in which it is induced by the act
cal techniques, there is a continual advance in the
of coitus.
knowledge and understanding of the mechanisms
During pro-oestrus and oestrus, there is follicular
involved.Althoughmuchof the early work was done
growth in the absence of functional corpora lutea,
on laboratory animals -notably the rat and guinea
the main ovarian hormones produced being oestro-
pig - there is now much more information about
gens. Pro-oestrus and oesirus are frequently referred
domestic species, although there are still areas, par-
to collectively as the follicular phase of the cycle.
ticularly in hebitch, that are not fully understood
6
Chapter
[1]
Endogenous and exogenous control ofovarian cyclicity
Thecentralcontrolofcyclical activityisthehypo-
substances.These aresecreted bythehypothalamic
thalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis.Ar one end ofthis
neurons and are carried from the median emi-
axisthereistheinfluenceoftheextrahypothalamic
nenceofthehypothalamusbythehypothalamic-
areas - the cerebral cortex, thalamus and midbrain -
hypophyscal portal system.In 1971 the molecular
and theroleplayed bystimuli such aslight,olfac-
structure of porcine GnRH- was determined (Matsuo
tionandtouch(Ellendorff1978),while attheother
et al 1971) as being a decapeptide,and subsequently
end is the influence of the uterus upon the ovary.
synthesized (Geiger et al 1971). Opinion is divided
as to whether GnRHI is responsible invivo for the
Melatonin and other pineal peptides
releaseofbothFSH and LH(Lamminget al 1979),
although the injection of GnRH stimulates the
release of bothFSH and LH in domesticspecies.As
roleincontrollingreproductionin seasonalbreed-
yet,nospecific inhibitoryfactor such as thatfor pro-
ing species and also in the timing of puberty by
lactin hasbeenidentifiedforgonadotrophins.
influencing the release of FSH, LH and prolac-
Specific neurotransmitter substances are involved
tin.Although much of the interest has been in
intheregulation ofthereleaseofpituitaryhor-
the action of theindoleamine melatonin,there is
mones.Thus,noradrenaline(norepinephrine) stim-
increasing interest in the other pineal peptide hor-
ulates thereleaseofFSHand LH andtheinhibition
mones,namely arginine vasotocin,gonadotrophin
oftheconversion of dopamine tonoradrenaline,
and prolactin-releasing and inhibitory hormones.
and blocks the‘oestradiol-induced’release of LH,
There is some suggestion that melatonin may act
which is responsiblefor ovulation.Serotonin inhib-
notdirectlyupon thehypothalamus/anteriorpitu-
its thebasal secretionofLH andregulatesotherneu-
itarybutindirectlyviatheotherpinealpeptide
rosecretory systems. Dopamine has an inmportant
hormones.
rolein the control ofprolactinrelease.
Melatonin drives thereproductive response of the
Thereis good evidence thatin domestic species
ewetoinductivephotoperiods(Bittmanet al 1983).
the secretion of FSH and LH is controlled by two
Rhythmicadministration ofmelatonin toadult ewes
functionally separate,but superimposable,systems.
exerts a similar effect to increased hours of darkness
These are (1) the episodic/tonic system, which is
by inducing the onset of the breeding season (Arendt
responsible for the continuous basal secretion of
etal 1983) and causes changes in prolactin con-
gonadoirophinandstimulatesthegrowihofboth
centrationsin theplasmahataresimilarto those
germinalandendocrinecomponentsoftheovary,
following exposure to short days (Kennaway et al
(2） the surge system,which controls the short-lived
1983）.In sheep,an intact pineal gland is required
massive secretion of gonadotrophin,particularly
foranormalphotoperiodicresponsetoalteredday-
LH,responsible for ovulation.There are two hypo-
lightpatterns;however,otherseasonalenvironmen-
thalamic centres that are involved in controlling
talcuesare important,sincepinealectomized ewes
these two systems (Fig.1.2).
still show seasonal breeding(Lincoln 1985).
Withtheexceptionof thecat,rabbit and camelids
Themareisaseasonalbreederbutis‘switchedon'
all domestic species are spontaneous ovulators.
byincreasing daylength.The pineal gland isinvolved,
However,inthesethreespeciesovulationisinduced
since ifit is removed the mare does not show a nor-
bythestimulationofsensoryreceptorsinthevagina
andcervix atcoitus.This initiates a neuroendocrine
mares,melatonin concentrations increase during
reflexultimatelyresultingin the activation of GnRH
hours of darkness (Grubaugh et al 1982). There is
neurons in the surge centre and release of a surge
some evidence that foals are conditioned at an early
ofLH.
age and develop a pattern ofmelatonin secretion
Notonlydoes the anteriorpituitaryhave adirect
from about 7weeksofage(Kilmeretal 1982).
effect upon ovarianfunctions by stimulating follicu-
logenesis,follicular maturation,ovulation and cor-
Hypothalamic and anterior pituitary
pus luteum formation, but the ovary has an effect
upon thehypothalamusandanteriorpituitary.This
hormones
ismediatedbyoestradiol,produced bythe matur-
The hypothalamus isresponsiblefor the control of
ing follicle,and by progesterone, produced by the
release of gonadotrophins from the anterior pitu
corpusluteum.The episodic/tonichypothalamic
itarybytheactionofspecificreleasingandinhibitory
release centre is influenced by the negative-feedback
7
Part
1
Normal cyclical ovarian activity anditscontrol
isolatedfromovarianfollicularfluid;thesehave
been designated activin, which stimulates, and fol-
Extrahypothalamic centres
listatin,whichsuppressesFSH secretionTheirroles
Meialonin and
in controllingandregulatingfolliculargrowthare
clherpineal
not fully understood.
Hypothalamic centres
The positive-feedback effect of oestradiol on hypo-
Surge
Episodict
thalanlic-pituitary function iswell demonstrated in
Leplin
tonic
farmanimalssincethereovulatorysurgeofoestra
anss
diolstimulates thereleaseofL-,whichissoneces-
sary for theprocess ofovulation and corpusluteum
Anterior
formation.Theresponseof the anteriorpituitary to
pituitary
GnRH isinfluencedbythelevelsofovariansteroids,
Liver
so thatthereisincreasedresponsivenessshortly after
the levelofprogesteronedeclines andthatofoestra-
diol rises (Lamming el al 1979).There are probably
self-regulatory mechanisms controlling gonado-
trophin secretion actinglocallywithin theanterior
pituitary and hypothalamus.
Tonic release of gonadotrophinsespecially LHl
Ovary
nsulin
doesnot occur ata steadyratebut ina pulsatile
Pancreas
fashion in response to a similar release of GnR-I
Oes:rogens/
from thehypothalamus.Thenegative feedback of
PGF2u
progesterone
progesterone ismediatedvia a reduction inpulse
frequencyofgonadotrophinrelease,whereasoestra
Oxytocir
diolexerts itseffectvia areducedpulseamplitude.
The onset of cyclical activity after parturition(see Ch.7）,
at puberty or at the start of the breeding season is
Fig.1.2 Endocrine control of cyclical reproductive activity.
associatedwith increased pulsefrequency oftonic
Solid line,stimulation;brokenline,inhibition;GH,growth
gonadotrophin secretion.When theramisplaced
hormone;IGFs,nsulin-likegrowthfactors;IGFBPs,insulin-like
growth factor binding proteins; PGF, prostaglandin F
in contactwith ewesbeforethe startofthebreed-
ing season,here isincreased frequency of pulsatile
(Adapted from Lamming et al 1979.)
LH release,which stimulates the onset of cyclical
activity （Karsch 1984)
effectofoestradiolandprogesterone.Lowlevelsof
progesterone also have a modulating influence on
Leptin
this centre,which appears to be particularly impor
tant in ruminants (Lamminget al 1979). In the cow,
In the last fewyears,another hormone,leptin,has
eweand sow(andprobably inother domestic spe-
been identified as having not only an important
cies)FSHsecretion isalsocontrolled byanumber
roleinregulatingfood intakeinmananddomes-
ofovarian-derived peptide hormones.The first that
tic animals but also an important role in control-
hasbeen characterized,inhibin,isproduced by the
ling reproduction;itsrolein regulating the time of
granulosa cells of large anural follicles,and can be
onset ofpubertyhas alreadybeen described earlier
isolated from follicular fluid (Fig.1.1). It has also
in this chapter.Leptin is a 16kDa protein consisting
been isolatedfrom thetestis and seminalplasma
of140 aminoacidsthatissynthesizedby thewhite
（see Ch.29).Inhibin and oestradiolact in concert
fatcellsofadiposetissue,issite of action isprimar-
in suppressing FSH secretion. Inhibin,which is
ilythehypothalamusbut alsotheanteriorpituitary,
produced by all antral follicles, has a longer half
since leptin receptors have been identified in both
life and seisthe overall level ofnegative feedback,
sites (Dyer et al 1997, Lin et al 2000).The interac-
whereasoestradiol,whichisproducedonlybythose
tion betweenfoodintake,andthehypothalamic-
antral follicles thathavethepotentialfor ovulation,
pituitary axis,has been shown by examining the
isresponsiblefor the day-to-day fluctuations(Baird
effect ofacute fasting and chronicfeed restriction
et al1991).Twootherpeptidehormoneshavebeen
onboth leptin and LH levels in serum.In the cow
B
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
andewe,therewas a decreaseinboth leptin and LH
follicular development during normal cyclical ovar-
(Amstalden et al2000,Henry etal 2001,Morrison
ian activityor,n thecaseof camelids,during theper
etal2001).Howeverin thepig,an acute 24 hoursfast
odsofreproductiveactivity,well organizedwave-like
causeda decrease in leptin,but there was no effect
patterns occur.Thus there are antral folliclespresent,
on LH(Barb et al 2001);thus indicating species dif-
which areoftencloseinsizetothosewhich arejust
ferencesandemphasizingthedangersofextrapolat-
preovulatory,throughout the oestrous cycle,includ
ingfromonetotheother.
ingthelutealphase,However,inthesow thereisno
evidenceof awave-likepattern,but thepresence of
Role ofprogesterone and ovulation
30-50intermediatesized follicles(2-7mm in diam
eter),from which on average about 20which aredes-
Progesterone appears toplayacriticallyimportant
tined1o ovulate start to grow on days 14-16of the
roleintheinhibitionofthe tonicmodeofLH secre-
oestrous cycle, when the CLs are starting to regress.
tion in the ewe(Karsch et al 1978).Progesterone is
One explanation for such a system of folliculogen-
thusthemainregulatoryhormonethatcontrolsthe
esis,may bethe large numberof follicles that ovulate
oestrous cycleof the sheep andprobably ofother
over a very short space of time in this species.The
species too.Thus when the concentration of proges-
patterns of follicular development in individual spe-
terone in thecirculation falls,associated with the
cies will be described separately below.The follow-
regression of the corpus luteum,there is release of
ingterminologydescribingfolliculogenesisisnow
LH from the anterior pituitary.Therise in LH trig-
generally accepted (Webb et al 1999):
gers the secretion of oestradiol; this sudden rise
·recruitment - gonadotrophin stimulation of a
stimulates the surge centre for theLH release and,
pool of rapidly growing follicles
asaresultof thissudden increase,ovulationof the
selection -a process whereby one or more of the
maturefollicleoccurs(Karschetal1978)
In some species,notably the cow（see Fig.1.29),
recruitedfolliclesareselectedtodevelopfurther
there is also a concomitant surgein FSH;although
·dominance -the mechanism whereby one （the
itssignificanceis unclear itmaybepart of the‘ovu-
dominant follicle) orseveral follicles undergo rapid
lation-inducing'hormone complex.For this rea-
development in an environment where the growth
sonitisprobablyincorrecttoassignaseparate
and development of other follicles is suppressed.
andspecificphysiologicalroleforthetwopituitary
gonadotrophins.Thus,althoughovulation and ste-
marized,particularlynruminant species,byAdams
roidogenesis can be initiated by both FSH and LH,
(1999),and it is appropriate toquotethis asfollows:
it would appear that onlyFSH can induce early fol
liculargrowth,so that when thegranulosacellshave
(1)follicles grow in a wave-like fashion;(2)periodic
surges in circulatingFSH areassociatedwith follicular
matured and are able to respond to endogenous LH,
wave emergence:(3) selection ofa dominant follicle
the formationofafullydevelopedvesicularfollicle
involves the declinein FSHI and acquisition ofLH
occurs.Large amounts of a peptide similar to the
responsiveness;(4)periodic anovulatory follicular
hormone inhibin,produced by theSertoli cells of
waves continue lo emerge until the occurrence ofan
the testis,have been found in bovine and porcine
LH surge(5）within specie,theresapositiveeltn-
follicular fluid and granulosa cells.This hormone
shipbetween thedurationoftheoestrouscycleand the
number of follicular waves;(6) progesterone is sup-
probablyselectivelyinhibitsFSHreleasefromthe
pressive toLH secretionand thegrowth of the domi-
anteriorpituitarybutit may alsohave alocalrolein
nant follicle;(7)theduration of the interwaveinterval
conirolling ovarian function;ithas been shown to
isa function of folliculardominance,and isnegatively
inhibit the binding of FSH to granulosa cells in the
correlated with circulating FS1:(8) follicular domi
cow(Sato etal1982).
nance inall speciesis more pronounced duringthefirst
and last follicular waves of the oestrous cycle;(9) preg-
nancy,the prepubertal period and seasonal anoestrus
Folliculogenesis
are characterized by regulaperiodic surges ofFSHand
Throughouttheoestrous cycleduringpregnancyand
emergence ofanovulatory follicularwaves.
otherreproductivestages,hereiscontinuousfollicu
Even during times suchas pregnancy,anoestrus and
lar activity with growth and atresia.There appear to
post-partum there is evidence of follicular growth
be two different patterns of folliculargrowth (Fortune
andregression.Follicularwaveshavebeenidentified
1994). In horses, cattle, sheep goats and buffalo,
in pregnant cows,ewes,doegoats,llamas andcamels
6
Part
11
Normal cyclical ovarian activityand itscontrol
and during the puerperium,before the resumptionanumber of different cell types: the steroid-secreting
ofcyclicalactivity.Hlowever,thefolliclestendtobe
large and small,lutealcells,fibroblasts,smoothmus-
of smaller diameter than thosepresentinfollicular
cle cells,peritytes and endothelial cells.It has the
greatest blood supply per unit tissue of any organ
Evans2003).
(Reynolds & Redmer 1999）.In the ewe,based on
volume,thelargelutealcellscomprise25-35%,the
The insulin-like growth factor system,
smallluteal cells 12-18%and vascular elements
11% (Rodgers et al 1984).Although the CL devel-
and its role in folliculogenesis
ops as a resul of ovulation,in some species,nota-
Overthelast6or7years,severalresearch groups have
bly thebitch,thereare earlysigns ofluteinizationof
describedtheroleofwhat theyhavecalled:'theinsu-
thefolliclebeforeit has ovulated.Thestimulusfor
lin-likegrowth factorsystem'in thegrowth andselec-
the formation and maintenance of the CL probably
tionoffollicles inmostofthedomesticspecies(see
varies within species.The hormones thatare most
reviewbyMazerbourgetal2003);thesystem com-
likely to beinvolved areprolactinandLH,but here
prises a number of different,but related,elements.
is some evidence that they are involved together,
They are:(1) two ligands,insulin-like growth factor
perhapsinassociationwithFSH.Althoughall three
(IGF)-1 and IGF-2;(2) type1 and type 2receptors;
hormones are probably involved in the induction
(3） six IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs),which have a
ofluteinization of granulosa cells,the availableevi
highaffinityforbindingbothIGF-1 andIGF-2and
dence suggests that FSH is probably not required for
are ubiquitous inall biologicalfluidsncludingfolli-
themaintenanceoflutealfunction.Thedifference
cularuid.naddition,hereisalsa proteaser
betweenspeciesiswellillustratedbytheobservation
nancy-associated plasma protein (PAPP)-A,which
thatLHwillprolonglutealfunctionin thesowbut
degradesIGFBPin thefollicleThus,thebioavailabil-
prolactin willnot(Denamuretal1966,Anderson
ityofIGF-1and2isreducedwhentheyareboundto
their binding proteins;however, their bioavailability
be moreimportant as a luteotrophic agent, since LH
isincreasedbytheactionofPAPP-A,which degrades
will cxertaneffectonlyifinfusedfrom day10today
the binding proteins,thus releasing free and biologi-
12ofthe oestrouscycle.
cally active IGF-1 and 2.How does the insulin-like
growthfactorsystemfunction?IGFscausefollicular
Regression(luteolysis)ofthe
growth andmaturation,aswellasheemergenceofa
corpusluteum
dominant follicle by sensitizingfollicular granulosa
cells to the effects of FSH. PAPP-A has been identi
The presence ofa functional CL,by virtue of its
fied inbovine,equine,ovine and porcine preovula-
production of progesterone, inhibits the return to
tory follicles (Lawrence etal 1999, Rivera&Fortune
Oestrusby exerting anegativefeedbackeffectupon
2003).There is also good evidence in the cow that
theanterior pituitary;this is most obvious during
growth hormone(GH) also has a role in regulating
pregnancy (see Ch. 3). In the normal, non-pregnant
ovarianfunction,eitherdirectlyorbystimulatingthe
female,oestrus andovulation occur at fairlyregu
synthesis and secretion of IGF-1 by theliver(Lucy
larintervals;themaincontrolofthis cyclical activity
etal1999).
would appear to be the CL.There is also evidence
thai the Cl also exerts a positive intraovarian effect
Formation of the corpus luteum
by increasingthenumber of small antral follicles in
that ovary（Pierson&Ginther 1987).
The CL is rapidly formed from the graafian follicle
Although it has been known for over 80years that
after ovulation,primarily from the granulosa and
incertainspeciestheuterus influences ovarianfunc-
the thecal cells;in the ewe,for example, its mass
tion(Loeb1923)thewholemechanismhasyet to
increases20-foldover12days（Reynolds&Redmer
becompletelyunderstood(seereviewbyWeems et
1999). For some time it was assumed thal, once
al2006)
formed,tremainedarelativelystaticstructurehw
It has been demonstrated that in many species
ever,itis nowknown that,when it is functionally
removal of part orall of theuteruswill result in the
mature,hresapidcellnover,alhough thre
prolongation of the life span of the CL(du Mesnil
little change in size.The fully formed CL consists of
du Buisson 196l,Rowson & Moor 1967):these
10
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenouscontrol ofovarian cyclicity
speciesinclude caitle,horses,sheepgoas and pigs.
walls of the vessels.I has been suggested (Ginther
In the human,dog and cat the normal life span of
1974) that the variation in the response to partial
the CLisunaltered in the absenceoftheuterus.In the
or total hysterectomyin different speciesisprobably
cow,ewe and goattheluteolytic'action ofhe
dueto differences inhe relationships between the
uterine horn isdirectedexclusively tothe CL
vasculatureof theuterusandovaries.
onthe adjacent ovary(Ginther 1974).Thus,ifone
Itwas notuntil 1969that the substancerespon-
of the uterine horns is surgically removed on the
sible for luteolysis was identified,when the dura-
side adjacent to the ovary with a CL,then the lat-
tionofpseudopregnancyin theratwasshortened
terwillpersist.lf thecontralateral horn is removed.
by the injection of prostaglandin (PG)FThis same
then the CL will regress at the normal time.It
substance has subsequentlybeen shown to have
appears that in these species the luteolyic sub-
potent luteolytic activity in the ewe, doe goat, cow,
stanceistransporteddirectlyfromtheuterustothe
sow andmare.Alihioughit hasbeenprovedonlyin
ovary.Intheeweithasbeenshownexperimentally
ruminants and theguinea pig that it is thenatural
thatthemostlikelyroutefortransportofthesub-
luteolysinitislikely thatitsalsotruefortheother
stance is the middle uterine vein, since when all
specieslisted.
other structuresbetween theovary anduterus are
PGFa is a derivativeof the unsaturated hydroxy
severed thereis stillnormalregression ofthe CL
acidslinolenic and arachidonic acids.It derived
(Baird&Land1973).
its name because i1 was first isolated from fresh
Inthe mare,no local effect can bedemonstrated
semen andwas assumed tobeproducedin thepros-
since,if the ovary is transplanted outsidethepelvic
tategland.It is synthesized in the endometrium of
cavity,luiteal regression still occurs (Ginther &First
a numberofspecies(Horton&Poyser1976)and
1971).It isgenerally assumed that in this species the
in the ewe it has been demonstrated in increasing
luteolysinis transported throughoutthesystemic
amounts at and around the time oflutealregression
circulation.
(Blandetal 1971).
In the sow the luteolytic substance is transported
Luteal regression can beviewed from two aspects.
locally(du Mesnil du Buisson 1961)but not exclu-
Firstly, functional regression is rapid,so that the
sivelyto theadjacent ovary.It hasbeenshown that,
secretion of progesterone declinesrapidly.Secondly.
following surgical ablation of parts of the uterine
as regards struclural regression when the CL is
horns,providedatleastihecranialquarterofthe
reduced in size,thelatter process takes longer than
uterine horn is left,regression of the CLs occursin
theformer.Theprimarysitefortheinitiationof lute-
both ovaries.Ifmore than three-quarters of the horn
olysisisthrough thelargelutealcellswhichbecome
is excised,then regression of the CLs occurs only in
smaller, followed by the small luteal cells. In rumi-
the ovary adjacent totheintact horn.In thebitch,the
nants,luteal regressioniscausedby episodicrelease
mechanisms of control of the life span of the CLs are
ofPGFfromtheuterus at intervals ofabout 6
notfully understood,and in this specieseven inthe
hours.This is induced by oxytocin secreted by the
absence of pregnancy there is always a prolonged
CL;thus,each episodeofPGFreleaseis accompa
lutealphase,traditionallycalledmetoestrus.
niedby an episode ofoxytocinrelease.Furthermore,
Althoughtheimportanceofthemiddleulerine
PGFstimulatesfurthersecretionofoxytocinfrom
veinin thetransferoftheluteolyticsubstancehas
the ovary.It has been postulated that the abundant,
been demonstrated,the mechianisms whereby the
non-steroidogenic endothelial cells of the CLmay
luteolyticsubstance passes to the ovary have not been
mediate the actions of PGF and that its physical
conclusivelyshowninall species,althoughtheyhave
demise is due to the action of invading macrophages,
been fairly well evaluated in the ewe and cow. In the
which may secretecytokines,such astumournecro
formerspecies,itappearsthatthecloseproximityf
sis factor(TNF)-α(Meidan et al 1999).Recenit stud-
the ovarian artery andutero-ovarian vein isimpor-
ies havereported that nitric oxidemayplay arolein
tant,particularly since at their points of approxima-
luteolysis(Jaroszewki&Hansel2000,Skarzynski
tion thewalls ofthe twovesselsarethinnest;there
et al2003)
isno anastomosis(Coudertetal1974).This allows
The sensitivity of theuterus to oxytocin is deter-
leakageof the luteolytic substance from the uterine
minedby the concentration ofendometrialoxytocin
veininto the ovarian artery and thus to the ovary
receptors. At the time of lureal regression in sheep
byaform ofcounter-currentexchangethrough the
11
Part
1
Normal cycical ovarian activity and its control
Their concentration is determined by the effecis of
LH release (see below) may be mediated via opioids
progesterone and oestradiol. Thus, the high concen-.
(Brooks el al 1966)
trations ofprogesterone that occur after theforma-
tion of the CL reduce the number of receptors,so
The horse
thiatinthenormal oestrous cycleof the ewetheystart
to increase from about day 12. Exogenous oestradiol
causes premature induction of oxytocin receptors,
Cyclic periodicity
resulting in premature luteolysis (Flint et al 1992).
In non-ruminant species, much less is known about
Fillies are often seen in oestrus during their second
the mechanisms of luteolysis.
The CLbecomes more sensitive to the luteolytic
under natural conditions it is unusual for them to
effect of PGFa as it ages. The early CL is unrespon-
foal until they are over3years old.The mare is nor-
sive to PGF, (see Fig. 1.41).
mally a seasonal breeder,with cyclic activity occur-
ringfrom spring to autumn; during thewinter she
will normally become anoestrous.However,it has
Prolactin
been observed that some mares, especially those of
Therole ofprolactin in the control ofreproduction
native pony breeds, cycle regularly throughout ie
in many domestic species is still largely speculative,
year.This tendency can be enhanced if the mares
andin many cases it is onlypossible to extrapolate
are housed andgiven supplementary foodwhen
from studies in the traditional laboratory species.
theweather is cold and inclement,andif additional
Unlike other anterior pituitary hormones, which
lighting is provided when thehours of daylight are
require hypothalamic stimulation, it appears that
short.
prolactin secretion is spontaneous and that it is
Horse breeding has been influenced by the
largelycontrolledbyinhibitionby hypothalamically
demands of thoroughbred racing,because in the
derived prolactin inhibitory factor, which is believed
northern hemisphere foals are aged from 1 January,
to be dopamine. Tlhiere is some evidence lo suggest.
irrespective of their actual birth date.As a result, the
that dopamine may have a dual role as a stimu-
breeding seasonfor mares hasbeen,for over a cen
lant of prolactin secretion,ratherlike a prolactin-
tury, determined by the authorities as running from
releasing factor.
15 February to 1 July.Since the natural breeding sea-
son does not commence until about the middle of
April, and maximun ovarian activity is not reached
Role of opioids
until July, it is obvious that a large number of thor-
Much interest has been directed towards the role
oughbred mares are bred at a time when their feril-
of certain endogerious peptides with opioid activ-
ity is suboptimal (see Ch. 26).
ity such as β-endorphin and met-enkephalin. These
Winter anoestrus is followed by a period of transi-
substances hiave been found in high concentrations
tion to regular cyclic activity.During this transition,
in hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal blood. The
the duration of oestrus maybe irregular or very long
administration of exogenous opioid peptides inhib-
sometimes more ihan a month.The manifestations
its the secretion of FSH and LH while stimulatingthe
of heat during the transitional phase are often atypi-
secretion of prolactin.If an opiate antagonist such
cal and make it difficult for the ohserver to be cer-
asaloxone isinfused,there is anincreasein mean
tain of thie mare's reproductive status.Also,before
concentrations of gonadotrophins in the plasma
the first ovulation, there is poor correlation between
and the frequency of episodic gonadotrophin secre-
sexual behaviour and ovarian activity; it is common
tion. The effect of opioids appears to be influenced
for theearly heats tobe unaccompaniedby thepres-
by the steroid environment of the animal; for exam-
ence of large follicles, and some long spring heats are
ple,in ewes,naloxone increased the mean plasma
anovulatory. Hlowever, once ovulation has occurred,
concentration of LH and the episodicfrequency in
regular cycles usually follow.
a high-progesterone environnent.However, in ova-
The average length of the equine cycle is 20-23
riectomized ewes or those with oestradiol implants,
days; the cycles are longer in spring and short-
naloxone had no effect (Brooks etal 1986). It is pas-
sible that the negative feedback of progesterone on
6 days and dioestrus 15 days. Ovulation occurs on
12
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
the penultimate or last day of heat, and this relation-
the dominant follicle is anovulatory or ovulation is
ship tothe end of heat is fairly constant and irre
delayed to after tlie end of oestrus (Ginther 1993)
spective of the duration of the cycle or the length
Minor wave and secondary waves tend to occur most
of oestrus;Hammond (1938) found that manual
frequently during the transitional phase at the begin
rupture ofthieripe folliceresulted in termination
ning of the breeding season.
of oestrus within 24 hours. The diameter of the ripe
Day (1939), one of the early students of equine
follicle is 3-7 cm. During the last day before ovula-
reproduction, produced a series of drawings of
tion,the tensionin the follicleusually subsides,and
mares' ovaries collected after slaughter that give a
the palpable presence of a large fluctuating follicle is
clear picture of the changes that occur during the
a sure sign of imminent ovulation.
oestrous cycle (Figs. 1.3-1.7; they are half actual
The onset of heat after foaling occurs on the
size);the stage of the cycle had been determined
fifth to10thi day.This foal heat is soimetimes rather
short,2-4 days.It is traditional to cover a mare on
the ninth day after foaling. The first two postpartu-
rient cycles are a few days longer than subsequent
ones.
During oestrus, a single egg is usually released,
and there is a slight preponderance ofovulations
from the left ovary. Assessing the functional activ-
ity of the two ovaries on the basis of postmor-
tem counts of Cls in 792 equine genitalia, Arthur
Fig.1.3 Ovaries of a 5-year-olc farmmare in oestrus.Note
(1958)recorded an incidence of 52.2% ofovula-
dominant, preovulatory follicle (f) in left ovary, 4-5cm diameter,
tionsfrom theleftovary.Twinovulationcomimonly
and regressing corpus luteum in the left ovary (c),which was
occurs in mares;Burkhardt (1948),in a study of
bright yellow in colour.
June-Iuly slaughterhouse specimens, saw 27% of
double ovulations and Arthur (1958) found an
overall frequency of 18.5%,with a summer peak
of 37.5%.Hlowever, there is a strong breed influ-
ence on twin ovulation: thoroughbreds are prone
to it but pony mares rarely show it. A fascinating
finding by Van Niekerk & Gernaeke (1966)was
that only fertilized eggs pass into the uterus; non-
fertilized eggs remain for months in the uterine
tubes, where they slowly disintegrate. All equine
ovulations occur from the ovulation fossa;only at
Fig. 1.4 Ovaries of a 9-year-old farm mare in dioestrus. Note
the ovarianhilusmay occasionalprotrusions of
presence ofseveral sizeable follicles and corpus luteum (cl) in
corpora lutea be seen but,because of the curva-
in loose pleats.
ture of the ovary and thepresence of the adjacent
substantial fimbriae, these protrusions cannot be
identified by rectal palpation.
R
Folliculogenesis
into: major waves, in which follicles diverge into a
dominant folliclewithisubordinatefollicles as well;
as occurs in other monovular species,and minor
waves,in which there is no divergence (Ginther &
Fig.1.5 Ovaries of a 4-year-old shire mare in dioestrus.
Cerpus luteum (c) in lefavary is brownish-red in colaur,with
into primary waves, in which the dominant folli-
distinct pleats of luteal tissue.Right ovary contains a fellicle
cle ovulates,and secondary waves, in which either
filled with blood (bf).
13
Part
11
Normalcyclical ovarian activity and itscontrol
R
the follicular antrum is filled with follicular fluid
and then soga after ovulation it becomes filled
with blood.For thisreason mares are sometimes
incorrectly diagnosed as having failed to ovulate.
For thie next 3 days the luteinizing mass can be felt
as a resilient focus but later it tends to have the
same texture as the remainder of the ovary. In pony
mares ofknown historyfrom daily examinations,
Fig.1.6 Ovaries of a 5-year-old farm mare in dioestrLs,with
however, Allen (1974) reports that it is possible to
a corpus luteurm(cl) in each ovary.Beth are orange-yellow in
colour with distinct pleats of luteal tissue.
follow the growth of the Cl by palpation because
inponies it forms a relatively largebody ina small
Ovary.The CL attains maximum size at 4-5 days but
it does not protrude from the ovarian surface. On
section of the ovaryil isbrownand lateryellowand
日
ofa iriangular or conical shape,with thenarrower
end impinging on the ovulation fossa. Its centre is
commonly occupied by a variable amount of dark-
brown fibrin. The cyclical CL begins to regress at
about tie 12th day ofthe cycle, when there is a
parallel fall in the blood progesterone concentra-
lion.From this day onwards the events previously
described recur.Ovulation,with the subsequent
Fig. 1.7 Cvaries of a 6-year-old hunter mare in cioestrus.
formation of a CL, does not always occur; the fol-
Corpus luteum (cl) in right ovary s pale yellow in colour; with
distinct pleats of luteal tissue and a small central cavity.
tion (Fig. 1.11b).
B-mode ultrasound imaging with a rectal trans-
ducer has been used to visualize follicles (Figs.
clinically beforehand.Figures 1.8-1.13 show exam-
1.8-1.13). This is particularly useful in detecting
ples ofwhole ovaries,cross-sections and B-mode
thepossibility of twin ovulations and also in deter-
ultrasound images.
mining the timing of ovulation.Ginther (1986)
Just before the onset of oestrus, several folli
observed thatin thepreovulaioryperiod therewas
cles enlarge to a size of 1-3cm. By tlhe first day of
a chiange in the shape of the follicle and a thicken-
oestrus one follicle (the dominant follicle) is gen-
ing of the follicular wall, which, together with the
erally considerably larger than the remainder,hav-
assessment of the size of the follicle, could be used
ing a diameter of 3.0-4.5 cm. During oestrus, this
topredict the time of ovulation.The saine author
folliclematures and ovulateswhen it has attaineda
has used this technique to assess corpora lutea.
diameter of4.0-5.5cm (Ginther 1993).After ovu-
He identified differences in the echogenic proper-
lation, the other follicles regress until, during the
ties of the CL depending upon the persistence of
first 4-9 days of the ensuing dioestrus, no follicles
the corpus haemorrhagicum; this he identified in
larger than 1 cm are likely to be present. Several
about 50%.
hoursbefore ovulationthe ripe folliclehecomes
During winter anoestrus,both ovaries are typically
much Iess tense.The collapsed follicle is recognized
small and bean-shaped, connon dimensions being
by an indentation on the ovarian surface;there is
6cmfrom pole topole, 4cm from the hilus to the
usuallysome haemorrhage intothe follicle and the
free border and 3cm from side to side.Not uncom-
coagulum hardenswiihin thenexi 24 hours.Quite
monly,however,in early spring or late autumn,the
frequently themare shows evidence of discomfort
anoestrous ovaries are ofmedium orlarge size and
when the ovary ispalpated soon after ovulation.
knobbly due to the content ofnumerous follicles
Unless sequential transrectal palpation or ultra-
of 1-1.5cm diameter.During the cycle, there are
sonic examinations areperformed,it is sometimes
largevariationsinthe ovarian sizedepending on the
possible to confuse a mature folliclewith the early
number and size of the follicles.During oestrus the
corpus haemorrhagicum,since before ovulation
ovaryof thethoroughbredmaremaycontain two
14
Chapter
1
Endogenous and exogenous control ofovarian cyclicity
B
ONCEPT
C2561
Fig.1.8Ovary from an acyclic(anoestrous)mare.(A)The ovary was hardon palpation with no evidence of follicular activity.
Note the ovulation fossa(o）.(B)Cross-secticn of the ovary.Note that there area fewsmallfollicles(f)<1cm in diameter,which
are contained within the ovarian matrix.(C) B-mode ultrascund image of the same ovary showing smallanechoic(black)areas
<1 cm in diameter,which are follicles (f)
oreven threefollicles,eachof4-5.5cm,and these,
detect thepreovulation period.In dioestrus,the cer-
with other subsidiary follicles,combineto give it a
vixissmall,constricied and firm;itand thevagina are
huge size.During dioestrus,however,with an active
palepink,whilemucusis scanty and sticky.During
CL and only atreticfollicles,the ovary may be little
oestrus,thereisagradualincreaseinthevascularityof
largerthanin anoestrus.
thegenitaltractandrelaxationofthecervixwithdila-
Byvisualexamination of thevagina andthecer-
tation oftheos.As oestrus advances andovulation
vix using an illuminated speculun,it ispossible to
time approaches,thecervixbecomesveryrelaxedand
15
Part
1
Normalcyclicalovarianactivityand itscontrol
OCM
CM
A
Fig.1.9 Ovaryfroma marein theearlyfollicularphase.(A)Theovarywassoftonpalpationwith evidenceof large folliclesnear
in diameter.(C) B-mode ultrasound image of the same ovary showing one large anechoic (black) area about 3.5 cm in diameter.
which is a follicle(f),together with three smaller ones.
itsprotrusioncanbeseenlyingonthevaginal floor,
On palpating theuterus per rectum,cyclic changes
with its foldsoedematous;thevaginalwallsglisten
canbedetected.With the development of theCL
withclear,lubricantmucus.Afterovulationthereisa
theuterusincreases intoneand thickness,but these
gradual reversion to the dioestrous appearance.
features diminish when the CL regresses.At oestrus
During anoestrus,asinpregnancyboth hevagina
thereisnoincreaseoftone.Duringanoestrus and for
andcervixareblanched;thecervixisconstricted and
thefirstfewdays after ovulation theuterus isflaccid.
generally turned away from themidline,the external
During dioestrus, pregnancy and pseudopreg-
osbeingfilled withtenaciousmucus.
nancy thecervixisidentified onrectalpalpation as
16
Chapter
[1
Endogenous andexogenouscontrol ofovarian cyclicity
Fig. 1.10 Ovary of a mare with a single large preovulatory folicle.(A) Section of the cvary showing a 4cm follcle (f). (B)B-mode
Fig.1.11(A)B-mode ultrasound image of an ovary showing the corpus haemorrhagicum.(B)B-mode ultrasound image
of a 5 cm anovulatory follicle that is undergoing luteinization.
17
Part
1
Normalcyclicalovarian activityand itscontrol
A
6
Fig.1.12 Ovary of a mare in early ioestrus.(A) The corpus luteun (cl), although present,could not bepalpated externally,wereas
a follicle(f) could be identified.Note the ovulation fossa (o）.(B)Section of the same ovary.Note that the corpus luteum (cl), still
witha central bloocclot,impinges on theovulaticn fossa(o) where ovulaticn occurred.Also,one large follicle(f)and several
smaller ones can be identified.(C) B-mode ultrasound image of a different cvary showing the corpus luteum (cl) and follicles (f).
anarrowfirm tubular structure;at oestrusit is soft
urine with repeated exposure of the clitoris(Fig.
and broad.A temporary pneumovagina assists in
1.14).When introduced to a stallion or teaser
this examination(Allen 1978).
these postures are accentuated; the mare raises the
tail to one side and leans her hindquarters.The
Signs of oestrus
vulva is slightly oedermatous,and there is a vari
able amount ofmucoid discharge.A mare that is
The mare becomes restless and irritable; she fre-
not in oestrus will usually violently oppose the
quently adopis the micturition posture and voids
advances of a stallion and for this reason ‘rying'
18
Chapter
111
Endogenousandexogenouscontrolofovariancyclicity
AoCM
B
C
CONCEPT/LC 2561
Fig.1.13 Ovary of a mare in mid-dioestrus.(A)The corpus luteum(cl),although present,could not be palpated externally;there
wasno evidence of any follices.Note the ovulation fossa (o).(B)Sectionof the same ovary.Note thecopus luteum(cl),which
mares at stud should be done over a gate,box-
totheprocedureandthat,becauseoftheinterval
door orstout fence.If themareisinoestrus the
betweentheendofthelastoestrusandthestartof
stallionusuallyexhibitsflehmenGoodstud
thenext,sheisteased15-16daysaftertheendof
managementrequiresthatamareisaccustomed
thelastoestrus.
19
Part
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
100
150
100
200
E
100
Oestn
0
21
Ovulation
Ovulation
Days of oestrous cycle
Fig.1.15 Trends in hormonal concentraticns in the peripheral
circulation of the mare during the oestrous cycle.
Fig. 1.14 Exposure of the clioris (ct) in response to teasing.
Endocrine changes during the
The cow
oestrous cycle
The trendsin endocrinechanges are shown inFigure
Cyclic periodicity
1.15. The secretion of FSH is biphasic with surges
al approximately 10-12-day intervals. One surge
Under conditions of domestication,normal and
occurs just after ovulation,with a second surge in
well-cared-for cattle are polyoestrous throughout the
mid- to late dioestrus approximately 10 days before
year.Theageat first estrus,orpuberty, s affecteby
the next ovulation. It has been suggested that this
nutrition and season of birth and ranges fron 7-18
increase in FSH secretion,which is unique to the
months, with an average of 10 months. A small pro-
mare,is responsible for priming the development
portion of heifers do not ovulate at the first heat
of a new generation of follicles, one of which will
and in a majority of young caitle the oestrus asso-
ovulate at the next oestrus （Evans &lrvine 1975)
ciated with thie first ovulation is'silent(Morrow
Thepattern of LH secretion is also unusual in this
et al 1969). Poor feeding and calfhood disease delay
species since there is no sudden surge of this hor-
puberty. Once puberty has been reached, cyclical
mone but a gradual increase and persistence of ele-
activity should persist, except during pregnancy.
vatedlevels for 5-6 days on either sideof ovulation.
for3-6 weeks after calving,during high milk yield
Oestrogensin theperipheral circulationreach peak
(especially if there is some evidence of dietary insuf-
values during oestrus, while concentrations of pro-
ficiency) and with a number of pathological condi-
gesterone and other progestogens follow closely the
tions (see Ch. 22). Some cows and heifers also fail to
physical changes of the CL.
show overt signs of oestrus yet havenormal cyclical
20
Chapter
[11
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
activity, a condition referred to as 'silent heat' or
There are great variations among individual cattle
suboestrus. This may, however, be due to failure of
in the intensity of heat signs; the manifestations tend
theherdsperson to observe the signsrather than a
to be more marked in heifers than in cows.However,
failure of the cow to show signs.
it is generally agreed that the most reliable criterion
In heifers,the average length of the oestrous cycle
that a cow or heiferis in oestrus is that she will stand
is 20 days, and in cows 21 days, the normal ranges
to be mounted by another (Williamson et al 1972,
being 18-22 and 18-24 days respectively. For many
Esslemont & Bryant 1974, Foote 1975).
years, the average duration of oestrus has tradition-
The oestrous animal is restless and more active;
ally been recognized as being about 15 hours, with
Kiddy (1977), using pedometers, found that there
a wide range of 2-30 hours: however, there is good
s
evidence that, in themodern Holstein and Jersey
time. Lewis & Newman (1984) found that pedom-
cows, as compared with heifers, the average is much
eler aciivity was about twice as great in oestrus
shorter, perhaps an average of 8 hours.This has been
compared with the luteal phase of the cycle.In
shown using a radiofrequency data communication
their study. 75% of cows showed peak pedometer
system called 'FIeat Watch'(Nebel et al 1997), and is
readings on the day of onset of oestrus whereas
summarized in Table 1.1.
25% peaked 1 day afler oestrus. There tends to be
There are a number of factors that can influence
grouping of sexually active individuals; there is
the duralion: breed of animal, season of year, pres-
a reduction in the time spent eating, resting and
ence ofa bull,nutrition,milkyield,lactation number
ruminating, and frequently a reduction in milk
and,perhaps most inportant,tlie nunber of cows
yield.Reduced millyield has been shown tobe
that are in oestrus at the same time (Wishart 1972,
a reliable indicator of the onset of oestrus;there
Esslemont &Bryant 1974,Hurnik et al 1975).There
is usually a compensatory rebound at the next
is also good evidence that more signs of oestrus are
milling (Horrell et al 1984). In this study of 73
observed during the hours of night, perhaps wlen
dairy cows, it was found that if a cow produced
the animals are least disturbed (williamson et al
75% of her usualyield there was a 50% chance of
1972,Esslemont&Bryant 1976)
her being in oestrus. On the rare occasions that it
Ovulation is spontaneous and occurs on average
fell to 25%, oestrus was always present. As the cow
12 hours after the end of oestrus.
approaches oestrus she tends to search for other
cows in oestrus,and there is licking and sniffing of
the perineum. During this period, during oestrus
Signsofoestrus
and just afterwards, the cow will attenpt to mount
Where artificial insemination is used,the accurate
other cows;quite oftenbefore she does this she
detection of oestrnus by the herdsperson is paramount
will assess the rereptivity of the other cows by rest-
in ensuring optimum fertility. Poor detection is prob-
ing her chin on the rump or loins. If the cow to be
ably the most important reason affecting delayed
mounted isresponsive and stands,shewill mount
breeding (Wood 1976). In the UISA, Barr (1975) has
and sometimes show evidence ofpelvic thrust-
calculated that in Ohio dairy herds farmers appeared
ing(Esslemont&Bryant 1974).1fthecowthal
tobelosingtwice as many days dueto failure to detect
is mounted is not in oestrus she will walk away
heat as due to conception failures,
and frequently turn and butt the mounting cow.
oestrus detec:ion system (from Nebel et al 1997)
Nulliparous heifers
Pluriparous cows
Holstein
Jersey
Holstein
Jersey
No. of animals
114
46
307
128
Duration of oestrus (hours)
11.3±6.9
13.9±6.1
7.3±7.2
7.815.4
No.of standing events
18.8±12.8
30.4±17.3
7.2±7.2
9.6±7.4
21
11
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
Cyclicchangesin thevagina
A positive mountingresponse lasts abouu5 sec-
onds (Hurnik et al 1975):however, if both cows
The main yariations are in the epithelial cells of
are in oestrus it will be increased to about 7.5 sec-
the anterior vagina and in the secretory function of
onds. In a group of 60 cows, Esslemont & Bryant
the cervical glands (Hammond 1927,Cole 1930).
(1976)observed that33cowsweremountedon
During oestrus, the anterior vaginal epithelium
average56times.
becomes greatly thickened as a result of cell division
Sometimes there are signs of a vulval discharge
and the growth of the tall, columnar,mucus-secret-
of transparent mucus the elasticity of which causes
ing superficial cells. During dioestrus, these cells
it tohangincomplete,clearstrandsfrom thevulva
varyfromflat to low columnar.Leukocytic invasion
to the ground; it also adheres to the tail and flanks.
of the vaginal mucosa is maximal 2-5 days after
Thevulva may be slightly swollen and congested,
oestrus. Copious secretion of mucus by the cervix
and thereis asmallelevation of temperature.The
and anterior vagina begins a day or so before heat,
tail may be slightly raised.Thehair ofthetail-head
increases during heat and gradually diminishes to
isoftenruffled andthe skinsometimesbecomes
thefourth dayafterheat.Themucusis transparent
excoriatedthroughmountingbyothercows.For the
andflowsreadily.
samereason,therearof the animal may be soiled
Associated with these features of the cervical
with mud.Atrange,the oestrouscowmaywander
mucus arevariations in its crystallization patterns
from the herd and,if isolated,there will be bel-
thatcan be seen when dried smears ofmucus are
lowing.When she isput with a bull,the two ani-
examined microscopically.During oestrus, and for
malslickeach otherandthecowoftenmounis the
a few days afterwards, the crystals are disposed in a
bullbefore standingtobemounted byhim.For a
distinct aborization pattern,whilefor the reinain-
short timeafter service,the cow standswith raised
der of the cycle this pattern is absent. This phenom-
tail and arched back,and where actual service has
enon, together with the character and amount of
not been seen this posture indicates that mating has
cervicalmucus,is dependenton theconcentration
occurred.
of oestrogen.The postoestrous vaginal mucus shows
Within2 days of service,there is an occasional
floccuulescomposed ofleukocytesand,aspreviously
yellowish-whitevulval discharge ofmucuscontain-
mentioned,blood isfrequently present.
ing neutrophil leulocytes from the uterus.At about
Hyperaemia of the mucosae of the vagina
48hours after heat,irrespective of service,heifrs
and cervix is progressive during pro-oestrus and
andmanycowsshowabrightred sanguineous dis-
oestrus;the vaginalprotrusion of the cervix is
charge,thebloodcomingmainlyfrom theuterine
tumefiedand relaxed,so that one or two fin-
caruncles.
gers can be inserted into the cervical os. During
The body temperature ofdairy cows falls about
metoestrus,there is a rapid reduction in vascu-
0.5°C the day before oestrus,increases during
larity,and from3-5 days afterheat themucosa
oestrusandfallsbyabout 0.38°Catovulation.
ispaleandquiescentand theexternalosis con-
The vaginal temperature,at 37.74°C,was lowest
stricted while the mucus becomes scanty, sticky
onthe daybeforeoestrus,increased by0.18°Con
andpaleyellowor brown.Thereare also cyclic
thedayofoestrus andincreasedforthenext 6days
variations in vaginal thermal conductance and
until aplateau wasreached.Thiswas followedbya
vaginal pH,the former rising just before oestrus
gradual decline from 7 days before oestrus (Lewis
(Abrams etal 1975).When pHI electrodes were
&Newman1984).Practical detection ofthis is
placed in thie cervicalend ofthevagina thepH
tedious;however,theuseofmicrowave teleme-
fellfrom7.0 to 6.721daybefore the firstbehav-
try systems may enable such measurements to be
ioural signs ofoestrus,and at the start ofoestrus
madein hefuture(Bobbettetal1977).Automated
fell again to 6.54(Schilling &Zust 1968).
methodsofmeasuringtherelated increaseinmilk
temperaturein themillingparlourhave alsobeen
Cyclicchangesin the uterus
described(Maatje1976,Ball,personalcommunica-
tion1977).
During oestrus, the uterus is congested and the endo-
Vaginal pH alsofluctuates throughout theoestrous
metrium is suffused with oedematous fluid;its sur-
cycle butis lowest,7.32,on the day of oestrus (Lewis
face is glistening.The muscularis is physiologically
&Newman1984).
contractileso thatwhen theuterusispalpatedper
22
Chapter
1
Endogenous andexogenouscontrolofovariancyclicity
rectum thismuscular irritability,coupledwith the
are common(Bo etal 2003).The most notable
marked vascularity, conveys a highly characteristic
feature is theregularity of thenumber ofwaves of
tonicturgiditytothepalpatingfingers;thehorns
follicular growth per oestrous cycle,which prob-
feel erect and coiled.This tonicity is present the day
ablyreflectsgeneticorenvironmentalinfluences.
beforeand thedayafter oestrusbut is atitsmaxi-
Lactating Holsteins tend to have two waves per
mum duringheatand,withexperience,theveterinar-
cycle(Townsonetal2002)whereasbeefand dairy
ian can detect oestrus on this sign alone.Between 24
heifershavetwoor threewaves(Sirois&Fortune
and 48hours after oestrus the uterine caruncles show
1988).Thoseindividualswithtwowavespercycle
petechial haemorrhages, and these give rise to the
tend tohave a shorter interoestrous interval,ovu-
postoestrous vaginal discharge of blood. In heifers
latelargerfolliclesandbelessfertilethanthose
thereareoftenalso associatedperimetrial subserous
with three waves.Interesting data obtained by
petechiae.During dioestrus the endometrium is cov-
Sartorietal(2004)（Tables 1.2,1.3)usingsequential
eredbyascantysecretionfrom theuterineglands.
Table1.2Follicularwaves andmultipleovulations innulliparous
heifers(n=27)andlactating cows(n=14);mean±SEM
Cyclicchangesin theovaries
(Sartori et al 2004)
Usuallyonefollicleovulatesand oneovum is lib-
Heifers
Cows
erated after eachheat,buttwin ovulations occur in
Interovulatory interval
22.0±0.4
4-5%ofcowsandtripletovulationsmorerarely.In
22.9±0.7
(days)
dairy cattle,about60%ofovulations arefromthe
%with twofollicular
55.6
78.6
right ovary, although in beef cattle the functional
waves/cycle
disparity between the ovaries is not great.
%with three follicular
33.3
14.3
Thesizeandcontourof theovarieswill depend on
thephase ofthecycle.It isbest tobegin by study-
waves/cycle
ing theorgans ofa mature unbred heifer.Posumortem
%with four follicular
11.1
7.1
sectionofsuchovarieswill reveal themostsignificant
waves/cycle
Days from luteolysis to
structures in them tobegraafianfolliclesand Cls
4.6±0.1
5.2±0.2
ovulation
Multiple ovulation
1.9
17.9
Folliculargrowth and development
rate (%)
Folliculargrowth andatresiathroughoutthecycle
is a feature in the cow(Matton etal 1983).In
the studies of Bane&Rajakoski (1961),two waves
Table 1.3 Comparisons of Cata (mean±SEM) obtained
fromHolsteinheifers and lactatingcowswith singlefollicle
ofgrowthweredemonstrated,withthefirstwave
dominance and ovulation(adapted fromSartori et al 2004)
beginning on the third and fourth day and the
second startingon the12thto14th dayof the
Heifers
Cows
cycle.Consequently, a normal follicleof9-13 mm
Size of ovulatcryfollicle at
11.0±0.5
13.1±0.7
waspresentfrom thefifth tothellthdaybefore
luteolysis(mm)
becoming atretic.In the second wave the ovula-
Maximum size of
15.0±0.2
17.2±0.5
toryfollicledeveloped,andwas9-13mmbetween
ovulatory follicie(mm)
the 15th and 20th days;the ovulatory follicle is
Maximum serumoestradiol
11.4±0.6
7.3±0.8
selected atabout3daysbeforeovulation(Pierson
concentration preceding
&Ginther 1988).Others have observed three
ovulation(pg/ml)
wavesof follicular development inmost oestrous
Maximum luteal tissue
7303±308
11248±776
cycles(Sirois&Fortune 1988,Savio etal 1990).
volume of animals with
Thus, follicular waves emerge at 2 and 11 days,
onecorpusluteum(mm-)
or2,9and 16days.Ina smallnumberofcows
Maximum serum proges-
7.3±0.4
5.8±0.6
a four-wave cycle has been observed, although
terone concentration of
this is usually associated with delayed luteolysis
animals with one corpus
andanextended interoestrousintervalofmore
luteum (ng/ml)
than 24 days.In Bos indicus cows four waves
23
Part
11
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
transrectal ultrasonography of Holstein heifers
The corpus luteum of the
and lactating cows shows some of the effects of
oestrous,cycle
parity and/or lactation on folliculogenesis, ovu-
lation,CL formation and serum oestrogen and
On rupture the ovum is expelled through a small
progesterone concentrations;the most noticeable
breach in the surface of the follicle and,consequent
feature is thehigh numberofmultipleovulations
on theescapeof the greaterpartofitsfluid,hefollile
collapses.lf the opportunity aroseforrepeatedlycarry
in cows compared with heifers,17.9% and 1.9%
respectively. This has been noted before (Kinsel
ing out rectal examinations during heat andfor the24
etal1998).
hours succeeding it,this collapse would be detected.
The follicular waves are initiated by a small
The ovaryfrequentlyfeelsflattenedand soft.If such an
rise in FSH; if this does not occur or is delayed,
Ovaryis examinedpost-mortemit will be seen that the
then the follicular wave also does not occur,or
surfacefromwhich ovulationhasoccurrediswrinkled
is delayed.Thereis evidence that thefollicle that
andpossiblybloodstained.TheCL developsbyhyper-
isdestined to become the dominant one may
trophy and luteinization of the granulosa cells lining
be slightly larger and have a better blood sup-
thefollicle.Enlargement israpid.By the48thhour after
ply than the rest, so that it responds to the rise in
ovulation it has attained a diameterofabout 1.4cm.At
FSH and producesmore oestradiol and androgens;
this stage the developing CLis soft,and yields on pal
the production of the former hormone is critical
pation.Itscolouris dull cream,and theluteinizedcells
to it being selected for dominance (Fortune et al
can beseen in theform of loosepleats.TheCLattains
2001).There is also good evidence that the IGF
itsmaximumsizebythe7thtoSth dayofdioestrus
systemplays a criticalrolein theselection ofthe
(Fig.1.16).The luteinized pleats are now relatively
dominant folliclein the cow;this was described
compact and thebody comprises a moreor less homo-
above.The IGFs stimulate granulosa cell growth
geneous mass,yellow o orange-yellow in colour.Is
in the dominant follicle and synergize with FSH
shapevaries:themajority are ovalbut someareirregu
(seereviews by Fortune et al 2001,Mazerbourg
larly square or rectangular.The greatest dimension of
et al 2003).
thefully developed structurevariesfrom 2.0-2.5cm;
Thus,duringdioestrus,several largefollicleswill be
the changes in the dimensions ofthe CL are shown
found ranging in size up to 0.7-1.5 cm in diameter.
inFigure 1.17.Itsweight alsovaries;in our series fully
These follicles donot alter the general oval contours
ofthe ovariesbut docausesomeoverallvariationin
gross ovarian size. The ease of palpating them rec-
tallywilldepend upon thesize,dereeofprotrusion
andrelationshipwith thecorpusluteum.
During pro-oestrus and oestrus, the dominant
follicle destined toovulate enlarges,andovulation
occurs when ithas attaineda sizeof1.2-2.0cm
(Foriune etal 1988,Savio etal1988,Ginther
et al 1989).On rectal palpation of the ovaries dur-
ingoestrus itis sometimespossibleto detect the
ripeningfollicle asa slightlybulgingsmooth,oft
area on the surface ofone of them,although it is
readily identified using transrectal ultrasonogra-
phy.Ovulation may occur from any aspect of the
ovarian surface and the shape of that organ sub-
sequently when the CL develops will be influ-
enced chiefly by this site.The point of ovulation
is usually an avascular area ofthefollicularwall
CM
2
K
and consequently haemorrhage is not a feature of
bovine ovulation, although there is marked post-
ovulatory congestion around the rupture point and
Fig.1.16Ovary of cow inmid-dioestrus.(A)Amature corpus
sometimesasmall bloodclotispresentin thecentre
luteum(cl)withovulationpapillacouldbereadilypalpated
togetherwith a mid-cycle follicle(f).
of the new CL.
24
Chapter
111
Endogenousandexogenouscontrolofovariancyclicity
developed CLs have varied from 4.1-7.4g.(Similar
variations also occur in the weights of the CLs of preg-
nancy,ranging from3.9-7.5g).Sometimes,the centre
of theyellow body is occupied by a cavity (Fig.1.18
see also Fig. 1.28). This has been seen in 25% of those
collected.The size of thecavityvaries;in themajorityit
issmall,averaging0.4cm indiameter,butoccasionally
it islargeup to1cm ormore.It is occupied byyellow
fuid.Inecasejustdescribed,ereisevidencefv-
lation by the presence of a pinhead depression in the
centre of the projection from the surface of the ovary
ThisservestodifferentiatetheCLfromtheabnormality
of thecows ovary:luteinizationof thewallsof thefol-
liclewithoutovulation.Nevertheless,itisprobablethat
thisis theconditionthathasbeen described in thepast
OCM
as a cystic corpus luteuin and regarded as pathological;
thepresence ofa cavity isnormal.
Projectionofthecorpusluteumfrom the
surface of the ovary
As theCLenlarges,it tends topush itself outof the
ovary,stretchingthesurfaceofthelatter,untilbythe
timeitattainsmaximumdevelopmentitoftenforns
a distinct projection.Thedegree andtype of thispro-
jectionvary.In the majorityitisa distinct bulge about
1cmindiameterwithaclear-cutconstrictionwhere
专
it joins the general contour of the ovary.In other
cases it is nipple-like (Fig. 1.16). In a third type the
Fig.1.16 continued(B)Section of the same ovary showing the
projection is indistinct but diffuse and occupies the
solid corpus luteum (cl)andmid-cycle follice(f）.(C)B-mode
uitrasound imageof the same cvary showing a speckled area
greaterpart of theovary.Itwouldseemthatthetype
corresponding to the ccrpus luteum(cl) and themid-cycle
of protrusion that develops dependson the extent of
follicle(f).
the surfaceoftheovary occupiedbythefolliclejust
before ovulation.Figures1.19-1.27showbovine
B
C
D
E
P
ovaries*[natural size) during the oestrous cycle.
2.0
Corpusluteum
DU
(cm)
Regressingcorpusluteum
follicl
uun
The CLmaintains itsmaximum size and remains
1.0
unaltered in appearance until the onset of pro-
Follicles
oestrus,i.e.24hours orsobeforethe onset of heat.
From this point,it undergoes rapid reduction in
size and changes in colour and appearance. By the
middleofoestrus,itsdiameterisreduced to1.5cm
0.
10
15
20
andiisprotrusionismuch smaller andlessdistinct,
Ovulation
Ovulation
*Throughout thebook,sketchesofbovineovaries areofa sec-
Days ofoestrous cycle
tionfrom the attached to thefreeborder through thepoles.
ln thosecasesinwhichthissection didnot passthrough he
Fig.1.17The development of follicular waves（dotted line)
greatest dimension of the significantcorpusluteum orhe
and corpus luteum(solid line)during thecestrous cycleof the
cow.(A-E refers to Figs.1.19-1.27.)
largestfolliclethesketchhasbeenmadeasthoughitdidso
but withoutmaterially altering the size of the ovary.
25
Part
11
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and itscontrol
A0CM
2
B
CM
Fig.1.18 Cvary of cow in mid-dioestrus.(A)A mature corpus luteum (cl) with prominent ovulation papilla and mid-cycle follicle(f).
(B)Sectionof thesameovary showing thecorpus luteum(cl)withacentral lacuna thatwasfilledwithorange-yellowfluid,and
ultrascund imageof the same ovary showingaspeckled areacorresponding to thewall'of thecorpus luteum（cl),thecentral
lacuna and also the mic-cycle follicle(f).
while its colour is changing to bright yellow. (This
itscolour tendsto changetored or scarlet.Small red
colourcontrastsstrikinglywiththatoftheactive
remnantsofcorporaluteatendtopersistforseveral
body.) Its consistency is dense and already scar tis-
months.
sue invasion is commencing. By the second day of
dioestrus,its sizeisreduced toabout lcm and its
Sizeofthe ovaries
outlineisbecomingirregular.By thistimeitscolour
is changing to brown.By the middle of dioestrus,it
From theforegoing account,it will be appreciated
hasshrunktoaboutO.5cmand itssurfaceprotru-
thatthesizeofanovarywill dependchieflyonthe
sion islittlelarger than apinhead.As it gets older
periodin theoestrouscycleatwhich itis examined
26
Chapter
1
B
Fig.1.19Ovariesofafirst-calfheifer inoestrus.1,ripefollicle;
Fig.1.23Ovaries of ayoung cow2 days afterovulation
2,regressing corpus luteum,brightyellow;3,corpusalbicans.
1,twin corpora lutea,some haemorrhage;2,regressing corpus
StageA in Figure1.17.
luteum,bright yellow. Stage C in Figure 1.17.
Fig.1.20 Ovaries of a first-calf heiferin oestrus.1,ripe follicle;
Fig.1.24 Ovariesof a 4-year-old cowinearly dioestrus
2,regressing corpus luteum,brick-brcwn.Stage A inFigure
1,activecorpuseumleatscose,colourange-ellw
1.17.
central cavity:2,regressing corpus luteum,dense and brown;
3,corpus albicans.Stage C in Figure 1.17.
R
L
R
Fig.1.25Ovaries of a6-year-old cowin early dioestrus.
Fig.1.21 Ovaries of a nulliparousheifer just after ovulation.
1,activecorpusluteumrange-yellow,atypicalprotrusion;
1,collapsed fallice,surface wrinkled and bloodstaired
2,regresngcorpusluteum,small,shrunken,carlet;3,corpus
petechiae in wall;2,regressing corpus luteum,bright yellow.
albicans; 4, follicle. Stage D in Figure 1.17.
Stage B in Figure 1.17.
andwhether or not it contains an active CL.Thepres-
ence of follicles does not alter the size of an ovary
R
toanythinglikethe sameextent.Inthegreatmajor-
ity of heifers and young cows examined at any time
betweenthe6thand18th daysofthe dioestrous
period,one ovary will be distinctly larger than the
other.The approximate dimensions of the larger
onewill be3.5cmfrompole1opole,3cmfrom the
attachedtothefreeborderand2.8cmfromsideto
Fig.1.22 Ovariesof a youngcow 1 day afterovulation.
side.(All ovarian dimensions given in this book are
1,developing corpus luteum,pleatsloose,calourpalecream
in this order.)From somepart ofits surface,the CL
central cavity;2,regressing corpus luteum,bright orange-
will project. The smaller ovary will have approxi-
yellow;centre filledby connective tissue;3,corpus albicans.
mate dimensions of 2.5x1.5x1.2cm and it will be
StageB inFigure 1.17
flatfrom sideloside.During thefirst4or5days of the
27
Part
Normalcyclicalovarianactivityand itscontrol
Fig.1.26 Ovaries of nulliparous heifers in dioestrus.1,corpus
luteum 2,largest follicle.Stage E inFigure 1.17.
interoestrousphasetherewillberelativelylittlevari-
ation in size,forasyet thedevelopingCLhasnot
attained sufficientbulktoinfluence thesizeofthe
ovary significanuly while theregressingCLhaslost its
significant bulk.Duringoestrus,also,therewill be
littledifferencein size.If theovarywhich contains
the follicleundergoing preovulation enlargement
also contains the regressing Cl (and this is often the
case),the ovarycontainingthe(wo structureswill be
alittle larger than theother,butnot strikingly so.
Fig-1.27 Ovaries of parcus cows in dioestrus.1,corpus
luteum;2,largest follicle;3,ccrpus albicans.Stage E inFigure
1.17.
Ovariesofthemultiparouscow
Theovariesofthenormalmultiparouscowdonot
differ greatly from those of the heifer or first calver.
infrequently,the ovary that does not contain a CL
They tend,however,inmany cases tobelarger.This
measures 4x3x2cm.Neveriheless,it is gener-
increase in size is due in part to the progressive
allypossible in mid-dioestrus to detect the CL,for,
deposition of scar tissueresultingfrom prolonged
quite apart from itsprotrusion,the ovary containing
function andin somecases also tothepresence
it isplum-like,whereas the other is distinctly flat-
of large numbers of small but visiblefollicles.Not
tenedfrom sidetoside.On sectionofsuch ovaries,
28
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
the CLs, both active and regressing, and the folli-
sectioningafterslaughter)ofthe ovaries and their
contenis.The advent oftransrectal B-mode real-
described for the heifer.There is,however,an addi
time grey-scale ultrasound imaging, particularly
tional structure to berecognized:old scarred CLs
using a 7.5MHz transducer,has enabled detailed,
ofprevious pregnancies.They generally show as a
accurate sequentialexamination ofthe ovaries
white,pinhead-sizedprojectiononthesurfaceofthe
to be madewithout adversely affecting the cow's
ovary, and on section are found to comprise mainly
healthor fertility.Theprinciplesofthe technique
scar tissue.They are irregularin ouline,with amax-
are described in Chapter 3 and,for a detailed
imum dimension ofabout 0.5cm.Their colour is
description of the echogenic appearance of the
white (corpus albicans) or brownish-white. The CL
ovaries,readers are advised to consult Pierson &
of pregnancy does not atrophy after parturition as
Ginther（1984）andBoyd&Omran（1991)
quickly as does that of the oestrous cycle after it has
The followingnormal structures can be identified
ceased to function.It is an appreciablestructure for
(Figs.1.16,1.18):theovarian stroma,antral follicles
several weeks after parturition,brown in colour and
CLs and ovarian blood vessels. In addition,patho-
about 1cm in diameter.It becomes progressively
logical structures such as ovarian cysis can be seen
invadedbyscartissueandremainsthroughoutthe
(seeCh.22).Theovarian stromahasa motled echo-
cow's life.On post-mortem the presence of the cor-
texture.Theantralfolliclesarereadilyidentifiable
pus albicans serves to distinguish the cow from the
as anechoic(black) structuresofvariable size,with
heiferand intheformer acount of thecorpora albi-
aclearlydefinedlineofdemarcationbetween the
cantia givesthenumberofcalvesborn.
follicularwalland antruin.Follicleswillnotalways
The fully developed corpus luteum is present by
beregular and sphericalin shape.CLs have a well-
the7thday andpersistsunchangeduntil the onset
defined border and a mottled echogenic appearance
ofpro-oestrus at the19th or20th day.Figure1.28
that isless echogenicihanthe ovarian stroma;the
showsexceptional corpora lutea.
presenceofafluid-filledlacuna canbereadilyiden-
tified as a dark, non-echogenic area in the centre.
Differentiation between developing and regressing
Ultrasonicappearance of the ovaries
CLs can be difficult.Ovarian blood vessels,which
Inprevious sections ofthis chapter there are
can beconfused with antral follicles,areblack,non
descriptions of the texture (as determined by pal-
echogenicstructures.Movementofthetransducerwill
usually demonstrate their elongated appearance.
L
R
Endocrine changes during the
oestrouscycle
Thetrendsin concentrationsofreproductivehor-
monesintheperipheralcirculation are illustrated
schematically inFigure1.29;it is important to stress
thathormones are secreted ina pulsatilemanner
andfluctuateconsiderably.An effectivedescription
is given by Peters (1985a,b).Just before the onset
ofbehavioural oestrus,there is a sudden rise in
plasma oestrogens,particularly oestradiol.Peak val-
ues occur at thebeginning of oestrus,with a sub-
sequentdeclinetobasalconcentrations atthetime
ofovulation.Duringtherest of thecycle,there are
fluctuations in concentrations,although there is a
discretepeakaroundday6ofthecycle(Glencross
etal1973)thatmayberelatedto thefirstwave of
follicular growth (Ireland&Roche 1983）.The pre-
Fig.1.28 Examplesofvacuolated orcavitatedbovinecorpora
oestrus rise in oestrogens stimulates the surge of
lutea,showing single(1)and sometimesmultiple(2)cavities.
LHfromtheanteriorpituitarythatisnecessaryfor
29
Part
Normalcyclicalovarianactivityanditscontrol
200
are 8-10 recurrent oestrous cycles.The stimulus for
(ju/Bu)
the annual onset of sexual activity is declining length
100
ofdaylightTheextentofthebreedingseasondimin-
FSH
isheswithincreaseinlatitude;thus artheequatorewes
may breedat any timeofyea,whereasnregionsof
20
high latitude- in both northern and southern hemi-
spheres-thebreedingseasonisrestrictedand distinct,
u/6u)
10
with a prolonged phase of anoestrus after parturition.
Thebreedofewe alsoinfluencestheduration ofthe
breeding season; for example, in Dorset Horns it is
distinctlylonger than in otherbreeds-whereby three
200
crops of lambs can be obtained in 2 years - but in
hill breedssuchas theWelshMountain andScottish
bd
100
Blackface,itis shorter.Localbreeds of central Europe
andtheMerinoinAustraliamaynotshowan annual
anoestrus.Also,in‘ordinary'breeds in Britain,like
the ClunForest,which normally show a distinct sea-
sonal activity,isolatedinstancesof successfulmating
may occur in every month of the year (Lees 1969).
Ewe lambs and yearlingewes have shorter breeding
seasonsthan olderewes.Theseasonal onset ofsexual
0
21
activity canbe advanced by artificial manipulation of
Ovulation
Ovulation
the photoperiod and by theuse of hormonal agents
Days of oestrous cycle
(describedbelow).
The average duration of oestrus in mature ewes of
Fig.1.29 Trends in hormone concentrations in the peripheral
British breeds is about 30 hours,and is atleast 10
circulationofthecowduring thecestrouscycle,withthree
follicularwaves.
hours less in immature ewes.In Merinos,heat may
last 48 hours. Ovulation occurs towards the end of
oestrus,and thelength of the oestrous cycle averages
follicular maturation,ovulationand CL formation.
17 days.
A secondary,less discrete peak has been demon-
strated24 hours after theovulatory surgeof gonado-
trophin(Dobson1978)
Signs ofoestrus and mating
Thechanges in progesterone concentrationsmimic
behaviour
closely the physical changes of the CL.In a number
ofcows there is evidence of a delayin progesterone
Oestrous ewes are restless.They seek the ram and
production or secretion by the CL(Lamming et al
together form a following‘haremTheram ‘tries
1979),which does not appear to affect the fertility
membersofthisgroupforreceptivitybypawingwith
oftheindividual adversely.Peakvalues arereached
a forefoot,rubbing his head along the ewe's side and
bydays7and8afterovulationanddeclinefairly
nippingher wool.A non-receptive ewe trots away,
quickly from day 18.When progesterone values fall
but when in full heat she stands, waggles her tail
tofairlylowbasal levelstheremovalof the anterior
and moves it laterally.Thevulva is slightly swollen
pituitary block allows the sudden release of gonado-
and congested,and thereis often a slight discharge
trophins.Prolactin values arefrequently difficult to
of clear mucus.The ram mounts and makes a series
obtain since stress induced byrestraint for venepunc-
of probing pelvic thrusts and then dismounts.After
tureis sufficient io cause a significant rise.
variableintervalsfurthermounts occurbeforeintro-
mission is achieved,and this is characterized bya
The sheep
deeppelvicthrust.An essential featureofsuccessful
coitusin theNajdiandAwassibreedsof theMiddle
Eastisthelateral displacementbytheramofthefat
Thesexual seasonofmostbreedsofsheepinBritain
tail of the ewe.Rams ofother breeds areunable1o
is from OctobertoFebruary,duringwhich time there
movethetail sufficiently toperfornintromission.
30
Chapter
[1]
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
Moreovinematingsoccur duringearlymorning
bythe5thdayofdioestrusit is0.6cm indiame
and evening. When several rams run with a flock,
teranditaltains itsmaximum sizeof0.9cm when
ahierarchyisestablishedandthedominantmale
ithas a centralcavity (Roux 1936).As dioestrus
attracts the largest harem but,despite this,a major-
advances,itscolourchangesfrombloodred topale
ity ofewesmatewithmore thanoneram.Also,ewes
pink.Its size remains constant until the onset of
show a preferenceforrams of their own breed or
the next oestrus,when regression israpid and the
foraramoftheirparticulargroupif thatgroupis
colour changes,first toyellowandlater tobrownish
mixed with other groups of different origin (Lees &
yellow.Theluteolyticmechanismis similar tothat
Weatherhead1970).Thenumberofservices received
inthe cow,where,at the end of dioestrus,dueto
by an cestrous ewe averages a little above four. Rams
the effect of oestradiol andprogesterone,thereis an
may servebetween eight and 38 ewes in a day.
increase in the number of uterine oxytocin recep-
tors and atthe sametimelutealoxytocin stimu-
lates uterine PGFsecretion andvice versa(Mann
Changesin theovaries
&Lamming1995）.ThefirstCLs formedafter the
first ovulations at ihebeginning of thebreeding sea-
The ovaries ofthe ewe are smaller than those
son have a shorterlifespan than subsequent ones.
of the cow and their shape is nearer the spheri
IntwinovulationstheCLsmayoccupythesameor
cal.During anoestrus their size is approximately
opposite ovaries. During pregnancy, the CL is 0.7-
1.3x1.1x0.8cmand thelargestfolliclespresentvary
0.9cm in diameter.Its colour ispale pink,but the
from 0.2-0.6 cm.Studies of folliculogenesis are more
centralcavityhasdisappeared,havingbecomefilled
difficultthan in thecow ormarebecausetransrectal
by white tissue.
ultrasonic sequential access to the ovaries is much
Ovulation with CL formation,butwithout signs
more difficult.Although thereis some conflicting
of heat,may occur towards the end ofanoestrus and
evidencemost studies,usingeither transabdominal
certainly at the first ovulation of the new breeding
ultrasonography or laparoscopy,have shown that
season.Astothenumber ofova shed at oestrus,
there are two to fourfollicular waves inewes(Evans
genetic and nutritional factors play a part. Hill sheep
2003);if there areihreethen there are two during
in theUK generally have one lamb but if they are
the luteal and one duringthe follicular phasesNoel
transferred to lowland pastures where herbage is
etal1993,Leyva etal 1995).There is lesscertainty
rich(beforetheonset of thebreedingseason)twins
about the endocrinemechanismsinvolved in fol-
become common.With lowland breeds the general
liculogenesishowever,it appears that the stimulus
expectancy is an average of 1.5 lambs per ewe.Roux
for the emergence of the follicularwave is the tran-
(1936) in South Africa has noted that age is also
sienuincrease inFSH,and it is also likely that the
a factor in the incidence of twinning.It attains its
IGFsystemdescribedinthecowisinvolvedin the
maximumwhenewesare5-6yearsold,afterwhich
selection of the dominantfollicles.Sinceewes fre-
itremains constani.Primiparousewes arevery much
quentlyhavedoubleovulations,ormoreinprolific
lesslikelytohavetwins thianpluriparous ones.Ewes
breeds,thefolliclesthatovulatecanarisefrom either
oftheBorderLeicesterandLleynbreedsarethemost
thesamefollicularwaveorfromthesubsequent one.
prolific of British sheep,and commonly bear irip-
Even during anoestrus,folliculogenesis occurs with
lets.TheFinnish Landrace and Cambridgebreeds
folliclesreachingthe sizeofthosefrequentlypresent
normally produce two to four lambs per pregnancy.
during cyclical activity(Bartlewski etal 1995).
Folliclesdestined for ovulationare0.6-0.7cm
in diameter,with the subordinate anovulatory fol-
Endocrinechangesduring the
licles being smaller(0.5-0.7cm).The follicle walls
oestrous cycle
arethin andtransparentandtheliquor folliculi
appears purple in colour. Grant (1934) observed
The endocrine changes are shown inFigure 1.30.Just
that ovulationof thefollicleisprecededbytheele-
beforethe onsetofoestrusthereisarisein oestrogens
vation of a small papilla above thegeneral surface;
in theperipheral circulation,particularly oestradiol
ovulationoccursthrough ruptureofthispapilla
17β.Thisisfollowedbya suddensurgeof LH,which
about24 hours afterthe onsetof heat.The develop-
reaches a peak about 14 hours before ovulation;
mentoftheCLisrapid,beinglinearfromday2o
coincidentalwith thispeak isarise inFSH.Thereis
day12afterovulation(Jablonka-Shariffetal1993);
alsoasecondFSHpeak2daysafterovulation.
31
Part
1
Normalcyclicalovarianactivityanditscontrol
90
of the breeding season. The duration of oestrus is
30-40hours,yith ovulation occurring12-36liours
/6u)
60
aftertheonset.
The detection ofhear in a doeis difficult in the
FSH
30
absence of a male goat.The vulva shows some evi
dence of oedema and hyperaemia;the tail iswagged
01
fromside to side and up and down (the most reli-
30-
able sign according toLlewelyn et al 1993);the doe
(w/bu)
20-
isrestless andmore vocal,has a reduced appetite
andmillyield,and showsmountingbehaviour.The
10
H
presence ofthe pheromonesfrom the male goat,
0
whichcanbetransferredfrom thescentglandon to
100
a cloth,will oftenintensify the signs.
The ovaries are ofvariable shape,depending upon
Su
品
the structures thatare present,thelongest dimension
w
beingabout2.2cm.Thepreovulatoryfollicles are0.6-
50
0.9cm in diameter and when they protrude from the
surface often have a bluish tinge. Ulurasonographic
studies have suggested that there are two to six fol-
licularwaves,althoughit islilely thatthreetofour
ismostprevalent(seereviewby Evans2003).Where
9
JS
multipleovulationsoccur,thefolliclesinvolvedusu
ally arise from the same wave;however,it is possi-
blein some casesfor them to arise from consecutive
ones.The corpora lutea are pink in colour.
The endocrine changes measured in the peripheral
circulation are very similar to those of the ewe.
17
Ovulation
Ovulation
Daysofoestrouscycle
The pig
Fig.1.30 Trends in hormone concentrationsin the peripheral
circulation of the eweduring the oestrouscycle
Pubertyingilts isreached atabout7months but diet,
breed (including the degree of inbreeding) and sea-
Progesterone concentrations follow closely the
son ofbirthinfluenceitsonset.Atthefirst oestrus the
physicalchangesofthecorporaluteabutmaximumval-
numberofovulationsislowbutitincreases thereaf-
ues arelower than those ofthe cow,i.e.2.5-4ng/ml.
tersothat,if matingis delayed until the third heata
Prolactin fluctuatesthroughouttheoestrouscycle;
larger litter will result.The cross-breeding of inbred
however, concentrations rise during oestrus and
lines increases the ovulation rate,as does the provi-
ovulation,presumablyreflectingtheroleof thishor-
sion of ahigh-energy diet for 1l-14 days before the
mone in theformationof theCLs.
expectedoestrus;continuingsuch a dietaftermat
ing,however,increases embryonicloss.Fecundity is
best from the fourth to seventh gestations.
Thegoat
Although the domestic sow is generally consid-
ered to be polyoestrous the wild pig is a seasonal
The breeding season in Britain is from August to
breeder,the main period being late autumn with
February with the greatest activity in the months
asecondpeakofactivityinApril(Claus&Weiler
of October, November and December. Near the
1985).There is some evidence of the influence
equator,there is no evidence of seasonality but
ofphotoperiod on reproductionin the domes-
continuous cyclic activity.The doe(nanny) goat is
tic sow; for example, anoestrus is more prevalent
polyoestrous,withaninteroestrousintervalof20-21
in summer,and to a lesser extent February and
days,although it israther irregular at thebeginning
March,whiletheovulationrateislower insumer
32
Chapter
1
Endogenousandexogenouscontrolofovariancyclicity
Claus and Weiler(1985) found that by reducing the
abletodecreasetheinterval fromweaningtooestrus
from 23.6 to 5.7 days.For themost part, the recur-
rent reproductive cycles of 21 days are interrupied
by pregnancy and lactation.The average length of
oestrusis 53 hours,with spontaneous ovulation
occurringbetween38and42hoursfromthebegin-
ning(Signoret 1971).During lactation,the physical
stimuli of suckling suppresses cyclical activity,but
manysowsshowananovulatoryoestrus2daysafter
farrowing.Whenweaningoccursat5or6weeks,
oestrus can be expected in 4-6 days.Earlier weaning
A
resultsin a slightly longer time interval.
Signs of oestrus
Beginning 3 days before oestrus,the vulva becomes
progressively swollen and congested;these features
persistthroughoutoestrus andgradually subsidedur-
ing the 3 days afterwards.Restlessness is an unfailing
sign of theapproachofheat,andapeculiarrepetitive
grunt is emitted.With other sows the pro-oestrous
animal sniffs theirvulvae andmay trytoridethem,
orwill betherecipient of suchattentions.Theboaris
sought,and in his presence the pro-oestrous female
noseshis testicles andflanks andmaymount himbut
willrefuse tobemounted.At theheight ofoestrus
the sow assumes a stationaryrigid attitude withher
ears cocked,and she appears to be quite oblivious
to her environment. She generally remains still dur-
ingcoitus,which lasts an averageof5-7minutes but
whenmating with heavy boars giltsmaybecome
fidgety.Burger (1952) demonstrated that oestrus
C
could readily be determined byfirmlypressing the
loin of the sowwith the palms ofboth hands:the
Fig.1.31 Ovaries of sows.(A) Ovary ofa sowa fewdays after
oestrous sow will stand motionless with cocked ears
ovulation showing alargencmber ofreddishpurpleCLs
insome of which the ovulation papilla can be seen(arrow)
whereas sowsnot inheatwill object tothis approach.
giving them a conical shape.(B) Left(L)and right (R)ovaries
The sameimmobilization responsecan be elicited if
ofa sow inmid-dioestrus;on theleft ovary five and on the
the attendantsitsastridethesow,andit can also be
right 14CLsof the current oestrous cyclecan be seen (arrow
obtainedin the absenceofaboarbyreproducingthe
a),and on the leftovary fourand on theright five CLsof the
voice or odourof theboar.Thesubstanceresponisible
previous cyclecanbe seen,which areawhite/creamcolour
(arrowb).(C)Ovary froma sow at 15-18daysof theoestrous
forboar odourhasbeenidentified as5o-andost-16-
cycleshowing the typical,creamy yellcwcoloured CLs（cl：
ene-3-one and is secreted by the salivary glands.In
several follicles(f) canbe seen.Courtesy of DrM.Nevel.
theform ofan aerosol it canbesprayed in thevicinity
of sows topromote the standingreaction of oestrus.
'Silent heats’occur in about 2% of porcinecycles.
lobulation being dueto theelevationsof thelargefol-
licles and CLs;preovulatory follicles,when mature,
Cyclicchangesin theovaries
attain diameters of0.7-0.9cm.Itismuch more dif-
The ovaries of the mature cyclical sow arerelatively
ficult tostudyfolliculardynamicsinthesowthan in
large and mulberry-like (Fig.1.31),the surface
thecowand mare;firstly,there aretheproblems of
33
Normalcyclical ovarian activityand itscontrol
identifyinganindividual follicleamongalargenum-
afterwhich theygraduallyregresstothenextoestrus.
ber,and secondly because,until the recent devel-
They are darkedup to day3but thenchange to,and
opment of small transrectal B-modeultrasound
remain,wirered until day15(Fig.1.31B).As the CLs
ransducer probes, it has been almost impossible to
regress between days 15 and18,the colour changes
study changessequentiallyinthe same animal.Unlike
rapidly from wine red to yellow,creamy yellow or
other domesticspecies,therearenofollicularwaves.
buff(Fig.1.31C).Themechanism ofluteolysis is not
Ithas been shown that,cxcept during the follicular
fully understood in the sow,for, although PGFis
phaseof tecycle,there iscontinuousproliferation
secreted by theuterus asearlyasdays12-16ofthe
and atresiaoffolliclessothat thereisgenerallyapool
ofabout30-50between2and7mmindiameter;this
1982); the CLs are tinresponsive to exogenous PGF,
isnotassociatedwithanychangesinplasmaFSHcon-
until about12-23 daysafterovulation.During the
centrations (Guthrie &Cooper 1996).The absence of
process of luteolysis, the CLs are invaded by mac-
afollicularwave pattern maybe due to the different
rophagesthat produce tumournecrosisfactor(TNF);
hormones produced by the Cls such as oestradiol
this substance in association with PGFa probably
andinhibinswhichexertanegativefeedbackeffect
causes luteolysis (Wutike et al 1995). In addition,
on FSH secretion（Driancourt2001).Between about
there is also a suggestion thatTNF inhibits oestradiol
day14andday16ofthecyclethereisacoordinated
production,thereby removing a luteotrophic source.
recruitment of follicles,probably under he influ
There is further rapid regression of the CLs at the
enceofgonadotrophinstimulationinducedbecause
next oestrusbutthroughout thesucceedingdioestrus
ofthedeclineinprogesteroneandthewithdrawal of
the CLs remain as distinct entities; after this they
its negative feedback effect.A substantial number of
regress sharply to grey,pinhead foci.when,there
thesefollicles aredestinedforovulation,although it
fore,a cyclicsow isslaughteredinthefirstlialfof
isnotpossibletoidentifythepreovulatorypopula-
dioestrus the ovaries may show thewine-coloured
tion until day 21-22oftheoestrous cycle.The growth
CLs of the current cycle,also the smaller,pale CLs
ofselectedpreovulatoryfolliclesduringthefollicular
ofthe previous cycle and the grey specks ofthe
phase is associatedwithrapid atresia of small follicles
third-generation CLs (Fig. 1.31B). During the luteal
and a block to their replacementin the proliferating
phases of thecycle,oestrogensarevery luteotrophic;
pool, thus indicating someintraovarianconirol mech-
as a result itis possible to prolong the life span of
anism(Foxcroft &Hunter1985).The precise nature
the CLs for several weeks,resulting ina pseudopreg
ofthe substances is not fully understood,although
nancy (Dzuik1977).
various substances have been proposed: steroids,
growthfactors(epidermal/transforming,fibroblast
Endocrine changes during the
and insulin-lile)andtheirrelatedbindingproteins,
oestrouscycle
andotherregulatory substances such asfollicleregu-
latory protein’（Hlunter&Picton1999),which might
The endocrine changes are shown in Figure 1.32.
be the IGFBPs or PAPP-A (see p. 10). The ripe follicle
Oestrogensin the peripheral circulation start torise
issea-shellpinkcolourwithafinenetworkof surface
at the time that the CLs begin to regress,reaching
bloodvessels and avery transparent focus that indi-
apeakabout 48hoursbeforetheonset ofoestrus.
catesthe siteofimminent ovulation.Haemorrhagic
The ovulatory LH peak occurs at the beginning of
follicles are common.After ovulation there remain
oestrus and 8-15 hours after the oestrogen peak;
a considerablenumberof folliclesofabout 0.4cm,
valuesremain low andfluctuate throughout the
rest of the cycle. FSH concentrations vary consid-
succeedingday18.
erably;howevet,there appears to be some pattern
Immediately after ovulation, the ruptured folli-
ofsecretion.Brinkley el al (1973) demonstrated
cle is represented by a congested depression but the
two surges,one concurrent with the LH peak and
accurnulation of blood clot soon givesit a conical
a largeroneonday2or3of thecycle;VandeWiel
shape(Fig.1.31A).By day 3,its cavity is filled with
et al (1981) found a similar pattern,the peak coin-
darkredblood clot,whichbyday6isreplaced bya
ciding with theminimum value ofoestradiol.As
connectivetissueplugorbya slightlyyellowfluid;
with other species,the progesterone concentra-
clots may persist up to day 12 and luid up to day 18.
tions closelyfollow the physical changes of theCLs.
The CLs attain their maximum size at12-15 days,
For the first 8 days after ovulation there is a good
34
Chapter
11
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
Andersen 1977).Despite extensive research it isonly
comparativelyrecently, that themechanisms involved
6u)
in determining ihe duration of anoestrus and when
FSH
bitches come into oestrushave started tounfold.In
addition,it must bestressed that this,aswith much
oftheworkoncaninereproduction,hasbeendone
B
onexperimental Beaglecolonies,whichmayormay
notberepresentative of the speciesingeneral.There
is strong evidence that dopaminergic substances are
involved in initiatingfolliculogenesis and causing the
transitionfrom anoestrus topro-oestrusandoestrus.
0
Whiletreatingbitcheswithdopamineagonists,such
60-
asbromocriptineandcabergolinecan shortenthe
SoJIs
duration of anoestrus, probably by inhibiting pro-
30
lactin secretion,there is evidencethat endogenous
B
dopaminergic substances have a direct effect on reg-
门
ulating GnRHl secretion,thereby stimulating basal
30
FSH secretion and initiating folliculogenesis (see
sn
reviewbyOkkens&Kooistra2006)
20
est
The average interval between successive oestrous
O
periods is 7 months but it is variable and there is
10
someevidencethatthebreedofthebitchcanhave
an effect.For example,for the Rough Collie it is
0
21
37weeks andfor theGermanShepherd26weeks
Ovulation
Ovulation
(Christie&Bell 1971）:other breeds that were stud-
Days ofoestrous cycle
ied hadmean intervalsbetween these twofigures.
Mating does not appear to influence the inter-
Fig.1.32 Trends in hormone concentrations in the peripheral
val,although pregnancy cauised a slight increase
circulation of the sow during theoestrouscycle.
(Christie & Bell 1971). There does not appear to be
anyseasonaleffectonreproductivefunctionsince
thereisafairlyevendistributionoftheoccurrence
correlationbetweenprogesteronelevelsandthe
ofoestrus throughout the year(Sokolowskiet al
number of CLs;however,by 12 days it is less obvi-
1977).
ous (Dzuik 1977).
The oestrous cycle is traditionallydivided into
Two prolactin surges have been identified (Brinkley
four phases (Heape 1900).
etal1973,Van deWieletal1981),hefirstonecon-
comitantwith thepreovulatoryLHandoestrogen
Pro-oestrus
surges anda second during oestrus.
The bitch has a true pro-oestrus characterized by
The dog
the presence of vulval oedema, swelling and a san
guinous discharge.Somefastidiousbitchiesshowno
evidence of discharge as they are continually clean-
Reproductive activity in the bitch differs from the
ing the perineum.The bitch is attractive to males but
polycyclicpattern of otherspecies in that there areno
will not accept the male.
frequent,recurringperiodsofoestrus,eitherrepeat-
edly throughout theyear asincattle andpigsor sea-
sonally driven as in horses, sheep, goats and cats.
Oestrus
All bitcheshave a prolongedperiod of anoestrus or
Thebitchwill acceptthemaleand adoptsthebreed
sexual quiescence between successive heats irrespec-
ingstance.Thevulva becomes less oedematous and
tive of whether they have been pregnant or not;this
thevulval dischargebecomesclearer,lesssanguinous
pattern has been described as monocyclic(Jochle&
and lesscopious.
35
Part
111
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
The duration ofpro-oestrus and oestrus combined
copulatory tie, which occupies 15-25 minutes, she
is about 18 days, i.e.9 days each.However,tlis can
becomes restless and irritable and her attemmpt lo free
be very variable, somebitches showingvery little sign
herself maycause the male considerable physical
ofpro-oesirusbefore theywill accept and stand for
embarrassment.After the first 2 days of oestrus, sexual
the dog anid others producing a copious sanguinous
desire gradually recedes but, with the continued per-
discharge during true oestrus.Some bitches also
suiasion ofthemaleshewill accept coitus until the end
show evidence of sire preference, which can affect of the period. Bleeding, although reduced in amount,
the timing.Ovulation usually occurs 1-2 days after:
generally continues well into oestrus. More often,
the onset of oestrus, although,using laparoscopy, it 
however, the discharge becomes yellow as oestrus pro-
has been observed that some follicles continue to
ceeds. Vulvar swelling and tumefaction are greatest at
ovulaleupto 14 days later(Wildt et al 1977).
the onset of the stage ofacceptance.During thecourse
ofoestrus the enlarged labia become softer in con-
sistency. Some labial swelling continues into the first
Metoestrus
part of the metoestrous phase.
This siage starts when the bitch ceases to accept the
dog:however, there is dispute about its duration.
Some consider that it ends when the corpora lutea
Changes in the vagina anduterus
have regressed at 70-80 days while others measure it
Vaginal smear
in relation tothetime taken forrepair of the endo-
metrium,130-140 days.
The cyclical changes that occur in vaginal cytology
have been described in detail (Griffiths & Amoroso
Anoestrus
1939,Hancock & Rowlands 1949,Schuite 1967,
Rozel 1975). Vaginal smears stained with either a
At the end of metoestrus the bitchi passes into a
simple stain such as Leishman's or a trichrome stain
period of anoestrus without any external signs. The
suchi as Shorr's can,with practice,be used to deter-
same is also true after parturition following a nor-
mine the stage of the oestrous cycle.The advent of
mal pregnancy.This phase lasts 2-10 months before
the Diff-Quik staining method has greatly simpli-
the bitch returns to pro-oestrus.
fied the procedure.At the onset of pro-oestrus, large
numbers of erythrocytes are present; however, wlien
Signs of oestrus
true oestrus occurs the number of erythrocytes is
reduced and the smear consists of superficial cell
types from the stratified squamous epithelium, such
is he oniset of slight swelling of the vulvar lips.This
as anuclear cells, cells with pyknotic nuclei and large
generally precedes the commencement of bleeding
intermediate cells.Towards the end of oestrus, num
by several days. Labial swelling is progressive during
bers of polymorphonuclear neutrophil leukocytes
he pro-oestrus period.Bleeding attains its maximum
appear in the smear, and hese become hie donni-
earlyinpro-oestrus andcontinues at thislevel intothe
nant cell type during metoestrus. In anoestrus nucle-
early part of true oestrus. During the greater part of
ated basal and intermediate cells of the stratified
pro-oestrus the bitch, alihough attractive to the dog,
squamous epithelium, together with a few neutro-
takes no interest in his attentions. She will not stand
phils,form the characteristic smear.
for him and generally attacks him if he attempts to
Figure 1.33 shows the cyclical changes of the cell
mount her. A day or so before the end of pro-oestrus,
lypes and Figure 1.34 examples of stained smears.
her allitudechanges, and she shows signs of courtship
towards the male.These comprise sudden darting
Vaginal epithelium
movements which end in a crouching attitude with
The vaginal epithelium during anoestrus is of the
ingly, but as the dog approaches she moves suddenly
low, columnar, cuboidal type and comprises rwo or
again. She will not yet allow him to mount. With the
three layers only. During pro-oestrus the epithe-
onset of oestrus the invitation to coitus is obvious.
lial cells change to the high, squamous, stratified
She stands in the mating position with her tail slightly
type and persist in this form until the later stages
raised orheld to one side.Sheremains still while the
of oestrus.The stratum corneum and the layers
male mounts and copulates. In the later stages of the
immediatelybeneathit arelostby desquamation
36
Chapter
1
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
oestrogen
progesterone
Oestrogen
and LH
....Progesterone
Plasma
LH
Pro-oestrus
Oestrus
Early
Cell type
Vaginitis
Anoestrus
Early
Late
Early
Late
metoestrus
pyometra
Para basal
+++
+
一
一
一
++
±
Small
+++
++
一
一
+
±
intermediate
Large
++
+++
+++
一
intermediate
Anuclear
++
++++
+++
一
keratinized
一
0.0
Red blood
。
+++
++
-
一
00
Neutrophilis
+
+++
+
++++
Fig. 1.33 Changes in the types of cell,and theirelative nurnbers, in vagnal smears from thebitch during the stages of the
cestruus cyce, and changes in oestrogen, progesterone and luteinizing hormone levels in the peripheral plasma.
during the pro-oestrous and oestrous periods, leav-
into anoestrus, there is a reduction in the amount
ing a low, squamous struicture that becomes con-
and degreeofcoilingof theglands
verted to columnar epithelium in 1-3weeks after
Ai aboui 98 days after the onset of oestrus, i.e. in
the end of lheat.During metoestrus (and pregnaney)
metoestrus,thereis evidence of desquamation of the
the epithelium is of a higher columnar type than
endometrialepithelium;however,byabout 120-130
during anoestrus.
days theepitheliumhasbeenrestored by proliferation
During pro-oestrus, oestrus and early metoestrus
of cells from the crypts of the endometrial glands.
the epithelium and lamina propria are infiltrated
with large numbers of neutrophils, which eventu-
Changes in the ovaries
ally escape into the vaginal lumen.
During anoestrus the ovaries are oval and slighiuy
flattened.In a bitch ofmedium size theymeasure
Endometrium
approximately 1.4cm from pole to pole and 0.8 cm
The endometrium shows considerable change dur-
from the attached to the free border.No appreciable
ing the oestrous cycle. The endometrial glands in
follicles can be seen,although on section the min-
pro-oestrus and oestrus are loosely coiled with very
ute remnants of the CLsof theprevious cyclemay be
obvious lumina and deep epithelial lining. During
seen as yellow or brown spots. In the young bitch,
metoestrus the glands become larger, the lumina
the surface of the ovaries is smooth and regular but
smaller and the coiledparts in the basal layer of the
in the aged animal it is irregular and scarred.At the
endometriummore tortuous.As the bitch passes
commencement of pro-oestrus, developing follicles
37
Part
11
Normalcyclicalovarian activity anditscontrol
Fig.1.34Photomicrographsofexfoliativevaginal cellsduringvariousstagesof thereproductivecycleof thebitch.
Thesmearshavebeen stainedwithamodifiedWright-Giemsastain.(A)Anoestrus:parabasal epithelial cells and
smallintermediate epithelialcells.(B)Pro-oestrus:small intermediate epithelial cells,largeintermediate epithelial cells
and erythrocytes.Polymorphonuclear leucocytesare also found inlownumbers during thisstage of the cycle but are
not demonstratedhere.(C)Earlyoestrus:large intermediate epithelial cells,anuclearepithelial cells anderythrocytes.
large intermediate epithelial cells and erythrccytes.The percentage of anuclearcellsis high.(E) Metoestrus (higher
magnification thanA-D):smallintermediateepithelial cellsandlarge numbers ofpolymorphonuclearleucocytes.
Duringearlymetoestrus largeintermediate epithelial cellmaybepresent,and laternumbersofparabasal epithelial
cells increase.Thereisoftenalarge amountf background debris.(F)Latemetoestrus(highermagnification than
A-D):parabasalepithelialcellsandsmall vacuolatedintermedialeepithelialcellsaretypicalof thisstageof thecycle
but mayalsobefound duringanoestrusandmorerarelyduringpro-oestrus.
38
Chapter
1
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
have already attained a diameterofO.4cin(England
obviously developing antral follicles.When the bitch
was in oestrus, they had increased in size,reaching a
the time of ovulation, their size varies from 0.7 to
maximumof4-13mmin diameteronday13(day 0
1.1 cm (England & Allen 1989b,Hayer et al 1993).
being onset of pro-oestrus). The walls of the follicles
By this time the ovary is considerably enlarged, its
became thickened from day 10 onwards,presumably
size depending on the number of ripe follicles pres-
because of preovulatory luteinization; there was 10
ent, and its shape is irregular because of the projec-
evidence of follicular collapse associated with ovula-
tion of the follicles from its surface.Because of the
tion.At 25-30 days after the onset ofpro-oestrus the
thickness of the follicle wall,it may be difficult to
ovaries were difficult to identify.
distinguish between follicles and CLs. Prior to ovula-
tion, the surface of the follicle shows a slightly raised
Endocrine changes during the
papule, pinhead-sized, and the epithelium covering
it is brown,which contrasts with the flesh colour of
oestrous cycle
theremainderof thefollicle.Aremarkablefeature of
The trends in endocrine changes are shown in Figure
theripening follicleofthebitch is the thickness of
1.35.The main feature that distinguishes theim
its wall, due to hypertrophy and folding of the gran-
from other species previously described is the pro-
ulosa cells, which can be seen on section with the
longed luteal phase, illustrated by the persistence
naked eye as evidence of preovulatory luteinization.
of high progesterone levels in the peripheral blood.
Ovulation is spontaneous and normally occurs 1-2
days after the onsei of the period of acceptance. Most
200-
ofthe folliclesrupture overaperiod of48hours
(Wildt et al 1977). Ihe oocyte is capable of being fer-
100-
tilized for up to 10s hours after ovulation (Tsutsui &
Shimizu 1975). The Cl at first contains a central cav-
ity but becomes filled by compact luteinized cells by
the 10th day after ovulation,by which lime the body
has altained its fiill size (0.6-1 cm). CLs now com-
30-
prise by far the greater mass of the ovary. As a rule
an approximately equal number of CLs are found in
15
each ovary, although occasionally there are wide dif
ferences. (In this connection it is interesting io nole
that the numbers offetuses in the respective cornua
in pregnancy frequently differ from those of the CLs
80-
in the ovaries on the respective sicdes.) Embryonic
migration into the cormua on the opposite side would
60
appear to be common. On section, the CL is yellow-
40
ish pink; it remains unchanged in the non-pregnant
营
bitch until about the3oth day after ovulation, after
20-
which it slowly atrophies. Visible vestiges imay be
present throughout anoestrus, During pregnancy the
Clspersist at their maximum size throughout but
20
regress fairly rapidly after parturition.
15
hu
10
Ultrasound appearance of
the ovaries
0
20
10
60
80
001
120
Using a transabdominal approach via the flank,
Days after cnset of pro-oestus
with the bitch standing and a 7.5 Ml-lz realtime lin-
car array transducer, England &Allen (1989b) were
Fig. 1.35Trencs in hormone concentration in treperipheral
circulation of the bitch during the oestrous cycle.(After Jeffcoate
able toidentify ovarian structures at the onset of pro-
1998 and de Gier et al 2006.)
oestrus; these were circular and anechoic andwere
Part
1
Normalcyclicalovarian activityand itscontrol
It isnoticeablethatprogesteronelevelsstarttorise
the decline in progesterone appearing to coincide with
before ovulation has occurred,which confirms the
therise inprolactin.If bitches undergo ovariohysterec-
morphologicalevidenceofpreovulatoryluteini-
tomywhentheyarepseudopregnanttheconditioncan
zationofthematurefollicles60-70hoursbefore
be intensified and prolonged.Furthermore, prolactin
ovulation (Concannon et al 1977).This preovula-
inhibitorssuchasbromocriptine andcabergolinehave
toryriseinprogesteronemay providethe stimulus
been successfully used tocauseremission of the signs
forthebitch toacceptthemale(Concannonetal
of pseudopregnancy and are now widely used in veteri-
1975).In addition,it can alsobe used as a method
nary clinical practice.
todeterminethetimingofartificialinseminationin
that it should not be delayed long after concentra-
The cat
tions higher than 2-3ng/ml are observed in periph-
eralplasma（Jeffcoate&Lindsay1989;seeCh.28).
Oestrogens rise rapidly just before the onset of
Body weight is the most important factor in deter-
standingoestrus,eithercoincidingwithorcloselyfol-
mining puberty in non-pedigree cats (Scou 1970).
lowingtheLHpeak(deGieret al2006),whichlasts
Femaleswill usuallyshow theirfirst oestrus once
muchlongerthanthatofotherspecies(36±55h;de
aweightof2.3-2.5kghasbeenattainedatan
Gieretal2006);ovulationoccurs24-96hours after
approximate age of 7 months.Puberty occurs a
this(Phemister etal 1973,Wildt etal 1977）.The pre-
monthor two laterinmales ataweight of approx-
OvulatoryLH surge,whichsometimes isbifurcated
imately3.5kg.Puberty isalso influencedbythe
(de Gier etal 2006),is generally accompaniedby
seasonofbirth:femalesbornveryearlyin theyear
the FSH surge,starting 25-30 hours before the pre-
maymatureintheautumnofthesameyear,while
Ovulatory LH peak,although in some cases theFSH
thosebornlaterwillnot normally showoestrus
surge starts 12 hours before theLH surge.FSl con-
until the following spring (Gruffydd-Jones 1982).
centrations at oestrus reach a peak coincident with
Puberty ismuch more variablein pedigree cats
that of LH but lasting much longer (110±8 h; de Gier
(Jemmett&Evans1977).Orienialqueens(such as
et al 2006). Prolactin appears to have a negative cor-
Siamese and Burmese) may show their first oestrus
relationwithprogesteronefrom about20daysafter
before 5 months of age, while pedigree long-hair
ovulation;thus,asprogesteronelevelsfallowardshe
caismaynot matureuntil over ayear ofage.
endofmetoestrusorpregnancy,prolactinincreases;it
Free-living non-pedigree and feral cats are season-
is themajor luteotrophic hormonein thisspecies.
ally polyoestrous, with a period of anoestrus begin-
ning in the late autumn. Increasing daylight length
Pseudopregnancy
isthemostimportantfactorininducingtheresump-
tionofreproductiveactivityandthefirstoestruswill
Most,ifnotall,bitchesshowsome evidence ofpseu
usually beseen soon after theshortest day of theyear.
dopregnancy during metoestrus, the intensity and
Ifaconstant 14hours oflighting isprovided daily,
signs beingvery variable;for thisreason it is prefera-
sexualactivity willcontinuethroughouttheyear,
ble to refer to couert pseudopregnancy, where the bitch
andthismanipulationofphotoperiodwillalter the
will be in metoestrus but will show litle or no signs,
circadian rhythm ofmelatonin production (Leyva
and overt pseudopregnancy.In the latter,the clinical
etal1985）.If the lighting regimen ischanged from 14
signswillrangefromslightmammarydevelopment
toShoursthencyclicactivitywillceaseimmediately
and lactogenesis while at the opposite extreme the
(Leyva etal 1989).There maybeaperiodofapparent
bitch will show all the external signs ofpregnancy
lackofoestrous activityintheearlysummerbutthis
andwillultimatelyundergoamockparturition,with
corresponds with thepregnancy or lactation following
nesting,lossof appetite,straining,emotional attach-
matingearlierin theyear,rather than true anoestrus.
ment to inanimate objecis and heavylactation.
Essentially,here are four possible outcomes fol-
Pseudopregnancywasoriginallybelieved tobedue
lowing oestrus in the cat. (1) Ifa fertile mating occurs
to an intensification and prolongation of metoestrus;
then there is ovulation, CL formation followed by
however,anumberofworkershavedemonstrated that
pregnancy. (2) There may be ovulation, CL forma-
there is no difference in the progesterone concentra-
tion, no fertilization and a pseudopregnancy.(3)
tionsintheperipheral bloodofbitcheswithorwithout
Theremay beno ovulation,followed byfollicular
regression and atresia and after a short interoestrous
maywellberesponsibleforinitiatingthechangeswith
intervalofafewdaysareturntooestrus;insomecases
40
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
the interoestrousinterval is so short that some indi-
Mating and ovulation
(4)At the end of the breeding season,where thereis
During mating. the tom mounts the queen and
no ovulation, the queen cat may become anoestrus.
grasps her neck with his teeth. The queen's hind
Some non-pedigree cats have regular oestrous cycles
legs paddle as he adjusts his position,and this
lastingapproximately3weeks,butothersmay show
becomes more rapid during coitus,which lasts up
no regular pattern (Shille et al 1979).The duration of
to 10 seconds. The queen cries out during copula-
oestrus is7-10 days and is not significanty shortened
tion,andas the tom dismounis,shemay strilkeout
at him, displaying the typical‘rage reactionThis
by mating(Shilleet al1979,Gruffydd-Jones 1982).
is followed by a period of frantic rolling and lick-
Oestrouscyclepatternsshowconsiderablymorevari-
ation in pedigree cats. Long-haired may have only
ing at the vulva.As soon as this postcoital reaction
oneor twooestrous cycles eachyear,while theperiod
has ceased, the tom will usually alttempt to mate
the queen again, and there may be several matings
ofoestrus maybelonger in Orientalqueenswitha
reduced interoestrous interval.Oestrogen concentra-
within thefirst 30-60 minutes.
tions increase dramatically at the time ofoestrus from
At oestrus,there are5-8 follicles present inboth
the baseline of6Opmol/l andmay doublewithin
ovaries and they are3-4 cm in diameter at the time
24 hours,reaching apeak ofup to300pmol/1 (Shille
of ovulation (Wildt et al 1980, Shille et al 1983).
et al 1979)(Fig. 1.36).The principal oestrogen pro-
The cat is an induced ovulator and thus mating is
duced by the ovary is oestradiol-17β.Therapid rise
important in triggering ovulation. Receptors are
in oestrogen concentrations corresponds to an abrupt
preseniwithin thequeen'svulva thatarestimulated
during copulation,ultimately resulting inrelease of
appearance of behavioural changes indicative of
oestrus,and queens do notusually showa distinctive
LH from the anterior pituitary.Only about 50% of
pro-oestrous phase. The oestrual display is character-
queens will ovulate after a single mating, and mul-
ized by increased vocalization,rubbing and rolling.
tiplematings may be required to ensure adequate
The queen becomes generally more active and will
release of LH to induce ovulation (Concannon el
solicit thealttentionofa tom.The queenmayadopt the
al 19sO).The ovulatory surge of LH begins within
minutes ofcoitus,peaks within2hours and returns
matingpostureeitherinresponsetothetom orocca
sionally spontaneously.She lowersherfront quarters
to basal values within about Shours;peal LH con-
with the hind legs extended,resulting in lordosis.The
centrations of over 90ng/ml have been reported
tail is held erecl and slightly to one side.There may
(Tsutsui &Stabenfeldt 1993).Further matings before
occasionally be a slight serous vaginal discharge but
the peak of LH concentrations has been reached
there are usually no changes in the appearance of the
willlead toadditional increments.However,after
external genitalia.The extent of the oestrual display
muliple matings over a period of 4 hours or more,
varies considerably between queens but is generally
further matings may fail to induce any additional
increase in LH concentrations, and this is thought
moreprominentin theOriental breeds.
toresultfrom depletion of thepituitarypoolofihe
hormone or development of refractoriness to GnRH
Oestrogeninabsence ofovulation
(Johnson&Gay1981).
-- Oestriogenfollowing ovulalion
Ovulation is an'all or nothing' phenomenon and
Progeslerone during pregnancy
once significant concentrations of LH have been
Progesterone during pseudopregnancy
300
100
achieved all ripe follicles will rupture (Wildt et al
1980). The mean ovulatory rate for non-pedigree
cats is approximately four, but is more variable in
pedigree animals.
Occasionally,ovulationwill occur n theabsence
of any contact with entire toms.Receptors similar
-0
-10
+10
+20+30+40
+50
+60+70
to those foundinthevulva arealso located in the
lumbar area (Rose 1978), and these may be stimu-
Fig.1.36Changes in the meanperipheral plasma concentrations
lated if the queen is mounted by other females or
in the queencatofprogesterone（during pregnancy and
castrated male cats, or by stroking over this area.
pseudopregnancy) and cestrogen(in the absence of ovulation
and following ovulation).
they havebeen castrated prepubertally.Ilowever,in
41
Part
1
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
a study involving a colony ofAmerican short-haired
ewe and goat it is the cffect of a decreasing photo-
cats in which the queens were housed individually,
period that is,the stimulus.
andwhere tactilestimulationofthehindquarters
In ewesard doe goatsit is likely that it is there
andperinealregionsbyhandlerswas avoided,ovu-ccdinglong day-lcngth thatcontrolsthetiming of
lation was detected; this was defined if progesterone
thebreeding season，with the decreasing daylength
concentrationswere≥4.8nmol/l in theperipheralactually synchronizingtherhythmoftheendocrine
circulation.The queens had sight and sound ofother
eventsthattriggertheonsetofcyclical ovarian activ
cats,includingmales.Itisnoteworthythat sixof the
ity.The provision of housing with controlled light-
sevencats thatovulatedwereolder than 7yearsof
ingenablesthetimingofthebreedingseasontobe
age (Lawler et al 1993).
advanced or changed, even to the extent of provid-
ing an equatorial lightingregimen so that breed-
Pseudopregnancy
ing can occur throughout the year. There are two
approaches: (1) the gradual and (2) the abrupt.
Sterile matings that successfully induce ovulation
In theformer,day lengthisreduced incrementally
lead to pseudopregnancy.Concentrations of pro-
until thefinal fixed daylength is reached.In thelat-
gesteroneareverysimilartothoseofpregnancyfor
ter, the ewes and does are subject to a lightingregi-
the first 3weels(Fig.1.36),after which levels gradu-
men that ondaylis thenatural onewitha sudden
allyfall,reachingbaselinebyapproximately7weeks
decrease on day 2and are then kept on that until
（Paape et al1975,Shille and Stabenfeldt 1979)(Fig.
breedinghastakenplace.Onemeihod thatobviates
1.36).Oestrus will usually occur shortly afterwards.
theneedforspecial daylight-proofhousingis asfol
Nestingbehaviourandmillproductionarerarely
lows:inlatepregnancyoratparturitionewesare
seeninpseudopregnant queensbuthyperaemiaof the
exposedto22hoursofdaylightusingan artificial
nipples will usually be evident as in pregnancy. The
source andthenareductiontonaturaldaylength.
Alternatively,in late pregnancy ewes are exposed to
tion offat leadingto anincreasein abdominal size.
18hours of daylight for1month,followed byasud
den return to 8 hours. This results in ewes having a
fertile oestrus 3 months after lambing. Modifying
Artificial control ofcyclical
reproductive activity
photoperiod has not beenused muchcommer-
cially,sinceitisnotwithoutproblems,notleast the
fact that thereis a widerangein theresponse of the
In themanagement of livestock,orin dealing with
ewesasmeasured bythetimeofonsetofcyclical
companion animals,therearemanytimeswhenthe
ovarian activity.
manipulationof normal cyclic activity ensures opti-
Ifmares are stabled at the end of December in
mumproduction oris convenient for theowner.In
thenorthernhemisphereandaresubjected to arti-
the case of seasonal breeders the ability toproduce
ficial light,preferably of increasing duration,then
offspring out of season or to advance the lime of
it is possible to advance the onset of normal cyclical
onset of cyclic activity has advantages. In these and
activitysothatthereisoestrusandovulation.
inotherspecies,theability toensure thatanindivid
Both tungsten and fluorescent lights have been
ual or group of animals does not come into oestrus,
used,although the former would appear to be bet-
oris in oestrus at thesame time,hasattractions.The
ter.Theprovision of a2ooWincandescentbulbin
methodsthat areavailablecanbedividedintotwo
each loase-boxisadequate andifitiscontrolledby
main groups:those thiat donot involvetheuseof
an automatic timing device so that the duration of
hormones and those that do.
lightingisincreased by25-30minutes eachweek
reproductive activitywill be initiated when the mare
Non-hormonal methods
is receiving 15-16 hours of light each day (Kenney
Light
etal1975).
The onsetofcyclicalactivityinthemare,ewegoat
Nutrition
and cat is dependent upon changes in thehours
ofdaylight.Themareandqueenarestimulatedto
Theeffectofnutritionininitiatingreproductive
activity by a lengtheningphotoperiod,whilein theactivity in seasonallybreeding species isnot clear.
42
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
There is some evidence that the stabling of mares
It has also been shown in gilts and sows that stress
and the provision of good feeding assist in stimulat-
associated with a change in environment or trans-
ing the onset of cyclic activity in early spring. There
portation can stimulate the onset of oestrus post-
is also evidence for the coniverse, since Allen (1978)
partum.
has reported that when yarded mares are turned out
to fresh spring grass about 80% of them come into
Hormonal methods
oestrus and ovulate within 14 days. Furthermore,
he has found that barren and maiden mares main-
A large number of different hormones have been
tained in yards on adequate but mainly dried
used to manipulate cyclical activity in domestic spe-
feedstuffs during the winier and spring remain in
cies. Some of the methods have been based upon
anoestrus longer than those that are kepl out at
attempts to mimic closely the normal endocrine
grass. An explanation for this is difficult to find,
changes that occur; however, some have been rather
although it may be related to theβ-carotene con-
more empirical.
tent of the diet, fresh spring grass containing large
They can be considered in various groups: (1)
amounts of this substance.
preparations that stimulate release of anterior pitui-
Improved nutrition can exert a profound effect
itary hormones; (2) preparations that replace or
on ovarian fiinction by increasingihe number of
supplement anterior pituitary gonadotrophins; (3)
follicles that mature and ovulate.This effect is
Oestrogens; (4) progestogens: (5) prostaglandins:
described as‘flushing'a practice that has been
and (6) melatonin.
used in lowland flocks of sheep for many years.
By increasing the dietary intake,particularly that
Preparations that stimulate the release of
of energy. before ewes are tupped it is possible
anterior pituitary hormones
to increase the number of lambs that are born.
A similar technique can also be used in the sow to
Ovarian steroid hormones, particularly oestrogens,
increase litter size.However,there is no evidence
have been shown to exert a positive-feedback effect
that, provided the ewes are adequately fed, it is
upon the anterior pituitary and hypothalamus (see
possible to advance the onsef of the breeding sea-
Fig. 1.2). A large number of oestrogens, both nat-
son by this means.
urally occurring and synthetic,have been used to
The opinions on the effect of nutrition on repro-
stimulate oestrus.ltislikely that their effectis purely
duction in the sow are conflicting.It is generally
a direct one in stimulating oestrous behaviour and
assumed that flushing gilts and sows 4-6 days before
changes in the genital tract but it is possible that they
Oestrusincreasesprolificacybyincreasingovulation
may also stimulate the release ofpituitary gonado-
rate(Dailey et al 1972). Whether this effect occurs in
trophins. However, synthetic GnRH can be used to
adequately fed individuals is difficult to determine
stimulatetherelease ofendogenous gonarlotrophins;
(Aherne&Kirkwood1985).
for example, GnRH has been used to induce pre-
mature puberty in gilts following equine chorionic
gonadotrophin (eCG) stimulation (Webel 1978). 1t
Othernon-hormonal methods
can be used to stimulate the onset of oestrus in the
The presence of a male animal can exeri its effect
postpartum cow (Lanming et al 1979); lowever, it
upon the cyclical activity of the female. This is well
has not proved to be effective in inducing oestrus
demonstrated in sheep, where the introduction of
in mares during the seasonal anoestrus (Allen &
a vasectomized rup at the start of the breeding sea-
Alexiev 1979). In recent years GnRH agonists in the
son will stimulate the onset of oestrous cycles in
form of implants (deslorelin) have been used in
the majority of ewes and can also bring about some
mares[although they arenot licensedfor usein the
degree of synchronization of cyclical patterns (see
European Union(Eu)).While initially they induce
Ch.24).
a transient increase in gonadotrophin release, this
In sows and gilts,the weaning of piglets liastens
is then followed by a suppression of FSHI and LH
secretion,with extension of the interoestrous inter-
If litters from a number of sows are weaned at the
val.Such treatment has been used inan aitempt to
same time thiswill result in some degree ofsyn-
suppress cyclical ovarian activity in the same way as
chrony of oestrus.
progestogens are used (see below).
43
Part
11
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
Preparations that replace or supplement
necessary to withhold insemination at this induced
oestrus. Unfortunately, in many cases, the cow will
pituitary gonadotrophins
then returrto the anoestrous state.
It is possible to extract purified FSII and LHI from
Combinations of eCG/hCG have been used to
pituitary glands obtained at abattoirs.However,it is
induce oestrus in the anoestrous bitch,sometimes
expensive and time-consumingto obtain sufficient
in combination with oestrogens. The induction ofa
quantities for routine commercial use other than for
behavioural response has usually been good but the
superovulation and embryo transfer. Furthermore,
numbers of bitches that ovulated and subsequently
there is a danger of transmitting diseases such as
conceived has usually been poor.
bovine spongiform encephalitis (BSE). Fortunately,
Surprisingly, eCG does not appear to stimu-
three readily available substitutes are available:(1)
late ovarian activitywhen given to maresin winter
eCG,obtained from the serum of pregnant mares,
anoestrus.The reasons forthis areprobably twofold:
which has mainly anTSH-like'effect but with some
firstly, it may be that the dose required to stimulate
'LH-like' activity; (2) human chorionic gonadotro-
follicular developmenr is large and secondly, it is
phin (hCG), obtained from the urine of pregnant
likely that eCG alone is not responsible for stimu-
lating the wave of accessory follicles during early
with some ‘FSH-like'activity:(3) human meno-
pregnancy. hMG is extracted from the urine of meno-
pausal gonadotrophin (hMC) which is mainly
pausal women; this has a highFSH-like'action. It is
'FSH-lilke'; this is not used very much in domestic
used to superovulate cowsfor eimbryo transfer but
species.
I am not aware of it being used elsewhere.
Pseudopregnancy can be achieved by matingqueen
cats with a vasectomized tom or through siniulat-
Oestrogens
ingcoituis by swabbing thevagina.Administration
of hCG can also be used to induce ovulation.
The administration of oestrogens,either syntheticor
Pseudopregnant queens may not show a return to
naturally occurring,has been used to induce oestrus
in animals that are anoestrus, especially in the bitch.
oestrus for 4-8 weeks.
As has been previously described, premature
In most cases they have a direct effecton the tubular
genital tract and on behaviour; however, it is doubt-
puberly hasbeen initiatedin most domestic spe
ful that they initiate ovarian activity and ovulation;
cies by the administration of eCG.However,both
in fact, in large doses they could result in piuitary
gonadotraphins have also been successfully used lo
inhibition.The use of oestrogens in food-producing
manipulate cyclic activity. In anoestrous gilis and
animals is banned in many countries.
sows,eCG alone or in coinbination with hCGwill
promote follicular growth and oestrus(400iu eCG
and 200IU hCG), but a second injection of hCG.
Progestogens
72 hours later will ensure that ovulation occurs. The
Progesterone and progestational conpounds liave
same technique can be used to synchronize cyclical
been used extensively in most domestic species as
activity,particularly if used in combination with a
a method of controlling the oestrous cycle. particu-
progestogen or other pituitary-blocking substance
larly synchronization within groups of females. In
(seebelow).
general, the principle behind their use is that the
The use of eCG alone to induce oestrus in sea-
exogenous progestogens act in the same way as a
sonally anoestrous ewes is not very suiccessful but if
CL, resulting in a negative feedback effect upon the
progesterone is administered to the ewes before the
anterior pituitaryand asuppression ofcyclical activ-
injection of eCG then there is synchronized oestrus
ity initiated by the release of gonadotrophins. When
and ovulation. However, attempts to stimulate an
the source of progestogen is withdrawn, or its effet
early return to cyclical activity in lactating ewes have
declines, there is a return to cyclic activity.
proved to be difficult, particularly in those that are
lactating heavily.
In the anoestrous cow, it is possible to stimulate
Usesinthehorse
follicular growth and ovulation with eCG treatment.
In some racehorses and show jumpers it is desirable
However, the dose-response is variable, and it can
to prevent the mare from coming into oestrus at an
frequently result in multiple ovulations. Thus, it is
inopportunetime:insomecasesitmaybedesirable
44
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
to synchronize a group of animals.However, it is
likely reason for thisbeing impaired sperm trans-
important to remember that progestogens have an
port as a result of the atypical hormmone balance after
anabolic effect and thus their use in competition
withdrawal of the progestogen.
horses may be prohibited. A daily injection of pro-
Good synchronization and ferilityfollowingdou-
gesterone at a dose rate of 0.3 mg/kg is effective in
ble fixed-time artificial insemination was reported
preventing oestrus, with a return to a normal fertile
by Wishart & Young (1974) using a synthetic proges-
heat3-7 days after treatment ceases(Van Niekerk
togen (Norgestomet). The hormone was given as a
1973). Potent oral progestogens are now also avail-
subcutaneous implant at the same time as an injec-
able for suppressing oestrus and synchronizing
tion of estradiol valerate.Theimplant was removed
groups of mares when withdrawn (Webel 1975).
after 9 days and, following Iwo inseminations at
One of these, allyltrenbolone or altrenogest,has
48and 60 hours afterwards, conception rates were
been used successfully in a number of ways:
65%. This product is no longer licensed for use in
to stimulate the onset of cyclical activity. The hor-
the Eu because of the ban,in 2006,on the use of
mone,which is incorporated into a clear,yellow
oestrogens in food anirnals.The main disadvantage
vegetable oil, is administered at a dose rate of
of such a schemewastheneed to handlethecattlea
0.044 mg/kg body weight mixed in the feed for 10
second time toremove theimplant.
days and then stopped.A good response will be
Another method of administering progestogens
is in the forn of a progesterone-releasing intra-
obtainedwhengiven in thelatetransitional phase
vaginal device (PRID) containing 1.55 g progester-
from anoestrus to cyclicalactivitywhen follicles
are present.The results are better ifincreased light-
one (Fig. 1.37) or controlled internal drug release
device (CIDR-type B) containing 1.3Sg of proges-
ing is used
terone (Fig.1.38).The PRID,which is a stainless
lo suppress oestrus - for example, for shows or
steel coil covered with an inert elastomer incor-
other functions, It should be fed for 15 days at a
porating the progesterone, is placed in the vagina,
dose rate of 0.044 mg/kg
using a special speculum or ‘gun'（Fig.1.39) and
·to suppress oestrus in mares with prolonged
while it is in position progesterone is absorbed,
oestrus or other aberrant sexual behaviour
producing concentrations in the peripheral blood
·tocontrol the time ofoestrusso that effective use
comparable with the maximum levels of dioestrus.
can be made of a stallion or artificial insemina-
When the coil is removed after 7-10 days,thecow
tion.The hormone should be fed for 15 days and
will come into oestrus in2-3days,provided that
then stopped, so that the mare should come into
there is no persistent luteal tissue. Originally the
oestrus 2-3 days later.
coil also had attached a small gelatin capsule of
estradiol benzoate, which when released caused
luteolysis. However since the use of oestrogens in
Uses in cattle
food-producing animals has been banned in many
Progestogens can be used to suppress oestrus as
countries of the world, including all of those in the
described in the mare, but there are no practical
EU, PGF, is now given 24 hours before removal
indications for this.However,there is ample indica-
to ensure the demise of the CL.Good conception
tion for their use to synchronize groups of cows and
rates have been obtained following two fixed-time
heifers for artificial insemination and to overcome
inseminations at 48and 72hours after theremoval
the problems of oestrus detection.
of the device. The CIDR, which is a T-shaped device
Progesterone was first used by daily injection to
with flexible arms impregnated with progesterone,
functions in a siinilar manner andalso requires
1948(Christian & Casida 1948).Alargenumber of
the administration of PGFbefore removal.The
synthetic substances have since been used and it is
protocol is: insert CIDR on day O, PGF on day 6
generally accepted that, following treaument of ran-
and removal of CIDR on day 7.A system used in
domly cycling animals with these compounds for
ihe UsA, referred to as the Fastback programme, is
18-21 days, there is fairly good synchronization of
used in dairy cows to assist in the early detection of
oestrus 4-6 days after the cessation oftrcatmcnt.
Oestrus incows that fail to conceive.liis asfollows:
Unfortunately,as with other species,fertility at the
cow is inseminated at observed oestrus (day O),a
first oestrus may be lower than normal, the most
CIDR is inserted on day 14, removed on day 21 and
45
Part
1
Normal cyclical ovarian activityand itscontrol
Fig.1.37Progesterone-releasing intravaginal device（PRID)(p)with speculum/applicator
Folman et al 1983),with a pregnancy rate of 67%
following fixed-time artificial insemination at56
hours.
The same PRID has also been used successfully to
induceoestrusindairyandbeefsucklercows that
are anoestrus (Lamming&Bulman 1976）.This will
bediscussedfurtherin Chapter22.
Usesinthesheep
Progestogenshavebeenwidelyusedin controlling
reproduction in the ewe,either on their own or in
conjunction with other hormones.They have been
Fig.1.38Controlled internal drug release(CIDR) device.
used to induce oestrus in the anoestrousewe during
the non-breeding season and also for synchroniza-
tion of groups of ewes that are already showing cycli-
on days22-25observed foroestrusifnot pregnant,
cal activity.Most of theprogestational substances are
and re-inseminated.If the cow is pregnant,it will
aclministeredvia theintravaginal routein theform of
not adversely affect the pregnancy and cowswill
impregnated sponges or tampons (Fig.1.40). Provided
that the progestogen is correctly incorporated into
notreturn tooestrus.
In a study comparing the effect of the stage of
the spongeit isreadily absorbed at a sufficient rate
the oestrouscyclewhenPRIDs are inserted and the
toensureafullnegativefeedbackeffect onpituitary
degree of synchronization,it was found thatit was
function.Although progesterone was used initially in
much better when they were inserted on day13or
the sponges,the potent shor-actinganalogues,nota-
14 compared with days 2-4 (Cumming et al 1982).
bly fluorogestone acetate(FGA) and medroxyproges-
WhenPRIDswereinserted for12 days andPGFa
teroneacetate(MAP),havesupersededit.
injected 24 hours before removal,very good syn-
When intravaginal sponges are used outside the
chronization was achieved（Roche&Ireland1981,
normal breeding season,it is necessary to use eCG
46
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
Usesinthegoat
The same typeof sponge used insheep isquite suc-
cessful for synchronization ofoestrus and,in con-
junction with eCG,for theinitiation ofoestrus
during the normal period of anoestrus. Some
manufacturers produce a specific sponge for use
ingoats withahigher doserate ofprogestogen.
Goats object to the insertion of the sponges, partic-
ularly the applicator, much more than ewes, and in
maiden goats it is preferable to insert a lubricated
sponge with the use of a finger only (Hlenderson
Fig.1.39PRID attached togun'before inserticn intravaginally.
1985).Goats show intense oestrus36-48 hours
after sponge removal.A specially designed CIDR
（Fig.1.38)has been successfully used in Australia
(Ritaretal 1989).
WheneCGisused to stimulate oestrus,dose
as a source of gonadotrophin at the end of the pro-
rates of 600-5001u should be used in July,500-
gesterone priming period. The onset of normal
4001u inAugust and <300IU in September; from
cyclic activity can bedetermined by introducing into
OctoberonwardseCGisnotrequired(Henderson
theflockoneormorevasectomizedramsseveral
1985).
weeksbefore.These teaserramsshould either have a
coloured crayon smeared on their sternums or be fit-
Uses in thepig
tedwitha harnesswith acrayonblockattached.Thus
when the ram mounts a ewe, he leaves a coloured
A number of different progestogens have been tried
mark over the sacral area/tail base.However,it is
unsuccessfully to synchronize oestrus in sows and
possible to use a simple rule-of-thumb calculation
gilts.Altrenogest/allyltrenbolone is now sold in
todetermine if eCGis necessary;itis as follows:
many countries for this purpose.This progestogen
from the lambing records of the non-synchronized
effectively suppresses follicular maturation when
flock,calculatethedatewhen50%oftheewes had
fed daily at a dose rate of15-20mg, with no appar-
lambed; if the sponges are not to be inserted earlier
ent effect upon the life span of the CLs.When fed at
than150daysbeforethesamedateforthecurrent
lowerdoserates,i.e.2.5-5mgdaily,folliculargrowth
year, eCG will not be required (Hlenderson 1985).
wasnotinhibitedandcysticfolliclesdeveloped by
The doseofeCGrequiredis such that it should
10 days afterthestart oftreatment(Martinat-Botte
stimulate oestrus and ovulation without causing
etal1985).Similarproblemshavebeenencoun-
superovulation. Some approximate dose rates are
tered with other progestogens.
listed inTable 1.4.
Allyltrenbolone or altrenogest is sold as an oily
Opinions vary on the time of injection of eCG.
solution within a pressurized container and cali-
Whileitis claimedthatbetterresultsareobtained
brated so that a single5mlvolume(0.4w/v)con-
ifit is injected 48hoursbefore sponge removal, the
tainstherequireddose.In an extensivetrialinvolving
advantage is so small that the additional handling of
1223 gilis ofvarious breeds,Martinat-Botte et al
the ewes does notmake it cost-effective.
(1985)found that after feedingthecompound for
Fertilitymaybereducedwhen ewes aremated at
18 days therewasgood synchronization ofoestrus
the first synchronized oestrus; this may be due to
5-7 days after withdrawal.There were breed differ-
poor absorption of the progestogen from the sponge
ences in the degree of synchronization.In cross-bred
or toaneffectofthe abnormalsteroidbalanceon
gilis, good farrowing rates (average 64-73%) were
sperm transport and survival.However,if ewes fail
obtained followingfixed-timeartificialinsemination
toconceive at thefirst oestrus thereis usuallygood
on days 6and7 afterwithdrawal of theprogesto-
synchrony at the second,when better conception
gen; litter sizes ranged on average from 9.5 to 9.8.
ratesarelikely.
When pure-bred and cross-bred gilts were insemi
Attemptsto induceoestrus in theearlypostpar-
nated atobserved oestrus the overall farrowingrates
tum and lactating ewehavebeenunsuccessful.
were improved.
47
Part
11
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and itscontrol
S
Table 1.4 Dose of eCG (IU) required to induce'out-of-season' oestrus in ewes following the witharawal of progestogen sponges
(from Henderson 1985)
Month
 Dorset Horn, Finn/
Suffolk, Suffolk crass
Scottish half-breeds,
Dorset
Greyfaces
mules
July
600-500
750-600
Foor results
August
400-300
500-400
750-600
September
0
0-0000
500-300
October
0
A similar studyinvolving2215gilts and sowswas
that had been on treatment had good fertiliry.
undertaken to see if synchronization after weaning
Unfortunately,it was withidrawn for safety reasons
could be improved following feeding of altrenogest/
because if fed to pregnant animals it had a severe
allyltrenbolone.Itwas found that there was some
teratogenic effect on the developingfetuses.
improvement following short-term feeding at a dose
of 20 mg from 3 days before the weaning date.It was
Usesin thedogandcat
improved by boar proximity. This same progestogen
has been administered with some success as a sub-
Progestogens have been used formany years to sup-
cutaneous implant at the base of the ear (Selgrathi &
press oestrus in both the bitch and queen cat, by
Ebert 1993).
exerting a negativefeedback on thehypothalamic/
pituitary axis.While they cause a decline in FSH
gestational compounds was inhibited when a non-
concentrations in the peripheral blood, they have
progestational, pituitary-inhibiting substance was
no effect on LH concentrations,only a decreased
developed.This substance,Methallibure,was effc
responsiveness to GnRll.Probably,they exert
tive in regulating cyclic activity, and sows and gilts
their effect by preventing a rise in gonadotrophin
48
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenouscontrol of ovariancyclicity
secretion, which is the trigger for the naural pro-
months to achieve permanent oestrus suppression.
gression from stage to stage of the oestrous cycle
Loss of pigmentationinthe area overlyinginjection
(England1998).
sites is occasionally encountered. Oral progestogens
A numberof different progestogens,such asmege-
have the advantageof greaterflexibility and themost
strol acetate, proligestone and medroxyprogester-
commonly used of these is megestrol acetate.This
oneacetate,havebeenused to suppressoestrus in
can be used toprevent an individual oestrus occur-
the bitch; these are available for oral administra-
ring by administering 5mg as soon as signs are first
tion as tablets,or by injection.They can be used to
observed.However, this approach is less suitable in
postpone the onset of oestrus when administered
cats than in dogs inviewof theveryrapid and sud
during anoestrus,or to prevent oestrus from occur-
den onset of oestrous behaviour. Postponement is
ring at the first signs of pro-oestrus.The latter is not
achieved by administering 2.5mg daily or weekly
toodifficulttoachieveinthebitch.Postponement
dependent on whether treatment is begun during
can bemaintainedfor over ayearbyinjectionsof
the breeding season or anoestrusalthoughin some
progestogens at intervals of 3-5 months or, after a
queenslower dosagesmay prove effective.
40-day course of dailyoral administration,by tab-
Many queens treatedwith progestogenswill show
lets iwiceper week.Prevention of oestrus can be
behavioural changes, most commonly lethargy and
achieved by a single injection of the progestogen
weight gain (Oen 1977).Aproportionof treated
or by the administration of oral progestogen at a
queens may also develop endometritis.A more seri-
higher doserate than for postponement,but for a
ous side-effect that has occasionally been reported
shorterduration,
andmaynotbereversiblein some cats is the devel-
Unfortunately,following the administration of
opment of diabetes mellitus (Moise & Reimers
progestogens,the time interval before the onset
1983).
of the next oestrus is rather unpredictableif treat-
ment is not continued.Furthermore, there is good
Prostaglandins
evidence that continued and frequent useofsuch
preparatioris can predispose to reproductive dis-
Since thelength of theinteroestrous interval in most
orders particularly cystic glandular hyperplasia of
domesticated species is controlled by the duration
the endometrium.Because of this problem,owners
ofthelifespanoftheCL,prematurelysis,induced
should be warned of thepossible dangers,particu-
by the administration of PGF or its analogues, can
larlyif theywish to use thebitch subsequentlyfor
be used to manipulate thenormal partern of cyclic
breeding.
activity.
In thecat,suppression of oestrusmay be desirable
The CLsofthecow,mare, sow,ewe and goat nor-
for a nunber of reasons, but particularly for plan-
mally respond to the administration of exogenous
ning of litters throughout the year and to allow the
prostaglandinsbut inthebitch and the qucen the
queen a period of rest from sexual activity after a
CLs are generally unresponsive unless subjected
litterandtoenablehertoregainconditionbefore
to repeated doses. It is important to examine, in
being bred again.Ifa queen is allowed to call repeat-
the first five species mentioned,when the CLs are
edlywithoutmating,thismaylead toconsiderable
responsiveor arerefractory;thisis summarizedfor
loss of condition due torelative inappetence dur-
fourspeciesinFigure1.41.n thecow,mare,eweand
ing oestrus,particularlyin Oriental breeds,which
goat the pattern is fairly similar, thenew developing
have short interoestrual intervals and long periods
CLgenerallybeingrefractoryfor3-5 days afterovu-
of oestrus.In addition, breeders report that difficul-
lation;although thereis evidence thatin themare
ties are sometimes encounteredin breeding from
largedoses ofPGFCan induceluteolysis2 days
queensthathavebeenallowedto callincessantly
afterovulation.Attheend ofthe oestrouscycle,
and have been unmated for long periods.
the CL is unaffected by exogenous prostaglan-
The most widely used method of oestrus sup-
din, since it is already regressing under the influ-
pression is the administration of progestogens.
enceofits ownendogenousluteolysin;thereisno
Injectabledepotformsareavailableofproligestone
cvidence that this can be accelerated.Therefore in
and medroxyprogesterone acetate,which will sup-
the cyclesof the cow,doegoat,mare andewe the
press oestrus forupto 7monthsormorefollow-
CL is responsive for 13,13,10 and 9 days,respec-
inga singleinjectionandcanberepeatedevery5
tively.However,the sowisdifferent,sincethe CLis
49
Part
1
Normal cyclical ovarianactivityand itscontrol
Ovulation
Cow
0
Ewe
Sow
Mare
13
15
Day
CLrefractory
CL sensitive
CLregressingspontaneously
Fig.1.41Sensitivityof the corpusluteum(CL)of different species toPGFduring the oestrous cycle.
refractory forupto1l days after ovulation and thus
inseminatedtwiceatafixedtimeof72and96hours
is responsive for a much shorter period of only7
or72and90hoursafterthesecondinjection,con
or 8 days.
ception rates are comparable with those following
Since prostaglandins are abortifacients,theymust
artificialinsemination ornatural servicealasponta-
not be used in animals that might be pregnant. If
neous oestrus.Generally,a singlefixed-time insem-
there is any doubt, pregnancy diagnosis must be
ination resultsinreduced conception rates.Figure
performed.
1.42showshowthreecows at different stagesofthe
oestrous cycle can have their heats synchronized
withthe double-injectiontechnique.Thoseanimals
Uses in cattle
that have a sensitive CLat thetimeofthefirstinjec
Prostaglandins havebeenused successfully tosyn-
tion,as incow B,will have an induced oestrus3-5
chronize oestrus in groups of cows and heifers.This
dayslater,andifthis is observedit ispossibletosave
technique has applications in beef cows and heif-
an additional injection ofPGFby inseminating
ers,and in dairyheiferswhere oestrous detection is
tem at this stage. The time interval from the last
frequentlydifficult,thus enabling theroutineuse
injectionofPGFutooestrusandovulationdepends
ofartificialinseminationatapredeterminedtime.
upon the stage of follicular development when it is
The availability of arificial insemination in such
administered.It hasbeenshownbysequential trans
situations allows theuseof semenfrom genetically
rectal ultrasonography that the dominant follicle
superiorsires and can thusresultinimprovedgenetic
in thefirstwavelosesitsabilitytoovulatewhenit
potential in the offspring.
has reached the lateplateau,or regression phase,of
Ithasbeen found that,if two injections ofPGF
development if luteolysis is induced (Fortune et al
or one of its synthetic analogues,e.g.cloprostenol,
1991).Asaresult,it will be the dominant follicleof
dinoprost,etiproston,luprostiol, are given at an
thenext wavethat will grow andovulate,resultingin
interval of1l days to a group ofcows orheifers at
alongerintervalthanifprematureluteolysisoccurs
randomlydifferent stages of the oestrouscycle,then
whenthedominantfollicleisinthemid-staticphase
3-5 days after the second injection all the animals
of development.Thusoestrus and ovulationsynchro
treatedwillcomeintooestrusandovulatealabout
nizationregimenswouldbemuchimprovedif the
thesame time.It hasalsobeen shown thatif they are
secondinjection of PGFcould alwaysbegivennear
50
Chapter
11
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
1s1
2nd
CowA
13
151
0
2nd
0
CowB
1st
O
2nd
0
CowC
Corpusluteum
Corpus luteum
Corpus luteum
refractory
InjectionofPG
8
Dayofoestrous
sensilive
regressing
sponfaneously
cycle
On Spontaneous
OiInducedoestrus
cestrus
Fig.1.42Synchronization of oesirusinccwsby the administration of two injecticns of PGForan aralogue at an 11-day
interval.
theendof thegrowthphase ofthe dominant folli-
insemination;this is sometimes referred to as the
cle, and this probably accounts for thebetter results
‘one and a half reginen. Any individuals exhibiting
obtained when combinations of progestogens and
oestrus a few days after fixed-time artificial insemi-
PGF are used (Garcia et al 1999)
nation should be reinseminated.
The efficiency of synchronization following the
There is some suggestion that pregnancy rates arebet-
double-injection regirnen is usually much better in
ter after a prostaglandin-induced oestrus where cows
heifers than in cows. It is not known precisely why
are inseminated in relation to an observed oestrus. In
this should be so but one possible explanation is
a review of 17 trials usingcloprostenol,Mclntoshiet al
(1984) found thatherewasevidence of improved preg-
progesterone concentrations remain low for a much
nancy rates in 13 of the trials.There is no physiological
longer periodof time after ovulation than normal.
explanation for ihis response but the authors suggest
This phenomenon,referred to aslong-low proges
that it might be a management phenomenon: oestrus
terone',has beenrecorded as occurringin up to 15%
can be anticipated over a restricted period of time and
ofcows in some herds.Presumably the delay in the
there is the opportunity for interaction between several
CL reaching a sensitive stage interferes with the syn-
animals in oestrus,which may improve the timing
chronization scheme outlined in Figure1.42
of artificial insemination,Theuse of more complex
Largely to reduce cost and to improve the preg-
hormone treatment regimens to improve fertility are
nancy rates, a compromise regimen has becn used.
discussed later in this chapter.
All animals are injected with PGF, on the same day
Several points areworthy of further consideration.
and observed foroestrus during the following 5 days.
Firstly ifa substantial number of animals are to have
Any identified in oestrus are inserminated as normal
their oestrous cycles,and hence timing of ovulation,
and those not identified receive a second injection
synchronized itis imporiant to liaisewith thelocalarti
ofprostaglandin followed by fixed-tine artificial
ficialinsemination(Al)organizationbeforestartingthe
51
Part
111
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
regimen,toensuretheavailabilityofsufficientdoses
Usesinthegoat
ofsemen andinseminatorswhen they arerequired.
Two doses gf PGFa each of 2.5mg,or 100mg clo
Secondly,if'on farm'DIYAI is used，hen the per-
prostenol at 10-11 days are effectivein synchroni-
sonresponsiblemay quickly sufferfrom inseminator
zation of oestrus. When a single fixed-time AI was
fatigue if they are not very experienced. Thirdly,par-
used at 72 hours after the second injection,preg
ticuilarlyinheifers,itisimportant to ensure thatthey
nangy rates of 44.7%were obtained (Simplicio&
arereceivingadequatenutritionsincedisappointing
Machado 1991).
conceptionrateshavebeenobtainedwhenfeeding
has been inadequate(see Ch.22).The use of pros-
taglandinstoovercomeoestrous detectionproblems
Uses in thepig
andtotreatpaihologicalconditionswill bedescribed
later (see Ch.22).
Reliable synchronization of oestrus in groups of
sows and gilts would have many practical applica-
Uses in the horse
tions,particularlyin conjunction with the use ofAl
to enable batch farrowing to occur.Unfortunately
There arefewer practicalindicationsfor synchro-
prostaglandins and their analogues are not luteolytic
nizing groups of mares or fillies,although with the
until the llth or12th dayoftheoestrouscycle;thus,
increaseintheuseofAlandembryotransferinthisitisnotpossibletodevisearegimenofinjections
speciesit is likely to be utilized more in thefuture
that will synchronizegroups ofanimalswith ran-
（seeChs31,35）.When it is used,theonsetofoestrus
domlydistributedcyclicactivity.
is generallywell synchronized3 days after treatment,
Hlowever, it is possible to prolong the life span of
althoughthesubsequentovulationhasa timespread
CLsin thepigwithinjectionofoestrogens on days
of7-12days(Allen1978).Someimprovementhas
10-14oftheoestrouscycle;oncethishasbeendone,
been achieved by the injection of hCGor GnRH on
prostaglandins can be injected after 5-20 days to
the second or third dayof theinducedoestrus(Allen&
induce oestrus 4-6 days later(Guthrie&Polge 1976).
Rowson1973).
Another approach that has been used is to induce
Prostaglandins,both PGFa and the synthetic ana
luteolysisby prostaglandin administration,ofacces
logues,are useful in the breeding management of
sory CLsproducedbytheinjection ofeCGandhCGat
mares.Enabling mares to be mated or arificially
any stageoftheoestrouscycle(Caldwelletal 1969).
inseminatedonpredetermineddaysisparticularly
useful where either the mare or the stallion has to
Usesinthedogandcat
travela distanceforservice and eliminatestheneed
for the frequent teasing of mares. It is also useful
Prostaglandins do not teadily cause luteolysis in
if a heat ismissed,epecially the foalheat,sinceit
these species.
enablesoestrustobeinducedprematurelyandobvi-
ates the need towait for the next spontaneous heat.
Hormone combinations
Uses in the sheep
Uses in cattle
WhenPGF or an analogue isgiven to ewes witli
Oestrus,and thus ovulation,cannot besynchronized
sensitive CLs, oestrus occurs 36-46 hours after
verycloselyusingasimplesynchronizationregi-
(Coulson et al 1979). There can be poor pregnancy
ent stages of the oestrous cycle,it isnecessary togiverates,particularly in parous cows rather than nullipa-
two injections 8or 9 days apart.Conception rates
rous heifers,when fixed-time AI isused(Peters&Ball
andprolificacyfollowingnatural matingshavebeen
1994),probably for two reasons:firstly,because of
comparable with unsynchronized ewes (Haresign
the variability ofthe luteolyticrefractory periodof
andAcritopolou 1978).There are obvious advan-
the CLafter ovulation andsecondly,because of the
tagesofusingsuchatechniqueinconjunctionwith
complexityandvariability of thefollicularwavepat-
Al, since it could enable theuse of genetically supe-
tern thatoccur incattle.Asa consequence ofthelat-
rior sires in manyflocks.
ter,avarietyof differentregimenshavebeenusedin
52
Chapter
111
Endogenousand exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
an atiempt to manipulate folliculogenesis. Some of
rateswere20-40%lower in dairyheifers insem-
these are summarized as follows:
inated at a fixed time using the‘ovsynch' pro-
gramme compared with those inseminated at
A combination thiat has been utilized for sone
observed oestrus (Pursley et al 1995, Schmilt
time involves intravaginal progestogens, such as
et al 1996).Cows were inseminated once, in the
those applied with a PRID or CIDR,for 7-9 days,
regimen described by Mawhinney et al (1999)
followed by the administration of PGF or ana-
68-72 hours after prostaglandin treatment and
logue on the day before withdrawal. Such regi-
resulted in pregnancy rates of 44% compared to
mens will result in 95% of cows being in oestrus
52% in the control animals,which were insem-
within 5 days (see the review by Odde 1990 and
inated at observed oestrus. More recent studies
Fig. 1.43A).
involvingHolstein cowson two dairy farms in
Other approaches involve more complex meth-
which fertility indices were compared with cows
ods ofattempringtocontrol folliculogenesis and
served at observed oestrus were: first-service preg-
ovulation moreprecisely using either a GnRH
nancy rates of 34.5% and 35.6%,and 45.1%and
analogue or estradiol. In the former, GnRH
49.8%,for synchronizedandnon-synchronized
is given on day O, followed by PGF on day 7
cows respectively in the two herds (Tenhagen
(sometimes day 6), followed by GnRH on day 8,
elal2004).Rivera et al(2004)useda slight 1nod-
9or 10 and Al 17-24 hours later (Fig.1.43B)
ification of the regimen by injecting PGFa on day
Depending on the stage of the follicular wave, the
6,the second dose of GnRH on day 8 and fixed-
first dose of GnRH will either induce ovulation
time AI on day 8. The first-service pregnancy rates
or atresia of the dominant follicle, enabling the
of the synchronized group were 38.3% compared
emergence of a new follicular wave, so that sub-
t0 46.5% in the group inseminated following the
sequent ovulation and CL formation will mean
removal of'tail chalk' Such synchronization pro-
that the latter will be responsive to the PGF
cedures are expensivein termis of thecost of hor-
when administered on day 7.Alternatively,it can
monepreparations andthelabour involved in
extend thelife span of the CL in late dioestrus
the more frequient handling of animals.Recently,
so that it will still be responsive to PGFa 7 days
Tenhagen et al(2004) conducted a cost-benefit
later（Peterset al 1999).The second injection of
analysis of the'ovsynch' prograimme, as opposed
GnRH should ensure better synchronization
to Al at observed oestrus in dairy cows in
ofovulation,by stimulating the preovulatory
Germany.They found that it was superior, as mea-
LH surge (Coulson et al 1980). This regimen
sured by improved reproductive performance in
is sometimes referred to as the'ovsynch pro-
both herds in the study, as shown by the number
gramme'and was developed primarily for use in
of'days open' and the number of cows culled for
dairy cows raiher than heifers, where results are
infertility (see Chs 22, 24). It was cost-effective in
disappointing. In a number of studies, pregnancy
Remove PRID/CIDR
50-60h
17-24h
7-9davs
Single AI
Insert PRID
PGFga at
1st2nd
grCIDA
AI
AI
PGF2
GnRH
before
removal
6
7
8
10
11
12
6
7
10
11
12
A
B
Days
Fig. 1.43 (A) Protocol used for oestrus-synchronzation in the heifer or cow using a comaination of either a PRID cr CIDR
heifers andcowsusing a combinationof GrRH and Prostaglandin F,followed by a single or double fixed-time Al(ovsynch
programme).
53
Part
11
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
been a reflection of the difference in the quality
is unknown,although it hasbeen postulated thatit
ofoestrus detection inthetwoherds.
·Exogenous steroid hormones can modify follicu-
productionby the remnants of the CLs in the ovaries
logenesis. Estradiol has been used to suppress the
ofanoestrousbitches,
inhibitory effectofthedominantfolliclethereby
allowing the emergence of a newfollicular wave.
Androgens
Muchbetlerresultshavebeenobtainedbyusinga
combinationofestradiolandprogestogens,which,by
Androgenshavebeenusedtopreventbitchesfrom
inhibitingbothFSH andLHsecretion,suppressed
returning to oestrus,when given during anoestrus
folliculogenesis.Thus, when their influence waned,
and at least 30 days before the anticipated onset of
a new follicular wave emerged at apredictable time
pro-oestrus; they are not effective if given during pro-
irrespectiveofthestageoftheoestrouscycleat
oestrus oroestrus.Theirmodeofactionisprobablyby
meansofanegativefeedbackeffect on the hypotha-
usingestradiol cypionateinsteadofGnRHonday8
lamic-pituitary axis;pro-oestrus followedby oestrus
soon occus when treatment stops. They are usually
（24hours after theinjection ofPGF),sometimes
referred totheheatsynchprogramme'(Lopes et al
administered ina slow-release depot injectionand
2000,Stevenson & Tiffany 2004),inboth dairy
shouldnotbeusedforprolongedperiodssince adverse
heifers and cows resultedin goodpregnancyrates
effects,such as clitoral enlargement,mayoccur.
compared with Alat observedoestrus.However,
since the use of estradiol preparations in food ani-
Melatonin
mals is banned in the Ell, and cstradiol cypionate
isnolongeravailableintheUSA,such asynchroni
Thepinealglandcontrols reproductiveactivity in
zationregimen is only of historical interest
seasonal breeding species such as sheep, goats,
horses andcats by the secretion of melatonin.
GnRHisgiven at the same time as a CiDR is
Perhaps not surprisingly,itcannot be used to mod-
insertedand,24hoursbeforethelatterisremoved
ifyseasonal activity inthemarebecause it would
at10 days,PGFis injected.The GnRH stimu-
benecessary to inhibit ihe secretion ofmelatonin
lates folliculogenesisso that at the time of PGF
orneutralizeiiseffectto advancethetimeofonset.
treatmenta dominant follicle is present that is
However,intheeweanddoe,whichareshort-day
capableofmaturationandovulationoncethe
breeders,it has been used commercially to advance
negative-feedbackeffect ofprogesterone hasbeen
the timing of the onset of the breeding season.The
removedwiththewithdrawaloftheCIDR.
hormone is administered as an implant containing
Such combinations of hormones can reduce the need
18mgofmelatonin thatisinsertedsubcutaneously
for repeat inseminationswhile ensuring acceptable
at thebaseoftheear
pregnancy rates;however; they canbe costly and also
It is critical that rams(and bucks) should be sep-
requireadditionalhandlingofanimals.Itis impor-
arated from theewes sothat they are outof sight,
tant to stress these facts to farmers before embarking
sound and smell at least 7 daysbefore the inser-
upon such regimens. Mawhinney et al (1999), using
tion oftheimplant.Theymust remain separatedfor
the PGF and double GnRH regimens, showed that
atleast30 days andnot more than 40 days,when
such an approach can increase the number of cows in
rams(orbucks)should then bereintroduced.Peal
calfby specifictimeintervals aftercalvinginseasonally
mating activity occurs 25-35 days later.Melatonin
calvingherdsand reduce themean calving-conception
should not be used in ewe lambs.
interval by15days.Hlowever,they stressthat improve-
The breeding season can be successfully advanced
ments maybe obtained in herdswith average orbelow-
by 2-3 months with good fertility.
averagefertilityratherthaninherdswithgoodfertility.
Immunizationprocedures
Prolactin inhibitors/antagonists
Anti-GnRH
Inbitches,the use of prolactin inhibitors such as
cabergoline and bromocriptine cluring anoestrus
There has been considerable interest in immuniz-
can induce a fertile oestrus with normal pregnancy
ing male animals against GnRH to induce immu
rates,ifthey aremated.Theexact modeofaction
nocastration,therebyrendering themsterile,aswell
54
Chapter
111
Endogenous and exogenous control of ovarian cyclicity
as reducing aggressive behaviour and preventing the
References
development of secondary sex characteristics such as
the male‘tainting'of meat. The latter is a particular
problem in young boars.
Abrams RM,Thatcher WW,Chenault IEwilcox CI 1975
Some individual fillies and mares can be difficult
I Dairy Sci58:1528
totrain and control in oestrus, and sometimes dur-
Adams CP 1994 Theriogenology 41: 25
Adams GP 1999I Reprod Fertil Suppl 54: 17
ing dioestius.While in most individuals it can be
Aherne FX, Kirkwood RN 1985 I Reprod Fertil Suppl
controlled by behavioural modification, however
33:169
in those in which it cannot, ovariertomy or the use
Ahima RS. Dushay I. Flier SN et al 1997 I Clin Invest
of progestogens are the only options. The former is
99:391
irreversible,while the latter may well be prohibited
Allen WE 1974EquineVetJ 6:25
in some competition animals because of their ana-
AllenWE.AlexievM1979 EquineVet J 12:27
bolic, and hence performance-enhancing, proper-
Allen WR 1978 In:DB Crighton (ed) Conirol of ovulation.
Butterworth,London,p 453
ties (Stout & Colenbrander 2004).Immunization
AllenWR,RowsonLEA19731ReprodFertil33:539
against endogenous GnRH has been shown to be
Amstalden M,Garcia MR,Williams SWetal 2000 Biol
an effective method of suppressing cyclical ovar-
Reprod 63: 127
ian aclivity.In a recent study by Elhay et al (2007)
Anderson LL,Dyck CW,Mori H et al 1967 Am I Physiol
of 24 mares treated with a conventional two-dose
212:1188
Arendt I,SymonsAM,Laud CA,Pryde S] 1983  Endocrinol
immunization regimen, it was effective in inhibiting
97:395
oestrous behaviour for at least 3months.
Arthur GH1 1958VetRec70:682
Baird DT Campbell BK,Mau GE,MeNeillyAS1991
Anti-androstenedione
1 Reprod Fertil Suppl 43:125
Baird DT,Land RB 1973 1Reprod Fertil33:393
Increased lambing rates have been obtained by ihe
Bane A,Rajakoski E 1961 Cornell Ve1 51:77
use of an imnunogen produced by conjugating a
Barash IA,Cheung CC,Weigle DS et al 1996Endocrinology
derivative of thenatural ovarianhormone andro-
137:3144
stenedione with human serum albumen.When
Barb CR, Kraeling RR 2004 Anim Reprod Sci 155:82-83
Barb CRBarrett JB,Kraeling RR.Rampacek GB 2001 Domest
injected into ewes the conjugate stimulaies the
Anim Endocrinol 20:47
production of antibodies to androstenedione, which
Barr HL1975|Dairy Sei 58:246
binds free, naturally occurring androstenedione in
Bartlewski PM,Beard AP,Rawlings NC1995I Reprod Fertil
the blood. This resulis in an increase in the ovula-
Abstract Series 15: 14
tion rate and the number of lambs bon; the precise
Bazer FW, Geisert RD.Thatcher WW,Roberis RM 1982 In:
mode of action is not fully understood (Scaramuzzi
Prostaglandins in animal reproduction I1. Elsevier Science,
et al 1983, Harding et al 1984).
Amsterdam. p 115
Bhanot R,Wilkinson M 1983 Endocrinology 113:596
The conjugant is injected twice, 8and 4 weeks
Bitman ELDempsey Rl, Karsch F 1983 Endocrinology
before tupping, although if ewes have been treated
113:2275
in the previousseason oneinjection onlyisrequired
Bland KP,Horton EW,Poyser NL 1971 Life Sci 10:509
(4 weeks before rupping). The cffcci of immuni-
Bo GA,Baruselli PS,MartinezMF 2003AnimReprodSci
zation is to increase the lambing percentage by
78:307
about 25%.
Bobbe RE,Koelle AR,Landt IA,Depp SW 1977Progress
Report LA 6S12 PR.LosAlamos Scientific Laboaratory
lt is important that only those ewes that are likely
University of California,Los Alamos,CA
to be fed adequately during pregnancy should be
Boyd JS, Omran SN 1991 In Pract 13: 109
treated because of ihe dangers of preguancy tox-
Rrinkley H.WillfingerWW,Young EO1973Anim Sci
aemia; for this reason, mountain and hill breeds
37:333
should not be treated.
Brooks AN,Lamming GE,Lees PD,Hayes NB19861 Reprod
Feril76:693
Burger JF 1952 Onderstepoort / Vet Sci Anim Indust 6:465
Anti-inhibin
Burkhardt J 1948Ve1Rec60:243
Caldwell AK.MoorRM,Wilmut1etal 1969IReprod Fertil
Immunization againstinhibin,which has been used
18:107
experimentally to increase the ovulation rate in cat-
Christian RE,Casida LE 1948 )Anim Sci 7:540
tle and sheep, may well become available for com-
ChristieDW, Rell ET 1971 J Small Anim Pract 12: 159
mercial use.
Claus R,Weiler U1985J ReprodFertil Suppl 33:185
55
Part
1
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and its control
Cole HH 1930Am J Anat 48:261
Garcia MR,AmstaldenM.Williams SWetal 2002|Anim Si
Concannon PW,Hansel W,Visek W] 1975 Biol Reprod 13:112
80:2158
CuncannonPW, Hansel W,McEnteeK 1977BiolReprod
CeigenigWia19hy
Res Comm 45:767
Concannon PW. Hodgson B, Lein D 1980 Biol Reprod 23: 111
Ginthier Ol1974 | Anin Sci 39:550
Coudert SPPhillips CD,Faimin Cet al1974I Reprod Fertil
Cinther Ol1986Llltrasonic imaging andreproductive events
36:319
in themare.Equiservices,Cross Plains,WI.pp 142-145,
CoulsonA,Noakes DB,Cockrill T.Harmer I 1979 Vet Rec
158-163
105:440
Ginther O] 1993 I Equine Vet Sci 13: 18
Coulson A,Noakes DE,Cockrill T,Harmer I 1980Vet Rec
Ginther O1Bergfelt DR19921EquineVet Sci 12:349
107:108
Ginther O), Firsr NL 1971 Am J Ver Res 32: 1687
Cumming lA,McPhee SR,ChamleyWAet al 1982Aust Ve1j
Ginther Ol, Kastelic JP, Knopf 1. 1989 Anim Reprod Sci
59:14
20:187
Dailey RA,ClarlJR,FiistNL etal 1972 JAnim Sci 35:1210
Clencross RG,Munro IB,Senior BE,Pope GS1973Acta
Day FT 1939 Vet Rec51:581
Endocrinol 3:374
De Gier J, Kooiisytra HS,Djajadiningrat-Laanen SC et al 2006
Grant R 1934 Trans R Soc Edin 58:1
Theriogenology 65: 1346
Griffiths WFB,Amoroso EC 1939 Vet Rec51: 1279
Denamur R,MartinetJShortRV 1966Acta Endocrinol
GrubaughW,SharpDC,Berglund 1Aeial 1982 J Reprod
Copenh52:72
Ferlil Suppl 32: 293
Dobson H 1978 IReprod Feril52:51
Gruffydd-Jones T 1982 PhD Thesis,University of Bristol
Driancourt MA 200i Theriogenology 55:1211
Guthrie HD, Cooper RS 1996 Biol Reprod 55:543
Du Mcsnil du BuissonF 196l Ann Biol Anim Biochem
Guthrie HD,Polge C1976J Reprod Tertil48:423
Biophys 1:105
Hammond J 1927 Physiology of reproduction in the cow.
Dyer CJ, Simmons JM,Malteri RL,Keisler DI1 1997 Domes1
Cambridge University Press,Cambridge
Anim Endocrinol 14:119
Hanmond J1938]YorksAgric Soc95:11
Dzuik P1 1977 In: Cole HH, Cupps PT(eds） Reproduction in
Hancock JLRowlands IW1949VetRec61:771
oesticanimals3rdedn.Academic Press,London,p456
Harding RB,Hardy PRD,Joby R 1984 Vet Rec 115:601
Elhay M,Newbold A,Brilion A etal2007Ausi Vet] 85:39
HaresignW.Acritopoleu SA 1978Livesiock ProdSci 5:313
EllendorffF 1978 In: DB Crighton (ed) Control of ovulation.
Hayer P,Gunzel-Apel AR,Luerssen D,Hopper HO 1993
Butterworth.London,p7
1 ReprodFeril Suppl 47:93
England GCW1998 In:Simpson GM,England GCW,Harvey
Heape W1900 Q I MicroscSoc44: 1
M (eds) BSAVA manual of small animal reproduction and
Henderson D 1985 In Prart 7: 118
neonatology. British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Henry BA, Goding IW, Tilbrook AI et al 2001 J Endocrinol
Cheltenham, Glos, ch 16
168: 67
EnglandCCW,AllenWE1989aJ Reprod Fertil Suppl39:91
Horrell RI,Kilgour R,Macmillan KL,Bremner K1984VetRec
England GCW,AllenWE 1989b Vet Rec 125:555
114.36
Esslemont R),Bryant MJ 1974ADAS Q Rev 12:175
Horton EW,Poyser NL 1976 Physiol Rev56:595
Essleont RI, Bryant MJ 1976Vet Rec 99:47
Hunter MG,Picion HM1999AnimBreeding 3:54
Evans ACO2003ReprodDomestAnim38:240
Hurnik JE, King CL Robertson HA 1975 Appl Anim Ethol 2: 55
Evans ACO, Adams GP Rawlings NC 1994a I Reprod Fertil
Ireland 1,Roche JF 1983 Endocrinology 112:150
100:187
Jablonka-Shariff A,Granzul-Bilska AT,RedmerDA,Reynolds
Evans ACO,Adams GPRawlings NC 1994b I Reprod Fertil
I.P1993 Endocrinology 133:1871
102:463
Evans MI, Irvine GHG 1975 I Reprod Fertil Suppl 23: 193
Jeffcoate IA,Lindsay FEF 1989 J Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:277
Flint APF, Stewart HI. Lamming GE, Payne JH1992I Reprod
Jemmett JE,Evans IM 19771 Snall Anim Pract 18:21
Fertil Suppl 45:53
1chleW,Andersen AC1977Theriogenology 7:113
Folman Y,McPlee SR,Cummings IA et al 1983AustVet J 60:
Iohnson LM, Gay VL 1981 Endocrinology 109:240
44
Karsch F| 1984The hormonal control ofreproduction.
looleRH1975|DairySci58:248
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge pp 10-19
Fortune IE 1994 Biol Reprod 50:225
Karsch F, Legan SI,Ryan D,Fostre DL 1978 In: Crighton DB
FortuneIE,Sirois 1.Quirk SM1988Theriogenology 29:95
(ed) Control of ovulation.Butterworih,1ondon,p 2
FortuneIE,Sirois J,TurzilloAM,LavoirM 191 Reprod
Kennaway D),Dunstan EA,GilmoreTA,Seamark RF 1983
Fertil Suppl 43:187
Anim Reprod Sci 5: 587
Fortune JE,Rivera GM,Evanns ACO,TurzilloAM 2001 Biol
Kenney RM,Gamjam VK,Bergman SI 1975VetScope 19
Reprod G5:648
Kiddy CA 1977 I Dairy Sci 60: 235
Foxcroft GR,HunterMG1985J ReprodFertil Suppl33:3
Kilmer DM,SharpDC,BerglundLAet al1982  ReprodFertil
Frisch RE 1984 Biol Rev59:161
Suppl 32:303
GarciaA,van derWeijdenGC,Colenbrander B,BeversMM
Kinsel MLMarsh WERuegg PL,EtheringtonWG1998
1999Vet Rec145:334
IDairy Sci 81:989
56
Chapter
Endogenousandexogenouscontrolofovariancyclicity
Lamming GE,Bulman DC1976BrVet]132:507
PetersAR1985bVetRec115:164
Lamming CE,Foster JP,BulmanDC1979VetRec 104:156
Peters AR,Ball PIH 1994 In:Reproduction in catte,2nd edn
Lasley JF 1968In:Hafez ESE(ed) Reproduction in farm
Blackwell Science Oxford
animals.Lea&FebigerPhiladelphia.p 81
Peters AR,Mawhinney SB,Drew SBet al 1999VetRec
Lawler DFJohnstonSD,Hegstad RLetal19931 Reprod
145:516
Feril Suppl47:57
PhemisterRD,Holst PA,Spano IS,HopwoodML 1973 Biol
Lawrence IB,Oxvig C,Overgaard MT,Weyer Ketal 1999
Reprod 8:74
Cited by Mazerbourg et al 2003 Reprod Dom Anim
Pierson RA,GintherOj1984Theriogenology21:495
38:247
PiersonRA,Ginther OJ1987Theriogenology28:929
LeesIL1969OutlookAgric6:82
Pierson RA,Ginther Oj 1988Anim Reprod Sci 16:81
Lees JL,Weatherhead M 1970Anim Prod 12:173
Pursley R,MeMO,WiltbarikMC1995Theriogenology
Lewis GS,Newman SK 1984 1 Dairy Sd 67:146
44:915
Leyva H,Addiego LStabenfeldiG 1985 Endocrinology
QianH,BarbCR,ComptonMMetal1999DomestAnim
115:1729
Endocrinol 16:135
Leyva H,MadleyT,StabenfeldiGH1989Reprod Fei
ReynoldsLP.RedmerDA1999IReprodFertil Suppl54:
Suppl39:125
181
LeyvaV,WaltonJS,BuckrellBCetal1995IAnimSci
Ritar Al, Salamon S,Ball PD,OMay PI 1989 Small Rumin
73(suppl 1):226
Re54:29
Lin JBarb C),Matteri RLet al 2000 Domest Anim
Rivera GM,Fortune IR2003Endocrinology 144:437
Endocrinol 19:53
RiveraH,LopezH,FrickePM2004Dairy Sci 87:2051
Lincoln GA 1985 In:Austin CR,Shor RV (eds) Hormonal
Roche 1I; Ireland J1981 JAnimSci 52:580
control of reproduction.Cambridge University Press,
Rodgers R),O'Shea JD,BruceNW1984]Anat 138:757
Canibridge, p 52-75
RoseJD 1978ExpNeurol 61:231
Llewelyn CA,Perrie1,Luckins AG,Munro CD 1993BrVet]
RouxLL1936OnderstepoortIVetSciAnim Indust6:465
149:171
RowsonLEA,MoorRM1967I ReprodFertil13:511
LoebL1923ProcSocExpBiol Med20:441
Rozel JF1975VetScope 19:3
LopesFL,AnoldDR,Williamsetal2000Dairyi
Sartori R,HaughianIM,ShaverRD etal 2004Dairy Si
83(suppl1):216
87:905
Lucy MC,Bilby CR,Kirby Cetal 1999Reprod Fertil Suppl
Sato E,Ishibashi T,IritaniA 1982IAnim Sci 55:873
54:49
Savio JD,Keenan L,Boland MP and Roche JF 1988 J Reprod
MaatjeR1976LivestoclProd Sci 3:85
Fertil 83:663
MclntoshDAD,LewisJA,1ammondD 1984VetRec115:129
SavioJD,BolandMP,RocheJF1990ReprodFertil 88:581
Mann CE,Lamming GE1995 Biol Repr0d 52(suppl 1):197
Scaramuzzi Ri,Geldard H,Beels CM elal 1983WoolTechnol
Martinat-BoteFBariteau EBadouardB,Terqui M1985
Sheep Breeding 31:87
|ReprodFeril Suppl33:211
SchillingE,Zust」1968ReprodFertil15:307
MatsuoH,BabaY,NairRMG,SchallyAV 1971 Biochem
Schmitt EIP,DiazT,DrostM,ThatcherWW1996JAnim Sci
Biophys ResComm 43:1334
74:1084
MattonPAdelakounV,CoutureY,Dufour  1983|Anim Sci
SchutteAP1967JSmall AnimPraci8:301
52:813
Scott PP 1970 In:Hafez ESE (ed) Reproduction and breed-
Mawhinney I,BiggadikeH,DrewB1999Ve1 Rec145:551
ing techniques forlaboratory animals.Lea&Febiger,
MazerbourgS,Bondy CA,Zhou1,Monget P2003 Reprod
Philadelphia,p192
DomAnim38:247
SelgrathJP,EberKM1993Theriogenology39:306
MeidanR,MilvaeRA,WeissSetal1999|ReprodFeril Suppl
ShilleVM,StabenfeldtGH1979BiolReprod21:1217
54:217
ShilleVM,LundstromK,StabenfeldtGH1979Biol Reprod
MoiseNS,Reimers TI1983 IAmVet MedAssoc182:158
21:953
Morrison CD,Daniel JA,Hampton JH et al 2001
ShilleVM,MunroC,FarmerSWetal 1983ReprodFertil
JEndocrinol168:317
69:29
MorrowDA,Roberts SlMcEnteeK1969 Cornell Vet59:134
Signoret JP 1971 Vet Rec 88:34
Nebel RLJobst SM,Dransfield MBG et al 1997| Dairy Sti
SimplicioAA,Machado R1991 Cited by Gordon I1997
80(suppl 1):151
In:Controlled reproduction in sheep and goats.CAB
NoelB,Bister IL,PaquayR19931Reprod Fertil99:695
International,Wallingford,Oxon
Nogueira GP,GintherO]2000EquineVet/32:482
SiroisJ,Fortune JE1988Biol Reprod39:308
OddeKG1990IAnim Sci68:817
Skarzynski D.Jaroszewski J,Bah Met al 2003 BiolReprod
OenEO1977NordVetMed29:287
68:1674
Okkens AC,Kooistra HS 2006 Reprod Domest Anim
Sokolowski JH,StoverDG,VanRavenswaayF19771AmVet
41:291
PaapeSRShilleVMSeoH,StabenfeldG1975il
Stevenson JS,Tiffany SM2004』Dairy Sci 87:3658
Reprod 13:470
SioutTAE,Colenbrander B 2004 Anim Reprod Sci 82-S3:
PetersAR1985a BrVetI141:564
633
57
Part
111
Normal cyclical ovarian activity and itscontrol
TenhagenBADrillichR,SurholtR,HeuwieserW2004
WecmsCW,WeemsYS,RandelRD2006VetJ171:206
1 Dairy Sci 87:85
WildtDE,ChakrabortyPK,Banks WB,Seager SWJ 1977
TownsonDH,Tsang PC,Butler WRet al 2002Anim Sci
Proceedipgs of the XthAnnual Meeting of the Society for
80:1053
the Srty of Reproduction,Abst 110
Tsutsui T,ShimizuT1975 Jpn/Anim Reprod 21:65
WildtDE,SeagerSWj,Chakraborty PK1980 Endocrinology
TsutsuiT,Stabenfeldt GH1993JReprod Fertil Suppl 47:29
107:1212
Van deWiel DFH,Erkens1.KoopsWelal 1981BiolReprod
WilliamsonNB,MorisRS,BloodDC,CannonCM1972Vet
24:223
Rec91:50
Van Niekerk CH1973CitedbyAllen 1978
Wishari DF1972Vet Rec90:595
VanNiekerkCH,GernaekeWHI966Onderstepoort IVetRes
Wishart DF Young IM1974Vet Rec95:503
25(suppl 2)
WoodPDP1976AnimProd22:275
WebbR,Campbell BK,GarverickHAeial1999Reprod
WrayS,Floffman-Small G1986Neuroendocrinol 45:413
Fertil Suppl54:33
WuteW,Pizel L,KnokeI,Jarry H1995BiolRerod
Webel SK1975IAnimSci 41:385
52(suppl1):64
Webel SK1978In:DB Crighton(ed) Controlofovulation.
Bulterworth.London,p421
58
Part
121
Pregnancy and parturition
Developmen.t .of.theconceptus.......1
David Noakes
3
Pregnancy and its diagnosis.
76
Marcel Taverne andDavid Noakes
Abnormal development of the
conceptus and its consequence.......123
Susan Long
5
Prolapse of. the cervix and. vagina..... 146
David Noakes
6
Parturition and the care ofparturient
animals, including the newborn ...
......154
Marcel Taverne and David Noakes
The puerperium
David Noakes
2
Chapter
David Noakes
Development of the conceptus
Within the uterine tube
is the endoderm and the outer is ectoderm; there is a
cavity known as the blastocoele (Figs. 2.1, 2.2a). The
As the ripe follicle is about to rupture, the fimbri-
embryo will form from a thicker portion of the ecto-
ated end of the uterine tube is applied to it and,
derm, the embryonic knot or disc (Figs. 2.1, 2.2a, b).
at ovulation, the follicular fluid and egg are dis-
The remaining part of the ectoderm is referred to as
charged. In many domestic species, those sperm
the irophoblast (from the Greek meaning 'nourish-
that traverse the female tubular genital tract are
ing layer') and will have an important subsequent
sequestered in the isthmus of the uterine tubes and
role in the formation of the placenta (Perry 1981).
are only released and migrate to the ampullae of
Up to the time of shedding of the zona pellucida
the tubes(wherefertilization occurs) at the start of
at the ninth day (often called ‘hatching') (Fig.2.1),
ovulation. Thus spern ascent, and oocyte descent,
there is little absolute growth of the niammalian egg
to the ampulla occur synchronously.Fertilization
from its original dimension of 0.14 mm.The fertil-
requires that there is fusion of nuclear material from
ized egg of the ewe reaches the uerus at the eight-
only one sperm and one oocyte; many hundreds of
cell stage on day 3, while in the sow it passes down
thousands of sperm will be released from sequestra-
the uterine tube within 2 days ofovulation and
tion in the isthmus at the same time, so that there arrives in the uterus at the four- to eight-cell stage
will be many present in the ampullae at the time
(Fig. 2.1). Tubal transport of the fertilized eggs of
of fertilization.The oocyte hias mechianisns to pre-
the mare probably takes 5-6 days, by which time
ventfertilizationbymore than one spermatozoon
they are at the blastocyst stage, but van Niekerk
(polyspermy) since,if this occurs, it will result n he
&Gernaeke(1966) have shown that unfertilized
abnormal development of the embryo(see Ch.4);
equine eggs remain in the tubes for several months,
this is called the'polyspermic block.
where they slowly degenerate. The variable duration
Following fertilization,cleavage of the zygote
of travel by the fertilized egg in the uterine tube of
begins and, as a result of peristaltic contractions and
the domestic species appears to be determined posi-
ciliary currents in the uterine tube, it is propelled
tivelyby the degrees of activity of ihe tubal muscle
towards the uterus.When it reaches the uterus,at
and cilia,and negatively by the muscular constric-
3-4 days in cattle and at 5-8 days in the dog and tion, eiher at the tubal isthmus or at the uterot-
cat, the zygote consists of 16-32 cells in the form of bal junction. Both positive and negative factors are
a morula. With further cell division and cell orien-probably influenced by variable concentrations of
tation the morulabecomes hollowed out to form a
ovarian steroid hormones and possiblyby locally
blastocyst and itswall becomes two-layered:theinnerproduced prostaglandins.
61
21
Pregnancy andparturition
1cell
Tight
By day 2i in the mare, the blastocyst measures
Bino
7x6.5cm,butin thecowitextendsalmost through-
days
days
outthepregnant horn.Embryonicattachment tothe
uterus occurs at approximatelythefollowing times:
12 days,cow; 18 days, sow; 15 days, ewe;13-17
4cells
Blastocyst
days, dog and cat; and 35-40 days, mare.
A tough,elastic glycoprotein capsule surrounds
days
the equine blastocyst between 6 and 23 days after
ovulation,whichprovides physical support forthe
8cells
Embryonic
embryo as it traverses the uterus as well as accumu-
discorknoi
latingtheconstituentsoftheuterinemill'（Allen&
lays
Expanded
blastocyst
Stewart 200i).Theunique intrauterinemobility of
8-10
the equineembryohasbeen demonstratedbymeans
16cells
days
ofB-modereal-timetransrectalultrasonographyby
4-5
Leith&Ginhier(1984).Thelocation ofthevesicle
days
was observedin sevenmaresovera2-hourperiod
Hatching
daily from days 9-17.There was increasing mobility
Morula
blastocyst
from day9today12,and theplateauof highmobil
9-11
5-6
days
itypersisteduntil day14,afterwhichtherewerefew
days
locationchangesonday15andnoneondays16
and 17,indicating that fixation had occurred;this
Fig.2.1 Stages of early embryonic development in domestic
takesplaceat thebaseofoneoftheuterineliorns
species, and their approximate limings.
and isduetoincreaseduterine tonicity.Ondays
9and 10,thevesicle was at least twice aslikely to
bein theuterinebodyasina uterinehorm;on days
11-14 this proportion was reversed and beyond day
Within the uterus
15 the embryowas alwayscornually disposed.
Formationofthefetalmembranes
From thetimeofits arrival intheuterusuntil attach-
ment,thezygoteispropelled or migratesintheuter-
At around the time of the blastocyst‘hatching'the
inelumen,whereit is nourished by the exocrine
embryonic (subsequently fetal) membranes develop
secretionsoftheuterineglandsreferred to as'uter-
someofwhichwillhaveamajorroleintheforma-
ine milk In the polytocous species,the blastocysts
tion of the placenta;these are: yolk sac, amnion,
aredistributed throughouttheuterus,soastoutilize
chorion and allantois.Soon after hatching'the
the uterine space effectively;thus there occurs free
inner（endodermal)layerofcellsofthebilaminar
migration of embryos between the cornua,regard-
blastocyst (Fig.2.2C),usually formed by the tan-
less of the side of ovulation. In the monotonous
gential division ofa fewcells of thie embryonicdisc,
cow such migration hardly ever occurs,in the ewe
migrate around theinner surfaceoftheectoderm
it isnot uncommon,whereas in the mare extensive
and theblastocoeleto form theyolk sac（Fig.2.2D).
migration always occurs(seebelow).After theninth
Ineutherianmammals,and thusinall thecommon
day,the blastocystelongatesrapidly in ruminants
domesticated species,it contains no obvious yollk.
andpigs.For example,the sheep blastocyst is1cm
Inthepig,for example,itreachesitsmaximum size
longat12days,3cmat13daysand10cinat14days,
whilein the sow at10 days just after hatchingitis a
atedwithitsseparationfrom thetrophoblast,it has
flaccid sphere 8-10mm in diameter,by day 13 the
shrunk（Figs 2.2D,2,3;Perry 1981）.In the mare,dog
apparent length of each blastocyst is 20-30cm but,
and cat,theyolksacpersistsfora much longer time.
becauseofthefoldingof themucosal surface,itmay
The amnion developsasanenvelopingfoldofecto
be a metre or more in length; the diameter is minute
derm and mesoderm,ultimatelyfusing and com-
in comparison.A characteristic feature of the elon-
pletelysurroundingtheembryonicdisc,embryo and
gated porcine blastocyst is that it is always aligned
fetus (Figs 2.2E,2.3);it is complete in the pig, for
with theuterine attachment of thebroadligament.
example,by day 17.Although theamnionhas some
62
Chapter
121
Development of the conceptus
Amnioticfolds
Embryonicdisc
Mesoderm
Exocoele
Blastocoale
Endodern
B
Sero-amnioticconnaction
Exocoele
Yolk sac
Yolk sac
D
Fig. 2.2 Developrment of the amnion and choricn, and the extension uf the exocoele around the yolk sac shown in trans
verse section in the pig.InD),the amniotic folds have met bulnatyet fused,so that the amnion and chcrion are jcined by a
'sero-amniotic'connection(after Perry 1981).
involvement in the intramembranous ahsorption of
exocoele, except for the region around the embryo
amniotic fluid and solute into the fetal circulation
where the amnion is in contact with the chorion
[Brace et al 2004), its main role is protective, con-
(Fig. 2.3B). The mesoderm covering the allantois
taining the amniotic fluid in which the fetus'floats
fuses with the mesoderm liningthe chorion to form
At around the same time, the chorion is formed
the allantochorion (chorioallantois), the structure
by theouterlayer ofmesoderm andtrophoblast
involved in the formation of the placenta (Fig. 2.3B, see
(Fig.2.2D).Thelast of the embryonic/fetal membranes
also 2.5A) (Perry 1981). The allantois also fuses with
to form is the allantois, which develops, as a thin-
the amnion, to fom the allantoamnion.
walledsac-likeoutgrowth ofendoderm surrounded by
mesoderm, from the embryonic gut close to the open-
Ruminants
ing connecting the gut with the yolk sac; in the pig it
starts to develop at about 14 days (Fig. 2.3A).The allan-
After hatching of the blastocyst, the bovine ernbryo,
tois grows very rapidly, passing through the umbilical
although differentiating fast, elongates slowly com-
cord and appearing asa crescent-shaped sacfilling the
pared with the chorion and at a month after mating
63
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
Trophoblast
Chorion
(trophectoderm)
Amnion
Gut
Head
Heart
Chorion
Blcod
vessels
Yolk sac
Exocoele
Allantois
Chorioviteline
Bilaminar
A
plecenta
omphalopleure
B
Allanto-chorion
Fig.2.3Fetal membranes of the pig as shown in longitudinal section(A)on day 18aftermating and(B)on day 21aftermating.
itisonlyjustoverlcmlong.Thechorionicvesicle
siveallantochorionicsac;thisfirstbeginstodistend
whichis atfirst string-likewitha central distended
the gravid cornu at about 35 days (Fig. 2.4A).
sphere of amnion containing the embryo,is pro-
Atthistime,thechorionalreadyextendsintothe
gressively filled by allantoic fluid to form an exten-
non-gravid horn;itslength is about 40cm and at its
A
Fig.2.4Bovine conceptus at:(A)40-45days;(B)50 days.Crown-rump length5.5cm;(C)80 days crown-rump length 8cm.
(D)Twinconceptuses at60-70 days crown-rump length7.0and7.6cm.Note thefetuscontainedwithin the discrete-almost
spherical-amnioticsac,withanelongatedallantochorion,and evidenceof the formationof cotyledons.
64
Chapter
21
Development of the conceptus
widest part in the dependent portion of the gravid
horn it is 4-5 cm in diameter. The early develop-
ment of the sheep is very similar to that of the cow.
The allantochorion, which eventually surrounds
the allantoamnion, is separated from it by allan-
toicfluid.When thevascularization of thechorion
by the allantois is complete (at 40-60 days in the
cow) the allantochorion is ready to participate in
placental function [Figs 2.4A-D,2.5).Before this
time, the embryo has been nourished through its
chorion and amnion by diffusion from the uter-
ine milk. In the ruminant uterus,where the allan-
tochorion contacts the uterine caruncles, finger-like
processes or villi containing capillary tufts grow
Fig. 2.6 Bovine conceptus at about 100 cays; methylene
out from the allantochorion into the crypts of the
blue dye has been injected into the allantochoricnic sac
maternal caruncles, which are also surrounded by
post-mortem.
capillary plexuses. Thus is formed the characteristic
ruminant placentome, through which nutrient and
gaseous exchange between the inothier and fetus
Amniotic
takes place. There can be up to 120 functioning cot-
cavity
yledons in the cow (Figs.2.4-2.8) and about 80 in
Cotyledon
the sheep, arranged in four rows along each of the
Allantoic
uterine horns.It will be recalled that the chorion,
channel
and following it the allantois,extend into the non-
gravid horn, and thus it is normal in the ruminant
for there to be numerous funclioningcotyledons in
the non-pregnant horn
During early development ofthe ruminant embryo.
there occurs an extensive fusion berween the allanto-
amnion and the allantochorion,thuslargelyoblit-
erating the cavity of the allantois.As a result,where
it lies over the amnion, the allantois is reduced to
Limits of
a narrow channel.Here its shape resembles the
amnion
Necrotic tip
Isthmus
Allantochorion
of chorion
Fig.2.7 Bovire conceptus showing the allantochorion of early
letter T, with the stem arising from the urachus,
along the umbilical cord and then diverging as the
two cross-pieces over the lateral face of the amnion.
Consequently, there is lirtle allantoic fluid over the
amniotic area:most ofit lies in the extremities of the
allantois, one of which lies in the non-gravid horn
(Figs. 2.6, 2.7）. However, studies of bovine uteri in
late gestation (Arthur 1959) have shown that, with
Fig.2.5Bovine conceptus at 90-100 days.Note the relatively
the increasing pressure of accumulating allantoic
larger amniotic sac compared with Figure 2.4, and obvious
fluid, the allantochorion tends tobecome separated
cotyledons that are larger towards the centre of the
again from the allantoamnion so that, at term, the
allantochorion
allantois may almost surround the amnion.
65
Part
2
Pregnancy and parturition
Fig. 2.9 Equine conceptus at 7 weeks. The allantochorion has
been opened to show the yolksac ancearly fetus within the
uouwe
referred to as microcotyledons [Samuel et al 1975).
Althoughmore or less fully differentiated by day
150, there is continued lengthening and branching
during the second half of gestation (McDonald el al
2000) The microcotyledons are distributed over the
whole surface of the allantochorion, and canbe seen
with the naked eye. giving the allantochorion a stip-
Fig.2.8 Bovine conceptus at 115 days.Note the blood supply
pled,velvety appearance [Figs.2.11,2.12).Between
to and from the develaping cotyledons.
the microcotyledons are areas of pseudostratified
trophoblast cells that overlie the ducts of the endo-
metrial glands, absorbing their secretions (Steven
Horse
1982). At day 35, the trophoblast of the spherical
The equine conceptus does not show the initial rapid
conceptus has separated into its invasive and non-
elongation of the blastocyst-chorion that occurs in
invasive conponents. Cells from the former, distin-
ruminants and pigs. For example, at 35 days the
guished as the thickened annulated chorionic girdle,
equine chorionis oval rather than cylindrical and
invade the endometrium to form the endometrial
is more distended by the allantoic fluid. This causes
cups,structures unique to equids(Allen & Stewart
an earlier, more discrete uterine enlargement than in
2001). These appear as crateriform structures dis-
 posed in a concentric manner at the base of the preg-
diagnosis [Fig.2.9). In the mare,unlike the cow,the
nant horn. They are present from the 6th to the 20th
amniotic and allantoicsacs do notfise as inrumi-
week of gestation and in them the equine chorionic
nants, so that the amnion floats freely, contained
gonadotrophin (eCG) is produced. The cups express
within the allantoic sac except for its attachment at
foreign fetal antigens (they are fetal trophoblast
the umbilicus, throughout gestation (Fig. 2.10). The
cells), stimulating strong maternal humoral and cell-
relationships of the fetal sacs at birth will be referred
mediated immuneresponses that ultimately curtail
to again in Chapter 6 on parturition.
In the mare,after the establishment of a stable
day 140, although the timing of this varies.
microvillus contact between the allantochorion and
The immunological importance of the endone-
endometrium at about day 40, there develops over
trial cups in protecting theforeign'conceptus has
the next 100 days a complex of multibranched inter-
been demonstrated by Allen (1982). In interspe-
digitations with the endometrium to form what are
cies transfers of fertilized eggs between horses and
66
Chapter
121
Development of the conceptus
B
Fig.2.10 Equine fetusof approximately 3months of age(A).Theallantochorion has been incised to expose the fetus enclosed
within the almost transparent amnion.Note the umbilical cord at thebottomof thepicture and the tortuousbloodvesselson
the surfaceof theamnion.(B)Surrounding membraneshavebeenincised toshow tortuous umbilical vessels.
donkeys,noendometrialcupswereformedand the
donkeyfetuses diedat 80-90days.Projectinginto
the allantoicfluid are peculiarinvaginations of the
allantochorionthatarefirstfoundatafetalbody
length(FBL)ofabout1lcm andoccurin juxiapo-
sition with theendometrialcups.Their sizecorre-
spondswith thesecretory activityoftheendometrial
cups, being largest at FBL 15-20cm and regressing
afterFBL3Ocm;when distendedwith secretion they
are appropriately called allantochorionic or chorio-
allantoicpouches.They arefewinnumber and are
notpathological structures.
The surface of the allantochorion,adherent to
Fig.2.11 Equinefetal membranes at term.Note the denser
theendometrium,isredincolourwitha‘velvety
allantochorion(al),whichisred incolourwhen fresh,with
appearance and texture. The area adjacent to the
itssmoothinner surfaceexposed,the amnion(am),whichat
internal opening of the cervix is devoid of placen-
term is almost transparent,and the umbilicus (u).
tal villi, giving rise to the so-called ‘star' (Fig. 2.12).
Theinner surface ofthe allantochorion which is
outermostwhentheplacentaisshedhasasmooth
surface（Fig.2.11).Sometimes attached to the allan-
tochorion,or floating freely in the allantoic fluid,
there aresoftcalculiofcellularand inorganicdebris
called hippomanes (Fig.2.13); they appear to have
no physiological function.
Pig
Thedevelopmentofthefetalmembraneshasbeen
extensively studied in thepig and very clearly
described by Perry (1981)and in Patten's text-
book on the embryology of the pig (1948);both
Fig.2.12Outer surface of the allantcchorion showing the
are worthy of reading.After the blastocysts have
'star(s),which is adjacent to theinternal opening of the
hatched,they enlarge so that at 10 days they are
cervix(c)and is devoid of placental villi.
flaccid spheresS-10mmin diameterandarethen
67
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
Types of placenta
Placentae mhay be classified according to the way the
villi are distributed on the fetal chorion.Thus,where
they are uniformly dispersed, as in the mare and
sow,theplacenta issaid tobe diffuse.Wheretheyare
grouped into multiplecircumscribed areas,asin the
ruminant, the placental arrangement is called cory-
ledonary. while in the bitch and cat the villi are dis-
posed in the form of a broad encircling belt forming
5
0
a zonary placenta.
Formerly, the placentae were differentiated accord-
ing to whether or not maternal tissue was detached
with the fetal tissue at birth.Thus,of the domestic
Fig.2.13Allantochorionicmembrane of the mare with
mammals,the placentae of the bitch and cat were
hippomare (h) attached.
said to be deciduate and those ofthe remainder
non-deciduate.
distributed and spaced along both horns,before
Morerecently,
embryologistshave
favoured
Grosser's (1909) division of placental types, in which
near the attachment of the broad ligament.Over
the degree ofproximity of the maternal and fetal
the next 1-2 days there is a huge transformation of
blood circulations is the criterion of classification.
the conceptus, in that it undergoes rapid elonga-
Such a concept recognizes the phagocytic property of
tion forminga very long,narrow cylinder.Although
the trophoblast, or chorionic epithelium, that may be
occupying 20-30 cm of horn length, because of the
exerted on tissueswithwhich it comes incontact. In
extensivefoldingofthe endometrium theblasto-
the simplest,orepitheliochorial type of placenta,seen
cyst may actually be over a metre in length. The
in the horse and pig, the chorion is everywhere in
amnion forms from lU days and the allantoisfirst
contact with theendometrium,and thereisno lossof
appears at about 14 days, expanding into a volumi-
maternal tissue.In the cow, the placenta is described
nous crescenticvesicleby 18 days and by 19 days
as being synepithelialchorial (Wooding 1992). Soon
it has fused with the chorion to form the allanto-
after embryonic attachment a syncytium is formed
chorion. By 22 days the allantochorion has devel-
on the maternal side of the placentome by thefusion
oped intricate corrugations,which interlock with
of binucleate cells derived from the trophectoderm
the folds and crevices of the endometrium to estab-
and the endomeirium.Unlike thesheep and goat,the
lish the placenta (Marrable 1969).
syncylium is only temporary, as fairly soon the syncy
tial plaques areovergrownbytherapid divisionof the
remaining matermal epithelium (King et al 1979). In
Dog and cat
he third, endotheliochorial type, there is further inva
Until 20 days of gestation,there is a choriovitelline
sion of the endometrium by the trophoblast, which
placenia in which the vascular yolk sac is involved.
is now apposed to the maternal capillaries. Such a
Even at 24 days the yolk sac is three times the length
type is typical of the carnivora. In the haenochorial
oftheembryo;theembiyoiscompletelysurrounded
placenta ofprimates,only tie tissues of the chori
by the avascular amnion,which contains translucent
onicvilli separate thefetal and maternalblood.The
fluid and is in contact with the yolk sac via the vitell-
placenta of the dog and cat is partly haemochorial,
ine duct. From 20 days, the allantois develops and
in that the main zonary placenta of endotheliocho-
by day 22 it is twice the size of the yolk sacand con-
rial type is flanked by marginal haematomata. Al
tains a clearyellow fluid; it completely envelopes the
about 22-25 days, they are visible at the margins of
amnion and thus the embryo and fetus.The central
the placental girdle. In the dog, they are green in
part of the allantoic sac, having fused with the cho-
colour because of the presence of the blood pig-
rion and being in contact with the endometrium,
ment uteroverdine and are 1 mm wide at this stage
forms the epithelial chorial zonary placenta (Fig.
but reach 8 mm at term (Fig. 2.14). In the cat, they
2.14). In the dog it completely encircles the embryo
are less obvious although they can be seen micro-
but in the cat it is incomplete.
scopically; the pigment is brown in colour.Therole
68
Chapter
121
Development of the conceptus
A simplediagrammaticrepresentation ofthe types
of placenta based on Grosser's (1909) original clas-
sification is shown in Figure 2.15.
There is good evidence that both the microscopic
andmacroscopic structure of theplacenta maybe
influencedby factors suchi as thenutritional status
of the dam during pregnancy, and breed. A compari-
son of the gross morphology of theplacentomes of
ewes subjected tomodest undernutrition during the
first 70 days of pregnancy, with those on a normal
conirol diet, has shown a change in the distribu-
tion of the types of placentomes based on thie clas-
sification of Vatnick et al (19g1).Undernutrition of
Fig. 2.14 Canine conceptus at approximately 8 weeks of
the dam results in a decrease in the type A placen-
gestation,partially contained within part of the uterine horn,
tome (the‘classical’shiape) and an increase in the
showing marginal haematcmata on the allantochorionic sac
type D, in which the fetal component of the pla-
(p),and the areas of placentation (h).
centa is increased (Steyn et al 2001). This shows that
the placenta is a dynamic organ responding io the
demands of the fetus,in this case the provision of
ofthese haematomata isbelieved to be the transfer
sufficienl nutrition to maintain normal intrauter-
ofiron to thefetus.In themajorityofcatplacentas,
ine growth. Hlowever, there is also evidence in sheep
there is a well develop fissure similar to that seen in
that theresponse of the placentomes to undernutri-
mink;itsfunctionisnotknown (Miglino etal 2006).
tion in mid gestation can be influenced by previous
When separation of the canine placenta begins at
nutritional conditioning (Vonnahme et al 2006).
parturition, it is the escape of this altered blood from
The degree of intimacy of the maternal and fetal
the marginal haematoma thatgives thecharacteristic
placental blood vessels is the basis for the variable
green colour to the normal parturient discharges.
function of the'placental barrier'of different species.
Epithelio-
Synepithelial-
Endothelial-
Haemo-
Key
chorial
chorial
chorial
chorial
Endothelium
90000
Connective tissue
0000
00
00
O
Fetal trophoblast
000
epithelium
000
Endometrial epithelium
Intervillous space
00000
QD
C
DOOOXOOY
OOOOOO
Horse and pig
Sheep, goat
Dog and cat
Man, rodents-
and cow
bop u Aued
and cat
Fig. 2.15 Diagrammatic representation of types of placenta found in domestic species based on Grosser's original classificat on.
69
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
Thisis ofinterest in certain diseases of the fetus and
newborn. For example, in the haemolytic disease of
foals antigens from the fetus pass across the placenta
tothemotherbut theresultant antibodiescanreturn
tothefoalonlyviathecolostrum,whereasinwomen
similarantibodiesmayraverse theplacentaandcause
an antigen-antibodyreactionin theunbonfetus
Fetal fluids
Cattle
Pinl
The total quantity of fetal fluid of catile increases
progressivelythroughoutpregnancy;it averages
about5litres at5monthsand20litresatterm.
Sharprises in the total quantity occur between 40
nio
and65 days,between3and4months andagain
between 61 and 7/months.The first and last of
theseareduetoallantoicand thesecond toamni-
oticincreases.For nearly thewholeofthefirst third
of pregnancy, when the conceptus consiss of an
elongatedallantochorion withacentralspheroi-
dal amnion-closely investing therelatively small
embryo- there is more allantoic fluid; during most
0B
120
200
240
280
of the second third of pregnancy amnioticfluid pre-
Days gestation
dominates but for the greater part of the final third
allantoic fluid is again clearly in excess (Fig. 2.16).
Fig.2.16Volume of fetal fluids at successive stages of preg-
Throughout gestation the allantoicfluid iswatery
nancy in the cow.-
-,total;-
--,allantoic;
orurine-like.In thefirst two-thirds of pregnancy the
amniotic.(From Arthur1969.)
amnioticfluid is similarbutfor theremainder ofges-
tation it is amucoid fluid.Thelatter change gives it
amnioticfluid diminishes to 369ml （Table 2.1)
the lubricant property that is so helpful at parturi
When twins arepresent thetotalsof fluid are approx-
tion.Atbirth theallantoicsacformsthefirst andthe
imatelydoubled(Arthur1956).
amnion the second 'water-bag'The allantochorion is
thicker and tougher than the transparent amnion.
Horse
Sheep
Ranges ofweightsof the total fetal fluid for each
month of pregnancy in themare as given by Richter
ThestudiesofMalan&Curson(1937)andCloete
&Gotze（1960)areshowninTable2.2.
(1939)haverevealedthat the totalvolumeof fetal
fluid increases with advancing age of the conceptus
but that the separate fetal fluid volumes show dif-
Table Z.1 Volume of fetal fluids in the sheep (ml).(Data frcm
ferent tendencies.Thus,during the first 3 months,
Malan& Curson 1937and Cloete 1939.)
apart from an initial preponderance, the allantoic
Monthof
Amniotic
Allantoic
Total
fluid accumulates slowly, e.g.131ml at 3 months,
gestation
whereastheincreaseinamnioticfluidoccurslargely
1
3
88
41
during this time,sothat at3 months itreaches
G04ml.Inthefourthmonth theincrease in allan-
2
169
89
258
toicfluidisgreatly acceleratedto485ml,whilethe
3
604
131
735
amniotic fluid increasesonly slightly.During thelast
4
686
485
1171
(fifth)month ofgestation theallantoicfluid almost
5
369
834
1203
doublesitsvolumeto834mlbutthevolumeof
70
Chapter
21
Development of the conceptus
Table2.2Weight of fetal fluids in thehorse
400
Amniotic luid
Month of gestation
Weight of total fluid (kg)
1
0.03-0.04
300
2
0.3-0.5
3
1.2-3.0
4
3.0-4.0
5
5.0-8.0
6
6.0-10.0
100
7
6.0-10.0
8
6.0-12.0
9
8.0-12.0
10
10.0-20.0
2
30
50
60
70
80
90
100
Gestational age (days)
11
10.0-20.0
Fig. 2.17 Mean changes in the volume of amniotic and allan-
toic fluid in porcine conceptuses.(After Knight et a 1977.)
Table 2.3 Volume of fetal fluids in the horse
Estimated
Fetal body
Amniotic
Allantoic
gestation
length (cm)
(ml)
(E)
thenincreases toreach amaximumof320mlat 60
(months)
days before gradually declining to term (Fig. 2.17).
Amniotic fluid gradually increases to reach a maxi
3
10
2300
mum of about 200ml on day 70 before declining
4/2
20
100
4090
slightly until term (Fig.2.17).
9
44
6200
4090
77
3700
4800
Dog and cat
9
80
9200
In kittens of fetal body length up to 9 cm the amni-
81.5
1670
5210
*Es:imated volume in a preserved spacimen
there is some decrease followed by a slight rise
'Some allantoic fluid lost in transit
just before term.The allantoic fluid starts with a
more rapid rise, and at mid-term is higher than the
amniotic(20ml),but towards the end of gestation
Serial values for the separate amounts of amni-
declines to about 6ml.
otic and allantoicfluids are not availablebut the
observations of Arthur (1956) (Table 2.3), together
Form and disposition of the
fetal sacs
similar to those of cattle. Thus, allantoic fluid pre
Ruminantspecies
dominates in early as well as late pregnancy and
measures S-i5 litres at term.The amniotic fluid
Throughout gestation the amnion enclosing the
volume differsfrom thatofcattlc.Iislow during
fetus, togetherwith the larger portion of the allanto-
the first 3 months:for example, only 27ml at 74
chorion, remains in the uterine horn corresponding
days.Thereafter it increases more rapidly and at
to the ovary with the corpus luteum of pregnancy;a
mid-pregnancy equals the volume of allantoic fluid,
smaller'limb'of allantochorionprojects across the
while at term it is 3-5 litres.
uterine body into the other horn.Most of the allan-
toic fluid gravitates to the poles of the allantocho-
Pig
rion,which lie in the dependent parts of the uterine
horns,and the uterine distension thus caused in
The volume of allantoic fluid shows an early rise to
cattle is the chief clinical sign of early pregnancy.
about 200ml at30 days;thereafter it declines and
By the third month,considerable fluid (up to 0.75
71
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
litres) has accumulated in the spherical amnion,
extremity of the other. According to Williams (1939),
anditnowgivesriseto the mainpalpablemass in
this results in an unequal sharing of the uterine
the pregnant horn (Figs. 2.5-2.8).
space and-thius competition for the reduced area of
On tlie inner face of the amnion ofruminants,
endometrium availablewithwhich the trophoblast
particularlynear theumbilicus,arenumerousraised,
can become attached to form theplacental attach-
rough,discrete,round foci called amnioticplaques.
ment.Thus usually one fetus suffers severe growth
They arerich inglycogen but ofunknown function
retardation and the result is either its death in utero,
and disappear after 6 months of gestation.Towards
resulting in the birth of the survivor as a singleton,
the end of pregnancy smooth, discoid, rubber-like
complete failure of the pregnancy with abortion, or
masses float in the amniotic and occasionally in the
the birth of live twins of very disparate size.
allantoicfluids.They probablycompriseaggregations
The noticeable feature of the allantochorionic sacs
offetal hair andmeconium around which salts are
of the pig is thiat,from about 27 days of gestation, the
deposited from the fetal fluids.They are called ‘hip-
tips of the elongated allantochorion become ischae-
pomanes' and are of no functional significance.
mic and then necrotic (Crombie 1972, Flood 1973).
It has been suggested that this mighi be a mecha
Horse
nism toprevent vascular anastomosis,which might
result in the development of freemartins (see Ch.4).
Much of the allantochorion and the greater partof the
Frequently theendsofadjacent allantoicsacs become
amnion are contained within the gravid horn with
‘glued’ together by a gelatinous substance, although
a direct continuation of similar width into the uter
the junction is not a strong one.Furthermore, in some
ine body. The part of the allantochorion that projects
cases thereis completefusion of the allantochorion
into thenon-gravid horn ismuch narrower and is
of adjacent sacs as early as 22 days; although here
about two-thirds the length of the gravid horn scg-
appears to be no vascular anastomosis, thus eliminat-
ment but in therarebicornual pregnancy the allanto-
ing the development of freemartins(Crombie1972)
chorion occupies both cornua to a similar extent
(see Ch. 4). The intervening ‘wall' between adjaceni
concepluses often disappears,most probably closeto
Pig
term,so thiere is a continuous allantochorionic'tube
through which fetuses are seen to pass during partu-
After the distribution and spacing of blastocysts at
rition (see Ch. 6). These have been called 'synchorial
about 10 days of gestation, the rapid elongation of
tubes'by Marrable (1969).
the blastocytes (see below) results in their distribu-
Interesting breed differences have been identified
tion along thelength of bothuterine horns-from
in pigs. In the Yorkshire, the placentae increase in
oneovary to theother-andwiththe onenearest the
size and surface area in the last third of gestation,
body of the uterus often extending into both horns.
whereas in the Meishan, placental size remains
The uterine surface of the sow's allantochorion is
constant in late gestation, although the density of
studded witlh small, round, grey foci called areolae
blood vessels at the allantochorionic/endometrial
in which the placental villi are absent. They occur
interface increases markedly (Wilsonet al 1998). In
opposite focal aggregations of uterine glands.
addition,it has alsobeen shown that,whereas in the
Yorkshire if a conceptus dies as late as 40 days there
Relationship between fetal
isacceleration of thegrowthrateof theplacentae of
membranes of twins and multiple
the adjacent live concepti,in the Meishan this does
fetuses
not occur (Vonnahme et al 2002). In the rare case
of anastomosis of allantoic blood vessels of porcine
fetuses of unlike sex,a basis for thefreemartincon-
The relationship of the membranes of contiguous
dition exists, as in cattle (see Ch. 4).
fetuses is simplest in carnivora, in which, although
In the majority of twin or triplet pregnancies of
the extremities of the allantochorionic sacs impinge
shieep and cattle,contiguous chorionicsacs coalesce
on1 each other, they remain separate. The next grada-
(Figs. 2.4D, 2.18, 2.19) and in many cases the allan-
tion is in the mare pregnant with twins; here, appar-
toiccavitiesareconfluent,whileincattle-butonlyin
ently owing to thelackof uterine length,the distal
about0.8%ofsheep-allantoicvascularintercommu-
pole of one allantochorion invaginates the proximal
nication is therule(Fig.2.4D). Such ani anastomosis,
72
Chapter
2
Development of the conceptus
late allantoic vascular anastomosis in these three spe-
cies as compared witli the early (30-day) fusion in
cattle.
allcatolcsoc
Fetal mobility during pregnancy
Allontois
While discussing placental relationships,it is instru-
hurian
tive toconsider thesubjectof fetalmobility withinthe
uterus. Obviously in all species, within the amnion,
fetalmovementaroundbothlongitudinal andtrans
verse axes is possible.Rotation about the first is lim
Fig.2.18 Fetal membranesof bovine twins inunicornual
itedbythe length ofamnioticumbilicalcord and
gestation.(Courtesy of M. J. Edwards.)
about the second when the length of the fetus exceeds
hewid ofthe amnion.In cattle,not more than a
three-fourths revolution around the longaxis is pos
sible and,althoughseveral turns around the transverse
Amniotic
axismay occur,a completerevolution of thebovine
Allantoic
umbilical cord is not normal and has been seen only
in mummified fetuses. In equine and porcine fetuses,
however, complete revolutions of the amniotic por-
Amnion
tion of the umbilical cord are common.
Amniotit
Junctionof
5OC
urachuslo
Another possibility of intrauterine fetal move-
allantoicsac
ment is the potential mobility of the amniotic sac
Allantolc
sac1
(with contained fetus)within the allantochorion.
Allcntois
Owing to the extensive fusion of the allantochorion
Charion
to the allantoamnion in the cow, ewe and sow, suich
Fig.2.19 Fetalmembranesof bovine twins in bicornual
mobility is impossible (excepi perhaps near term)
gestation.(Courtesy of M. J. Edwards.)
whereas in the mare,bitchi and cat such movement
does takeplace and leads to twisting of theallantoic
portion of theumbilical cord.
according to Lillie (1917), is present between hovine
Data collected from pregnant bovine uteri by Arthur
fetuses from the 40th day, and it forms the main
(personal communication)and from equinespecimens
premise of his dieoryof origin of the bovine freemar-
by Vandeplassche (1957) (Table 2.4) indicate that ini-
tin (see Ch.4).
tially anteriorand posteriorpresentations occur in equal
Of 25 sets ofequine twins, 11 were found by
numbers.Aibetween 5 and 6months ofpreguancy the
Vandeplassche et al (1970) to have blood chimerism,
body length of the fetal calf exceeds the width of the
thus indicating vascular anastomosis between the
amnion and thus at this stage the final polarity of 95%
twin placentae. However, on dissection, the genital
of fetuses in anterior presentation is adopted. However
organs of the female members of four heterosexual
in he mare at 6.5 monlis, 40% of fetuses are still in
chineric pairs were found to be normal while five
posterior presentation; the final gestational presenta-
other mares of heterosexual chimerical pairs were
tion of 99% of foals anteriorly disposed is not taken up
found clinically to have normal genitalia, had normal
until the 9th month. Messervy (1958), from observa
oesirous cycles and became pregnant. The fact that
tions made during laparotomy of pregnant mares, has
blood chimerism has been found in adjacent fetuses
also concluded that the presentation of a foal may alter
ofhorse, sheep and pig - as well as cattle - gestations
afterthe8thmonth.Itwould seem likelythat these
indicates that there is a basis for the freemartin con-
changes of longitudinal presentation that occur during
dition in these species also. The observed incidence
late gestation in the mare are due to movements of the
of freemartinism is very low, however, in pigs and
amnion within the allantochorion.The reason for the
sheep (see Ch. 25) and is nil in horses, and this may
final overwhelming proportion of anterior presenta-
be due, according to Vandeplassche et al (1970), to
tions in the mare and cow is not known.
73
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
Table 2.4 Pregnant equine uteri: cisposition of fetus
Months of
No.ofcases
Anterior
Posterior
Right horn
Left horn
gestation
presentation
presentation
pregnant
pregnant
2-3V2
4
2
2
2
2
3-4
12
7
5.
6
6
4V-5V2
4
6
E
5/2-6V
16
9
11
5
6V2-7V
12
4
7
5
7V8V
11
9
2
8
3
81-10
4
4
3
1
10-11
4
4
C
3
1
11-12
3
3
2
1
Total
75
60
25
48
27
64%
%9E
10
1
Transversepresentation
Bicornual pregnancy
5
1
Twin pregnancy
Fetal growth and size
50
000
CAL(cm)
900
The size of the bovine embryo/fetus at the various
Weicht(g)
stages of pregnancy is given in Chapier 3, Table 3.3
40-
800
and the fetal growtli curve is shown in Figure 2.20. The
—700
growth of the porcine fetus, both crown-rump length
OE
600
and wet weight, based on serial slaughter studies of
crossbred gilts of known gestational age are shown in
500
CAL
Figure 2.21 (Knight et al 1971). The growth curve is
400
very similar to that of the bovine embryo/fetus.
300
10
200
100
0
10
20304050
B0
90
100
08
Gesiatior age (days)
eng
70
Fig. 2.21 Changes in the meen = SEM of crown-rump length
60
(CRL),and weight,f porcine fetuses.(AfterKnight et al
1977.)
50
Richardson et al (1976) have shown that long bone
length (conveniently radius and tibia) is a reliable
10
indicator of fetal age from 50 days of gestation to term
in the sheep, and may be obtained radiographically in
Duration of gestation (days)
the living fetus or by postmortem measurement.Mean
values for the respective ages are shown in Table 2.5.
Fig. 2.20 The growth curve of the bovine fetus.
Many studies using B-mode real time ultrasonography
74
Chapter
21
Development of the conceptus
Table 2.5 Length of ovine fetal long bones at various stages
Arthur GH 1959Vet Rec71:345
Arthur GH 1969J Reprod Fertil Suppl 9:45
of conception
Brace RA,VerminML,Huijssoon E 2004AmJ Ohstet
Days after
Length of
Length of
Gynecol 191:837
conception
radius (mm)
tibia (mm)
Cloete JHL1939 Onderstepoort J Vet Sci Anim Indust 13:418
Crombie PR (1972 1 Reprod Fertil 29: 127
50
4.8
5.0
Evans HE 1983 In:Proceedingsof the Xllth World Veterinary
60
10
12
Congress, Perlh, p 27
Flood PF1973 J ReprodFertil 32:539
70
16
19
Grosser O 1909 Eihaute und der Placenta. Braumuller, Vienna
85
25
32
Kahn W,Kahn B,Richter A et al 1992 Dtsch Tierarzl
100
36
47
Wochenschr99:449
King GI,Atkinscn BA, Robertson HA 1979 J Reprod Fertil
110
47
9
55:173
120
56
76
Knight JW,Bazer F, ThatcherWW et al 1977 J Anim Sri 44: G20
67
91
Leith GS, Ginther Oj 1984 In: Proceedings of ihe 10th
130
lnternational Congress on Animal Reproduction and Al,
140
74
100
vol 1,p118
150
79
107
Lillie FR 19171 ExpZool 23:371
MeDonald AA,Chavatte P,Fowden AL 2000 Placenta 21:565
Malan AP, Curson HHI 1937 Onderstepoor IVet Sci Anim
Indust8:417
have demonstrated that it is possible to measure a
MarrableAW1969VetRec84:598
variety of fetal dimensions,thus being able to age the
Medan M,Watanabe G,Absy G et al 2004 J Reprod Dev 50:391
fetus(es) in both sheep and goats (Aiumlamai et al
Messervy A 1958Personal communication to G H Arthur
1992, Kahn et al 1992, Medan et al 2004).
Miglino MA,Ambrosio CE,Martins DS etal 2006
Richardson (1980) has provided the following
Theriogenology 66: 1699
Patten BM 1948Embryology of the pig.Blakiston,Toronto
formulaeforcalculating theageof thefetusfromits
PerryIS 1981| Reprod Fertil 62:321
crown-anus length:
Richardson C1980Personal communication to GH Arihur
PigX=3(Y+21)
Richardson C,Herbert CN,Terlecki S 1976Vet Rec99:22
RichterlCozeR1960Tiergeburshilfe.Paul Parey,Beln
Calf X=2.5(Y+21)
Samuel CA,JackPM,NathanielszPW1975]ReprodFertil45:9
LambX=2.1(Y+17)
Steven DH 1982 I Reprod Fertil Suppl 31: 41
Steyn C, Hawkins P, Saito T et al 2001 Eur J Obstet Gynaecol
where X is the developmental age in days and Y is
Reprod Hiol 98: 165
the crown-anus length in centimetres. A 35-day
Van NiekerkCH,GermaekeWH 19G6Onderstepoort J Vet Res
23(suppl 2):3
beagleembryo is35mm in crown-rump length and
Vandeplasstlie M1957 Vlaans Diergeieesk Tijdschr 26:60
increasesby6mnper day between the35th and
Vandeplassche M,Podliachouk L,Beaud R1970 Can J Comp
40th days (Evans 1983).
Med34:318
Vatnick I,SchoknechPA,DarrigrandR,Bell AW1991」Dev
References
Physiol 15: 351
Vonnahme KA, Hess BW,Nijland MJ et al 2006 J Anim Sci
84:3451
VonnahmeKA,Wilson ME,Ford SP 2002 1 Anim Sci 80:1311
Aiumlamai S,Fredriksson G,Nilsfors L 1992Vet Rec 131:560
Williams WL 1939 Diseases of the genital organs of domestic
Allen WR1982J Reprod Feril Supp31:57
Allen WR, Stewart F 2001 Reprod Fertil Dev 13:623
animals.Williams &Wilkins.Baltimore
Amoroso EC 1952 Placentation. ln:Parkes AS(ed) Marshall's
Wilson MEBiensen NJYoungs CR,Ford SP 1998 Biol
Reprod58:905
physiology of reproduction, vol 2. Longman, Green & Co,
London
Wooding FBP 1992 Placenia 13: 101
Zieizschmann O1924 Lehrbuch der Eniwicklungsgeschichie
Arthur GH 1956| Coup Patlol 66:345
der Hlaustiere. Paul Parey, Berlin
75
13
Chapter
Marcel Taverne
and
David Noakes
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
been thoroughlyreviewed(Spencer &Bazer2004
Maternal recognition ofpregnancy
Weems et al 2006) and clearly illustrated[Senger
2005). Knowledge ofthis topic is essential forunder-
In most domestic species, the establishment and
standing the possible background of pregnancy
maintenance of pregnancy require that the luteal
failures that are based on disruption of these early
phase of the oestrous cycle is prolonged by the per-
communication mechanisms between embryo and
sistence of a single corpus luteum(CL) or a number
dam. In addition, these mechanisms might provide
of corpora lutea (CLs). As a result of the persistence
a means for the development of tests for the early
of the luteal tissue, progesterone concentrations
diagnosis of pregnancy
remain elevated. This results in a negative feedback
on the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary with a
Sheep
resultant inhibition of follicular development and
ovulation and,in polyoestrous species, a prevention
In sheep,early work by Moor (1968) and Martal
of return to oestrus. In many species, the placenta
et al (1979) demonstrated that the conceptus pro-
subsequently replaces or supplements the luteal
source of progesterone.
acterized as existing in three or four isoforms of
In Chapter 1 the importance of the CL in regu-
molecular weight about 18-20kDa; originally it
lating the periodicity of the oestrous cycle was dis-
was named ovine trophoblast protein or oTP-1. This
cussed,and the role of prostaglandin (PG)Fa
substance hasbeen shown to be a type 1 interferon,
produced by the endometrium, in causing regres-
classified as an ovine tau interferon (oIFN-t).A sim
sion of the CL and the consequent retum to oestrus
ilar protein,bovine tau interferon (biFN-t) has been
was described. The presence of a viable, developing
found in cows (see below). It is produced by the tro-
embryo(s), however, prevents the CL from regressing
phectoderm from about day 10, ai the time that the
and thus,inpolyoestrous species,inhibits the return
blastocyst starts to elongate (Ch. 2).
10 oestrus.This phenomenon was described by Short
Details of the mechanism of luteolysis have been
(1969) as the‘maternal recognition of pregnancy,
described in Chapter 1.The effect of IFN- in the
It is particularly interesting because this maternal maternal recognition of pregnancy is to ater the
endocrine response is detectable before the blasto-dynamics of PGF, secretion at this early stage of
cyst is attached to the endometrium by microvilli.pregnancy, compared with the same stage of the
In five of the domestic species the time of mater- oestrous cycle. The number of luteolytic pulses is
nal recognition of pregnancy has been determined reduced between days 15 and 17. yet surprisingly
(lable 3.1). Mechanisms involved in the maternal 
thebasalsecretionof PGF,isincreased atthis time
recognition of pregnancy in domestic species have (Zarco et al 1988). A similar phenomenon was
76
Chapter
[31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
Table 3.1Time of maternal recognition of pregnancy
(after Findlay1981)
(Bazer et al 1991).As in sheep,it is now classified
as tauinterferon(bIFN-t),with maximum secretion
Species
Dayof maternal
Day of definite
occurringbetweendays16and 19ofgestation;it is
recognition of
attachment
first secreted at the time ofelongation of theblas-
pregnancy
tocystand,unlikeoIFN-t,continues tobesecreted
Sow
12
18
until day38ofgestation(Bartoletal 1985,Godlin
Ewe
12-13
16
etal1988).Whenitisinfusedintoheuterinelumen
Cow
16-17
18-22
of non-pregnant cyclical cows between days 14 and
14-16
17,the life span of the CLis extended.Similar results
Mare
17
havebeenobtainedfollowingtheadministrationof
Goat
recombinantbovineINF-α,usingthe sameroute of
administration,and also intramuscularly (Plante
etal1989).
observed during spontaneous prolongation of
As in the ewe,theluteolyticpatterns of PGFare
theluteal phase in unmated cyclic ewes (Zarco
altenuated in the cow in early pregnancy;however,
et al 1984).1FN-t secreted by the embryo prevents
the luteolytic pulses are abolished without major
theriseinendometrial oestrogen-αreceptors that
increases in basal secretion (Thatcher et al I995).
precedes the rise in endometrial oxytocin recep-
Itislikelythat bIFN-t exerts its antiluteolyticeffect
tors. The consequence is that IFN-t indirectly
bymodifyingoxytocinreceptors,therebyinhibiting
suppresses the expression of endometrial oxy-
the synthesis from arachidonic acid and subsequent
locin receptors.Oxytocin ofluteal(and possibly
releaseofPGFalthoughunlikein the ewe,ithas
acentral)origincan thusnolongerbind to the
beenshown thatinthecowitoccursatleastinitially
uterus, and this results in a reduction in the pul-
without a change in oestrogen receptors (Robinson
satile secretion of PGF(Spencer & Bazer 2004).
etal 1998)
Because basal production of PGF is even greater
in pregnant than in cyclic sheep,and since IFNT
Goat
does not affect expression of cyclo-oxygenase 2 in
the endometrium ofearly pregnant sheep,other
In the goat,theremoval ofconceptuses from the
researchers have emphasizedareducedluteal
uterinelumenbetweendays13and15doesnot
sensitivity to PGFand enhanced production of
prolongthelifespanof theCL,butremovalonday
luteotrophic PGEas the dominant mechanisms in
17 increases the interoestrous interval by 7-10 days.
the maternal recognition of pregnancy in this spe-
The caprine conceptus secretes a protein,originally
cies (Costine et al 2007).
designated cTp-1, which, as in other ruminants, is
clFN-t(Gnateket al 1989).As has been shown in
sheep and cattle, this protein suppresses pulsatile
Cattle
prostaglandin secretion from the endometrium.
In thecow,the importance of theblastocyst in pro-
longing the life span of the CLwas shown by the
dopregnancy in this species,when in unmated does
studies ofNorthey &French（19s0）.They found
the CL persists and fluid accumulates in the uter-
that,if the blastocyst was removed at day17or day
inelumen(hydrometra;Pieterse&Taverne 1986)
19,the interoestrous intervals were extended to25
Active immunization ofcyclicgoats against PGF
and 26 days respectively,compared with those in
results in luteal persistence and development of
whichtheembryowasremovedatday13,orthat
hydrometra(Kornalijnslijperet al 1997)
werenotmated;in thelattercasestheintervalswere
20-21 days.The antiluteolytic signalproduced by
Pig
thebovineconceptusisaprotein withamolecular
weightof24000.Originallyitwascalledbovine tro-
Although in the sow thematernal recognition of
phoblast protein(bTp-1)and was found to cross-
pregnancyalso involves theprevention ofluteo-
react immunologically with oTp-1 as well as having
lysis by uterine-derived prostaglandins, the mech-
ahigh amino-acid sequencehomologywithboth
anisins are quite different from those described
77
Part
2
Pregnancy and its parturition
above for the domestic ruiminant species.After their
As in ruminant species, the pig conceptus pro-
entry into ihe uterus on day 4,some 2 days after
duces interferons at the time of elongation (11-17
ovulation,embryos start migrating throughout
days of gestation) (Cross & Roberts 1989); to date
bothuterine horns so that by day 12 they have
two interferons have been identified,a type II (IrN-)
more or less become evenly distributed;a process
and a type I (IFN-y). The infusion of total concep-
called 'spacing. The early porcine conceptus has been
tus-derived secretory proteins into the uterine lumen
shown to convert progesterone to oestrone and
failed 1o prolong the life span of the CLs in cyclic
oestradiol-17β,as well as anoiher isomer of 16α,
sows (Harney&Bazer 1989).Their precisefunctions
17-oestradiol (Fischer et al 1985).The production
are not known but it has been postulated that they
ofoestrogens increases with the rapid elongation
may have a specific protective antiviral role or that
af the blastocysts, so that the conceprus is able to
they may act in conjunction with conceptus-derived
stimulate locally a large surface of the endome-
Oestrogens in prolonging the life span of the CLs (La
trium.This oestrogen production by the concep-
Bonnardiere 1993,Cencic&La Bonnadiere 2002).
tus plays a vital role in the maternal recognition
of pregnancy and the extension of the life span of
Horse
the CLs. The administration of exogenous oestro-
gens parenterally from day 12 in non-pregnant gilts
In the mare, the mechanisms responsible for the
has been long known to be luteotrophic, thus pro-
recognition of pregnancy are less well understood
longingthelife span of the CLs and extending the
(Allen 2005).However, evidence of the importance
of the developing conceptus hias been shown by the
tion, a wide range of maternal (endometrial) and
effects of its removal at varying stages of gestation: if
conceptus-derived producis, such as: proteases,
it was removed at 10,15 and 20 days, then tie return
calcium, growth factors, adhesion molecules and
to oestrus was 22.3, 38.0 and 47 days respectively
cytokines, are involved in a complex signalling cas-
(Hershman & Douglas 1979). However, the nature of
cade to establish pregnancy, as well as attachment
the embryonic signal that prevents luteolysis in the
and implantation (Jaeger et al 2001). After the ini-
mare is still nol clear (Stout & Allen 2001）.A low-
tial secretion of oestrogens at day ll, a second sus-
molecular-weight protein has been identified in the
tained release of oestrogens by the conceprus is
uterine flushings of mares in dioestrus; this persists
necessarybetween days14 and 18forlutealpersis-
tence beyond day25(Geisert et al 1990).Several
conceptus also produces oestradiol and oestrone
mechanisms have been proposed by which the
(Berg & Ginther 1978,Zavy et al 1979),which
conceptus-secreted oestrogens may prevent luteal
enhance the production ofa glycoprotein,uteroferrin,
regression (Ziecik 2002). These include a direct
by the uterus.PGFsecretion from the pregnant uterus
luteotrophic effect, a reduction in the endometrial
is apparently blocked, since lower concentrations
synthesis and release of PGFaThe luteotrophic
ofPGF have been ideniified in the uterine venous
effects includemaintenance of LH receptors in the
blood of pregnant mares compared with non-
CLs and secretion of prostaglandin E,to protect the
pregnant mares(Douglas&Ginther 1976)and simi-
CLs against the luteolytic action of PGF,However,
larly lower concentrations of PGFM in the peripheral
there is convincing evidence that they exert their
circulation (Kindahl et al 1982). There does not
effect by altering the transport of PGF, from an
appear lo be any sequestration of PGF in the uterine
endocrine towards the uterine vasculature)to an
lumen during early pregnancy but when endometrial
exocrine(into theuterinelumen) direction,thereby
tissue was incubated in vitro with material of con-
preventing PGF, from reaching the CLs (Bazer
ceptus origin there was a reduction in PGF synthiesis
et al 1984). Oestrogen-induced prolactin receptors
or secretion (Berglund et al 1982). Ihe importance of
in the endometrium might facilitate this redirecting.
the migration of the spherical conceptus within the
The fate of the intrauterine PGF, is not known;
uterine lumen until it becomes‘fixed’at 16-18 days of
however, fetalmembranes readily metabolize it
gestation at the base of the uterine horn has been den-
to PGFM (15-keto-13, 14-dihydro-PGF,), which
onstrated in some elegant experiments by McDowell
is inactive. The cestrogen stimulation of calcium
et al (1988). By restricting the mobility of the con-
ceptus using ligatures at various parts of the uterus, he
involved in the process.
maternal recognition was compromised so that the
78
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
CL regressed spontaneously.Itis likely that the stimu
the Doppler phenomenon,in which high-frequency
lus elicitedby themigratory conceptus in its contact
(ultrasonic) sound waves emitted from a probe
with the endometrium is comparable with the stimu-
placedontheexteriorofan animal orin therectum
lus associatcdwith therapidelongationoftheblasto-
arereflected atanalteredfrequencywhentheystrilke
cyst in ruminants and the pig.
a moving object or particles,e.g.the fetal heart,
fetal bodyparts orbloodflowing infetal or uterine
arteries.Thereflectedwaves arereceived by the same
Dog
probe;the differences in frequencies are converted
Thebitchis atypical in that thelengthoftheluteal
into audible sounds and amplified.
phase(metoestris/dioestrus)hardly differs from
Theultrasonicamplitude depth analyser(A-mode)
that of pregnancy. Surgical remioval of the nonpreg-
relies upon a transducerhead that emits high-fre
nant uterus inmetoestrus/dioestrus does not pre-
quency sound waves and receives the sound reflected
vent the demise of the CLs (Okkens et al 1985),
atinterfacesoftissueswitha differentacousticimped-
and there appears to benoneed for maternal rec
ance.The echoes are shown asa one-dimensional
ognition ofpregnancy to maintain the life span
displayofechoamplitudesforvarious deptis,usu-
of the CLs and the continuation of progesterone
ally on an oscilloscope but also on the newer light-
production.However,it may seem a conuradiction
emitting diodes or by‘squeak-producing'devices.
that CLs ofboth the pregnant and non-pregnant
This has been used successfully in many species,
bitch require luteotrophic support by prolactin,
notably the sow.
especially during the second half of their life span
Amore advanced ultrasoundtechnology is the
(Onclinetal2000).
one that uses theB(brighiness)modeto display the
echoes.It has become a very versatile tool in study-
ing a widerange of reproductiveevents in many spe-
Cat
cies,in particular the mare (see Ch.26).Readers
Thelength oftheluteal phasein themated but
whowishtoextendtheirknowledgeofthistech-
nique arerecommended to consult Ginther(1986),
days,while in pregnant females luteal progesterone
Taverne and Willemse(i989)and the textbook by
production continuesfor another20 days.Litule is
Kihn elal(1994)covering themajor applications
known about themechanismsunderlyingthemater-
inreproduction ofdomesticspecies.
nal recognition of pregnancy in the queen.
Itis worthwhileoutliningbrieflytheprinciples
behind the technique The probe, or transducer as
Methods of pregnancy detection
itshouldbecalled,isappliedtotheskinsurface or
inserted into the rectum. The transducer contains
numbers of piezoelectric crystals,which,when sub
A variety of methods can be used to detect preg-
jected to aneleciriccurrent,expandorcontract and
nancy;many are common to all specieswhereas
producehigh-frequency soundwaves.When thiese
others arespecies-specific.There arefourbroadcat-
soundwavesaretransmitted throughtissues apro-
egories:managemental, clinical,ultrasonographic
portion, depending upon the characteristics of the
and laboratory-based.Of these,thefirst two aregen-
tissue,will be reflected backto the transducer.The
erallywell tried and tested,whereas thelatter two,
returning echoes will compress the same piezocrys-
especially ultrasonography, have been improved
tals,resulting in the production of electric impulses,
and refined extensively in recent years. For this rea-
which are displayed in B-mode as a two-dimen-
son, the broad principles of ultrasonography will be
sional display of dots on a screen. The brightness of
reviewedbeforethemethods applicabletothevari-
thedotswillbeproportional to the amplitudeofthe
ous species are described.
returning echoes and hence will provide an image
ranging from black through various shades of grey
Ultrasonography
to white.
Liquids do notreflectultrasound and thus are
Threetypesofultrasound techniquehavebeenused
depicted as black on the screen, i.e. non-echogenic,
for pregnancy diagnosis. The ultrasonic fetal pulse
whereas at interfaces of solid tissues, such as bone
detector was the first type used.This is based upon or cartilage, a highproportion of the sound waves is
79
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
reflected,i.e.they are echogenic and appearwhite
onthe screen.Since a tissue-gas interfacecan result
Pregnancy and its detection
in up to 99% of the sound wavesbeing reflected,it
in the-Horse
is important that air should not he trapped between
thetransducerface and thetissues tobeexamined.
Endocrinology
Forthis reason,a couplingmedium orgel(usually
methyl cellulose)is applied tothetransducer face
The endocrine changes in the mare during preg-
beforeitisplacedon the skin orrectalmucosa so
nancy are particularly unusual whencompared with
thatairis eliminated.Itis also important to select an
other domesticspecies,becauseof thedevelopment
area that isrelatively hairless,oralternatively it may
of temporary hormone-producing structures, the
be necessary to clip the hair
endometrial cups.
The technique is frequently referred to as real-
Afterovulationandtheformationofthecorpus
time ultrasound or imaging.This just implies that
haemorrhagicum and the CL, plasma progester-
there are live or moving displays in which the
one concentrations in the peripheral plasma rise
echoesarerecordedcontinuously.Thetransducers
to7-8ng/ml by6 days.Theypersist at about these
mayhave thepiezocrystals orelements arranged
levels for the first 4weeks of gestation but there is
sideby side in lines (hence they are referred to as
frequently a transientfall at about28days afterovu-
linear array transducers);the field under exami-
lationto5ng/ml（Holtanetal1975),followedbya
nation andthetwo-dimensionalimageareinthe
laterrise.Publishedvaluesforprogesteroneinthe
shapeof a rectangle.Alternatively,inSector trans-
blood and plasma vary considerably between lab-
ducers thereis a singlecrystal,which oscillates or
oratories. This is because there are other progester-
rotates to produce a fan-shaped beam.They allow
one-like substancesthat cross-react withthe antisera
ready access tomostofthiethoracicandabdom-
duringthe assay;forthisreasonseveral authorsrefer
inal viscera; although very superficial structures
to'total progestogen'Ievels.
maynotbereadilyidentified berauseoftheshape
In the early part of the second month of pregnancy,
ofthe beam.Sector scanners require less slin sur-
the endometrial cups areformed.These are discrete
face contact,which can reduce the time required
outgrowthsof denselypacked tissuewithinthegravid
to examine each animal; hence they are used for
horn,derived as a result of theinvasion of fetal tro-
the transabdominal approach,especiallyin sheep.
phoblast cellsinto endometrium,where they subse-
quentlygiverisetotheendometrialcupcells(Moor
more robust,and they produce a rectangularimage,
et al 1975).Usually,there are about 12 cups present
which is easier to interpret.An intermediate form is
atthejunctionofthegravidhorn andbodyasacir-
the so-calledcurved array transducet,whichinfact
cumferentialband（seeFig.26.3).Theendometrial
is a modified linear array with a curved surface.The
cups produce pregnant mare serum gonadotrophin
transducer should be small enough tobe cupped in
（PMSG),whichisnowreferredtoasequinechorionic
ihehand,smoothincontour,waterproofandeasy
gonadotrophin or eCG.lt is first demonstrable in the
to clean（Boyd&Omran 1991).Forgoodbiosecu-
blood38-42daysafterovulation,reachesamaximum
rity the transducer shouldbethoroughlycleaned,
at 60-65 days,declines thereafter and disappears by
especially when the same equipment is used on dif-
150 days of gestation (Fig.3.1).eCG has both ‘fol-
ferent farms.
licle-stimulating hornone(FSH)-like'and luteiniz-
Each transducer produces ultrasonic waves at fre-
ing hormone(Lil)-like’activity,and it is generally
quencies between 1 and 10MHz. The most commonly
assumed that,in association with pituitary gonado-
used frequenciesare3.5,5 and,morerecently,7.5MHz.
trophins,it provides the stimulus for theformation
Thelower-frequencytransducers givebetter tissuepen-
ofaccessory Cls(Allen1975)andregulates lutealste-
etrationbutpoorerresolution.Since,using thetrans-
roidogenesis(Daels et al 1998).These structures start
rectal approach,the structures requiring imaging
lo formbetween 40 andG0 days of gestation,either
arewithin a few centimetresofthetransducer head,
asaresultofovulation,in thesamewaythattheCL
high-frequency equipment is the most effective.So
ofdioestrus is formed(32%),orasa resultof luteini-
the choice of the shape and frequency of the trans-
zation ofanovuilatory follicles(G8%)(Squire etal
ducer mainly depends on the type of investigation to
1974). Because of ihe presence of the accessory Cls
be performed.
the progestogen concentrations in the peripheral
08
Chapter
31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
Ovulation
Parturition
-.......eCG
Progestogens
10
-Totaloestrogens
800
100
(/6d)
(/
6u)
(w/n)
ens
Su
400
Total oestroge
ab
09
rogestog
eC
100
200
300
Days
Fig.3.1Schematicrepresentation of the trends in hormone concentrations inthe peripheral circulation of themareduringpreg-
nancy andatparturition.eCG,equine chorionicgonadotrophin.
circulation increase,to reach and maintain a plateau
Prolactin levels show no distinct pattern,thiere
fron about 50-140 days and thenn decline (Fig. 3.1).
being considerable variation within and between
By180-200daystheconcentrationsarebelow1ng/
mares,but there is some evidence of a slight
ml,and they remain so until about 300 days ofgesta-
increase towards the end of gestaiion(Nett etal
1975).
before foaling and subsequently declinerapidly to
The main source of progesterone in early preg-
very low levels immediately after parturition.
nancyisthe'true’CLorCLverum(formed fromthe
Concentrations of total oestrogens in the periph-
folliclethatovulatedandgeneraledtheoocytethat
eral circulation during the first 35 days of preg-
wasfertilized)and thie accessory CLs.The true CLis
nancy are similar to those of dioestrus,although
active forthefirst 3months of gestation and regresses
thereis a temporary production of oestrogen by
at the same time as the accessory CLs(Squire &
theembryo at12-20 days(Mayeretal1977).After
Ginther 1975).Theplacentamust takeover thepro-
this time theyincreasetoreachaplateaubetween
duction of progesterone after theregression of the
40and60daysatvaluesslightlyabovethosethat
accessory corpora lutea and, although concentra-
occurbefore ovulation,about3ng/ml;the rise is
tions fall in the peripheral circulation,they remain
probablydue to theincreasedfolliculardevelop-
high in theplacental tissue and must maintain preg-
ment associated with eCG production.After day
nancy byvirtue ofa localized effect(Short 1957).
60it islikely that theincreaseis duetotheactivity
When ovariectomy isperformedat25-45 days of
ofthe fetus orplacenta（Terqui &Palmer1979).
gestation,mares will abort or resorb the fetus;when
Maximumvalues are observed atabout210 days,
itisperformedafter50daystheresponseisvariable;
themain sourcebeingthefetalgonads(Cox1975),
between 140 and 210 days the pregnancy is contin-
with a gradual decline towards the time of foal-
ueduninterruptedto term.Thusafter50 daysthere
ingandaprecipitous fallpost-partum.Themain
is evidenceofanon-ovariansourceofprogesterone
oestrogensinthemareareoestroneandaketonic
andby140daystheovariesarenolongernecessary
steroid,equilin;oestradiol-17β,oestradiol17aand
for the maintenance of pregnancy (Holtan et al
equilenin are alsopresent.
1979).
81
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
The conceptual swelling of the uterine horn pro-
Changes in the genital organs
trudesventrally and craniocaudally butnot dorsally
Conception to 40 days
andgrawsslowly duringthephaseoforganogenesis,
ieuntil about 30 days.Thereafter,growth is faster
Ovaries.TheClverumcanonlybepalpatedperrectum
and the swelling progressively extends to the tip of the
for2-3daysafteritsformation.Thereafter,although
pregnant horn.Twins are usually disposed at the base
itpersistsfor5or6months,itcannotbeidentified.In
ofeachhorn,andinthissituation therewill betwo
pony mares there is some palpablefollicular develop-
groups of endometrial cups.If both twins are present
mentatabout15days,whileduringthenext14days
in thesamehorn,only onesetof cups will bepresent.
there is quite a marked increase in folliculogenesis
Vagina and cervix. During early pregnancy, the
with a large number of follicles less than 3cm diam-
vagina becomes progressively paler and dryer and is
eter giving the ovaries abunch of grapes'appearance.
covered bythin,tacky mucus.Thecervix is small and
Ovulations duringthisperiod arerare(Allen1975).
tightlyclosed;theexternal osisgraduallyfilledbya
Uterus.Duringlatedioestrus andoestrus,theuterusis
plug of mucus and points eccentrically.
softand theendometriumisoedematous.Afterovu-
lation,toneincreasesand theuterusbecomesmore
40-120 days
tubular;these textural changes are not marked in the
non-pregnant animal,in which they subside after the
Ovaries. This period is characterized by marked
CL begins 10 regress at 10-14 days,but in the preg-
Ovarian activity,with multiple follicular develop-
nant marethe CLpersists,and the toneofiheuterus
ment causing one or both ovaries to become tem-
increases to a maximum at19-21 days,when the
porarily larger than during oestrus,in some cases
conceptus causes a soft,thin-walledventral cornual
very much larger. Ovulations, forming accessory
swellingclosetotheuterinebody.Thehorninvolved
CLs,and luteinization of anovular follicles occur.
is notnecessarily on the same side as the ovary
Follicular activityhasusuallysubsidedby100days,
which produced the ovum,because there is exten-
and the CLs begin to regress. In pony mares, Allen
sivemobility of theconceptus within thehorns and
(1971) found ovulations in pregnancy between 21
uterinebody beforefixation,which occurs between
and112days,with thehighest incidencesbetween
days 16 and18.Most clinicians have reported more
days 40-42,54-56 and 63-66.
equine pregnancies in the right horn -for example,
Uterus.The conceptus completely occupies the preg-
Vandeplassche(1957)noted 64%-althoughin
nant horn by about 60 days,afterwhich thebody
poniesthereisonlya smallmajorityofright-horn
and then the non-pregnant horn are invaded by the
pregnancies.The excess of right-side pregnan-
allantochorionic membrane.The pregnant horn
cies,coupled with the slightly greater incidence of
nowchangesfromatransversetoalongitudinal dis-
left-side ovulations,indicates a major embryonic
position in themare's abdomen.By 1o0 days the
migration from left to right in horses generally.
fluid-illed uterus is a somewhat tense swelling on
There is,however, good evidence that other factors
the pelvic brim.At this time the small ferus,closely
can influence the hom in which pregnancy occurs.
enveloped in theannion,isfloatinginarelatively
Ina survey of937thoroughbredmares,Bulterfield
largevolumeofallantoicfluid.
&Mathews(1979) found that there was no signifi-
cant differenicebetween thenumbersofright-orleft-
120daystoterm
hornpregnancies:469left and 468right.However,
when they examined the results formares that con-
Ovaries. With the gradual regression of all luteal
elements and folicles the ovaries become progres-
nificantlygreater number ofright-honpregnancies.
s
Thereis alsogoodevidencethatimplantationusu-
and downwardsby thegravid uterus.Exceptinvery
ally occurs on the opposite side to that of the previ-
largemarestheycanusuallybepalpated throughout
ouspregnancy.Feo(1980)found that19of22mares
pregnancy.
that conceived at the foal heat were pregnant in the
Uterus.Gradual distension of theuterusby thefetus
oppositehorn to that of theprevious gestation.Allen
and fluids causes increased tension ontheutero-
&Newcombe（1981) foundthat in82.5%ofcases
ovarian ligament, and the anterior border of the
the conceptuswas present in theopposite horn.
uterus sinks downwards and forwards.After the
82
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
8thmonth thefetusnormally assumes ananterior
Rectal palpation
longitudinal presentation and ventral position (see
Ch. 8 for definitions of these terms). Except in very
The presence of follicles during the third week after
large mares the fetus can be palpated throughout
service does not necessarily indicate that the mare is
this period.Fremitus can be detected in the uterine
returning to oestrus. Follicles are normally present
arteries, although it is less obvious than in the cow.
during the first 3 months of gestation, and give con-
siderable size to the ovaries.
Uterine tone is marked at 17-21 days of pregnancy,
Methods of pregnancy diagnosis
when the uterine cornua can be palpated as resil-
jent tubular organs. If no conceptual swelling is pal-
Managemental methods
pable, then this tone should only be interpreled as
Failure to return to oestrus is a good sign that a
suggestive of pregnancy The uterine body and non-
mare is pregnant. The demonstration of the signs of
pregnant horn remain tonic uintil at least day50 of
oestrus (see Ch. 1) usually requires the presence of a
gestation. Marked uterine tone may also be found
teaserstallion,although somemareswill respond to
in: the puerperal mare covered at the foal heat; acute
geldings and to androgenized geldings. It is prefer-
endometritis; and pseudopregnancy,i.e.when early
able that mares should be accustomed io the teasing
embryonic death is followed by autolysis or expul-
routine,which should commence 16 days after
sion of the conceptus but the uterus retains the tex-
service and continue for a further 6 days.
ture ofpregnancybecause of the persistent CL
False positives will occur for the following
Palpation of the conceptus is first possible at
reasons:
17-21 days, when it is a small soft swelling of 2.4-
the mare has a silent heat, a common problem
2.8 cm in diameter or is an apparent'gap'in the oth-
when thefoalis at foot
erwise tonic horn.It is more easily felt between 21
and 30 days, but still only the cranioventral portion
·the mare becomes anoestrous as a result of lacta-
of the distension can be appreciated.A1 25 days,the
tion or environmental factors
conceptual swelling is 3-3.4 cm.At 30 days, its dor-
· the mare has a prolonged luteal phase, yet has not
soventral diameter is 3-4 cim. At 35 days, it is 4.5-
conceived (see Ch.26)
6cm and at40days 6-7cin in diameter-about
· the mare has a prolonged luteal phase associated
the size of a tennis ball, Thereafter, it is not pos-
with embryonic death;this is referred to as'pselt-
sible for the conceptual swelling to be completely
dopregnancy'(see Ch. 26).
cupped within the palm of the hand. By 60 days,
False negatives will occur in a few mares, which
it is becoming oval in shape and measures approxi-
will show oestrus at this time although they are
mately 13x9cm,while by90 days it has increased to
approximately 23x14cm.
pregnant.
There is a natural variation in the size of the con-
ceptual swelling in mares of similar size and ovula-
Clinical methods
tiondates owing to the variation in thevolumes of
fetal fluids present. However, swellings that appear
Vaginal examination
small for the given stage of pregnancy shiould be re-
This is best done using a speculum; however, man-
examined later to exclude the possibility of resorp-
ual exploration can be used. The vaginal mucosa
tion (hence the clinician should keep written records
is pale pink, the mucus is scant and sticky, and the
of the findings for later comparisons). Twin concep-
cervix small and tightly closed;the external os is
tuses can be identified up to 60 days.After this, a sin-
gradually filled with thick, tacky mucus, although
gleconceptus islikely toinvolvebothhornsandthe
it is not really apparent as a plugand points
swelling becomes more diffuse. Care must be taken
eccentrically.
not toconfuse apartiallyfilledurinary bladderwith
False positives can occur in early preg-
the pregnant uterus during the 70-100-day period,
nancy because the vagina is indistinguishable
or with an inflated large colon during days 90-120;
from that seen in dioesirus. Errors can also be
whenin doubta search should bemadefor theova
made as a result of prolonged luteal phase and
ries in order to establish an anatomical link between
pseudopregnancy.
them and the uterusvia the utero-ovarian ligament.
83
Part
21
At about 100 days,it is ofen possible to ballotte
B-mode has been used extensively in this species
the fetus as it floats in the fetal fluid of the uterine
(Fig.3.2). With this imaging mode and a 5.0MHz
body. Growth of the fetus and reduction in tension of
transducef, the earliest gestational age that preg-
the fetal sacs enable the examiner to palpate parts of
nancy has been confirmed in thie mare is 9 days,
thefetus in the uterine body from the end of the4th
when the conceptual vesicle appears as a black
month onwards.Itmaybedifficult tolocatebetween
sphere of about 3mm in diameter. By 11 days the
the 5th and 7th months in large pluriparous mares,
vesiclehasbeenidentified in98%ofponiesand
and very occasionally in mares near term. The pal-
horses examined(Ginther1986).Theconceptus at
this stage moves freely within the uterus and has
in the mesovarium, are reassuring features.
beenidentified inallparts oftheuterinehorns
False-positive results by rectal palpation can be
andintheuterinebody just cranial to thecervix;in
obtainedeitherwhninrarenstancesrenanys
fact,itisfoundmorefrequentlyinthebodyatthis
confused with pyometra (see Ch.26) or when,in the
stage.Rapid growthof theconceptual vesicleoccurs
very early stages,the uterinetone duetoincomplete
from9-16days,withevidenceofsomereduiction
involutionmightbe assumed tobe duetopregnancy
in growth rate from 16-28 days,before it increases.
in mares that have been served at thefoal heat and
This plateauin growthmaybe an artefact because,
in those that have developed apseudopregnancy.lt
with a reduced turgidity of thevesicle,it is capable
shouldalsoberememberedthatmaresmaysuffer
of being compressed by the uterine walls. This is
embryonicorfetaldeathwithresorptionorabor-
also associated with an apparent change in the
tion aftertheyhavebeenconfirmedpregnant.
shapeof thevesicle from spherical,to oval,to trian
False-negative results can be obtained if there is
gular;it thenbecomes irregularinoutline,Fixation
confusion over the service date,ie.laterthan the one
at the base of the horn occurs between 16 and 18
recorded,orif theuterus isnotpalpatedcompletely.
days,whenthediameter oftheconceptualvesicleis
about19-24mm（Ginther1986)
Ultrasonographic methods
Twin ovulationsare very common,especially in
thoroughbred and draught mares,where they can
The Doppler and A-mode ultrasonographic meth
occurinupto25%ofovulations.Thebirthoflive
odsareof littleornovalueinthemare;however,
CONCEPTUS
Fig.3.2Transrectal B-modeultrasound imagesof thepregnantuterus of themare and its contents,using a7.5MHz linear
transducer.Scaleincm.(A)Conceptus at 13days(left）,whichis9mmin diameterwitha dorsal andventral specularecho.
Adjacent ovary (right)showing corpusluteum verum.(B)Conceptus at16 days;note thatitis starting to loseits spherical shape.
84
Chapter
31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
AUHERG
C
E
F
Fig.3.2continued(C) Ccnceptus at 21 days;note embryo at 5o'clock and th ckening ofuterine wallextending from 8o'clock
to 10 o'clock. (D) Conceptus at 30 days; note embryo (e), which is sarting tc move towards the dorsal pole of the vesicle.
(E) Conceptus at35 days;nole embryo(e) and that theyolk sac has nowregressed leaving only the anechoicalantoi sac.
twins is relatively uncommon,ranging between
Whilethedetectionofdoubleovulationsby
0.8% and 3% depending upon the breed. 1he rea-
B-mode ultrasound has enabled beter manage-
sons for the discrepancy are:
ment,and hence prevention of the problem,it is
fertilization failure
still possible for double ovulations to go unde-
tected.Thus,early identification of twin embryos,
death of one or both embryos before or aficr
preferablybetweendaysI2and14beforefixation
fixation
occurs, can enable more effective management
death ofone fetus,which isrelatively uncommon
ofthe problem(see Ch.26).For this reason it is
abortion of both fetuses (see Ch. 26). This is the most
important toscanthewholeoftheuterinebody
common sequel and is obviously the most costly.
and uterine horns.
85
Part
121
Pregnancy and itsparturition
In additionto thedetectionofpregnancy,itisals
levelsofeCGthatarebriefly sustained andcannot
possible to determine the sex of the foal;however,
be detected,using the method.
thisrequires that thepersonhas good-qualityequip-
False-pesitiveresults are obtained as a result of
ment, as well as considerable experience of transrec-
embryonic or fetal death,cither after the blood
talultrasonographyandinterpretationofultrasonic
samplewascollected orin sorne casesbefore.Once
images.The method is based on determining the
theendometrial cups haveformed,they will persist
relationshipofthegenital tubercleto surrounding
and still secrete eCGeven if the fetus has died.They
structures.The genital tubercleis the embryonic pre-
regressatthetimethat theywouldhavedoneif the
cursor ofthepenis in the male and clitorisin the
pregnancy had continued normally.For this reason,
female.As the fetus develops, the tubercle moves
ownersshould alwaysbe warned oftheproblems,
fromapositionbetween the hindlegstonearthe tail
to save subsequent disappointment,and certifi
in the female,andnear theumbilicus in themale.
cates should indicate that a positive result has been
The optimumgestational age is between59 and 68
obtainedwith anexplanationofthesignificanceof
days（Curran & Ginther 1989),although accurate
sucha result
resultswere obtainedup to99 days(Curran1992);
Bloodoestrogens.A method of detectingpregnancy
it becomes more difficult after this stage.
by determining the concentration of total oestro-
gens in the peripheral blood has been suggested by
Laboratorymethods
Terqui&Palmer(1979).By 85daysofgestation the
concentration shouldexceed themaximum values
Milk or blood progestogens.As can be seen in Figure
obtained in non-pregnant mares.
3.1 in the pregnant mare, plasma progestogens
Urinary oestrogens.Oestrogens
(oestroneand
concentrationsremainelevated justbefore,or dur-
oestradiol-17β)arepresent intheurine ofpregnant
ing,the time when the mare would havereturned
mares in sufficient amounts for accurate detection
tooestrus.Bloodormillksamplescollected 16-22
byachemicalmethod(Cuboni 1937)berween150
daysafterserviceshouldhaveelevatedprogestogen
and300daysofgestation.Amodificationofthistest
concentrations in pregnant mares, while in non-
(Cox&Galina1970) canbecarriedout easily by the
pregnantmaresthelevelswould belowandtypi-
practitioner.Verylittleequipmentisrequiredand
calofthioseobtained at oestrus.Although Hunt
theresults are easy to interpret.
Because the presence of blood oestrogens depends
nosing pregnancy using thismethod,false-positive
ona functionalplacenta,falsepositives,asseen with
results occur with aprolongedluteal phaseand，in
the eCG test,do not arise.This chemical test is not
general, the method is not very reliable.
sensitive enough to identify the urinary oestrogens
Identification ofeCG.Blood samples should becol-
ofoestrus.It is nearly100% accuratebetween150
lected,preferablybetween50and90daysafterservice,
and 300 days.
althoughitispossibletoidentifythehormonebetween
40and120days.Thetestisperformedonserum
Optimum timefordiagnosing
Originally,biological methodswereusedtoiden-
tify the presence of thie gonadotrophin.The most
pregnancy
frequently used method was the injection of serum
The pmumtme,aswithall iesisasarlyan
into3v-week-oldimmaturemice,a positiveresult
as accurately aspossible.In thoroughbred mares in
beingthe production ofripe follicles in heovaries
particular,where twin ovulationsare common,the
and thepresenceofaswollenenlargeduterus.
earlyidentificationoftlieresultanttwinconceptuses,
should they be present, is important (see Ch. 26).
diffusionor thehaemagglutination inhibition tech-
The use of transrectal B-mode ultrasonic imaging
nique.Thelattermethod isavailablecommercially
has enabled early identification,which isimportant
in a simple kit form; all the reagents are provided,
sincetermination ofpregnancyinthecaseof twins
and it is possible for the procedure to be carried out
must be carried out before the endometrial cups
inanyveterinarypracticelaboratory.
develop. It is important to stress that good resulis
False-negative results areobtained if theblood
depend upon good equipment andknowledgeable
sample is taken either too early or too late,and for
interpretation of theimages. Similarly,many of the
this reason it is important to sample at the opti-
carlierchanges in uterine tone can be identified only
mum times stated above.Somemares produce low
by anexpert usingsequentialpalpation
86
Chapter
13]
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
If the mare is not pregnant and hasnot been
produce progesteronein vitro and a positive venous-
observed in oestrus, orif she is in a prolonged luteal
arterial difference of the plasma progesterone con-
phase or anoestrus, the necessary action can be taken
centration was maintained after ovariectomy on day
(see Ch. 26).
250butnoton day270ofgestation（Pimentelet
al1986).Therefore the placenta may only secrete
significantamounts ofprogesteroneduringa lim-
Hazards ofpregnancy diagnosis
itedperiodofgestation(from about days150-265)
There is no evidence that careful palpation of the gen-
when itcaneasily substituteforlutealprogesterone
ital tract will cause failure of the pregnancy.In those
after induced luteolysis.
mares where fetal death occurs after a normal rec-
The hormonal changes during pregnancy are illus-
tal examination has been performed, the pregnancy
trated in Figure 3.3.Progesterone concentrations in
would have failed in the absence of the examination.
the peripheral circulation during thefirst 14 days of
gestation are similar to those of dioesirus; thereaf
ter, those of thenon-pregnant cow decline sharply
Pregnancy and its detection
from about the 18th day after ovulation (see Fig.
in cattle
1.29).In thepregnant cow,there isnormally only
a slight decline at ihis stage with a rapid recovery.
Thereafter the concentration increases slightly dur-
Endocrinology
ing pregnancy until it starts to decline at about
The main source ofprogesterone for the mainte
20-30 days prepartum.Oestrogen concentrations
nance of pregnancy in the cow is the CL, the pla-
during early and mid-gestation are low,less than
centa producing only small amounts. The results of
100pg/ml;however, towards the end of gestation,
ovariectomyandremovaloftheCLarecontroversial.
in particular after day 250,oestrogen concentra-
Up to about200days ofgestation,removalofthe
tions increase to reach peak values 2-5 days pre-
ovarycontainingthe CL,orablationofthe CLeither
partum of 7ng/ml estrone sulphate and 1.2ng/ml
surgically orwith theuse ofPGFusuallyresults in
estrone(Thatcheretal1980).Theserapidly decline
abortion.However,after this stage until just before
fromaboutShoursprepartum tolowlevels imme-
term,pregnancy very oftencontinues.Placental cells
diately post-partum.
Ovulation
Parturition
Progesterone
10
......Prolactin
Totaloestrogens
400
B000
(1山/6u)
（/6d）
(1/6u)
esterone
LL
4000
Prolact
oestro
Proge
B
Total
150
200
100
250
Fig.3.3chematicrepresentationofthe trendsinhormone concentrationsinthe peripheralcirculationofacowduring
pregnancy and at parturition.
87
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
Both FSH and LH concentrations remain low dur-
R
ing gestation and show no significant fluctuations.
So there is no evidence to suggest that the prepar-
tum clecline of maternal plasma progesterone con-
centrationswhichstartsalreadyseveralweeksbefore
calvingwith a moreprecipitousfall at about30-40
hoursbeforedelivery,is due towithdrawal ofmater-
nal gonadotrophic support. Prolactin is low during
pregnancy until justbeforecalvingwhenitincreases
Fig.3.4Ovaries of the cowat35days of pregnancy.Fetal
frombasalconcentrationsof50-60ng/mltopeak
body length（FBL)1.6cm;ccrpusluteum verum (CLV)yellow.
values of 320ng/ml 20 hours prepartum,until a
subsequent decline tobasal concentrationsby30
hours post-partum.Bovine placental lactogen can
be detected in the peripheral circulation of the dam
after thefirst month ofgestation,increasingdramati
callytomaximumconcentrationsbetween200days
and term(Bolander etal 1976,Forsyth 1986).The
roleof thishormone is still unclearbut it appears to
haveprolactin-andgrowth-hormone-like activities.
Changes in the genital organs
Ovaries.In the cow,the CLofpregnancy remains
Fig.3.5Ovaries of the cow at 48 daysof pregnancy.FBL
3.4cm;CLV orange.
atitsmaximum sizethroughoutthewholeofthe
periodofgestation and a significant decreaseisonly
seen aftercalving(Ginther1998).Fundamentallyit
isindistinguishablefromthefullydevelopedCLof
dioestrus but there are certain features bywhich its
persistence can be recognized when examined post-
mortem.The chief one is that the protrusion of the
R
structurefromthesurfaceoftheovaryislessmarked
and the epithelium overit iswhite and scarred.The
CL of dioestrus often contains a central lacuna,
whereas during pregnancy this becomes filled.lt is
considered by some that theCL of pregnancy is larger
than that of dioestrus.The author's series indicates
that,ifthis is thecase,itistoo slighttobeof signif
cance,and moreover that there areconsiderablevari-
Fig.3.6 Ovaries of the cow at70 days of pregnancy.FBL
ationsin theweightsofpregnancyCLsinindividuals
6.3cm;CLV yellow-orange.
(3.9-7.5g),which bear norelationship to the dura-
tion of pregnancy. The colour of the CL of pregnancy
however,differs somewhat from that of dioestrus.
There is awiderrange from yellow through orange to
light brown,and theappearance of theluteal tissue
R
is duller.Figures 3.4-3.9 show examples of bovine
ovaries (natural size) obtained from gravid genital
tractsrecovered after slaughter.Notethevariations
in the shapeof the ovaries and theposition of the CL
of pregnancyIn addition,hese sagittal sections al
show that folliculogenesis andregression continue
Fig.3.7Ovaries of the cow at 100 days of pregnancy.FBL
throughout pregnancy (Ginther et al 1996).
16cm;CLVyellow-brown.
88
Chapter
31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
R
below, the pelvic brim and that on the non-gravid
side a little nearer thepelvis.In occasional cases both
ovaries may be detected aslateas day 150,although
by thistime thereisa risk that theywillbe confused
with cotyledons. In the later stages of pregnancy it is
not so much that they are beyond the reach of the
hand as that one is unabletodepress therecium suf
ficiently deeplyintothe abdomen tolocate them.
Uterus. During the early stages, detection of an
increase in size of the uterus affordsstrongevidence
of pregnancy, but the recognition of these changes
Fig.3.8 Ovaries of the cow at 120 days of pregnancy.FBL
necessitates an appreciation of the size of the qui-
25cm; CLV orange.
(Fig.3.10,Table 3.2）,the quantities of fluid pres
ent in therespectivefetal sacs and the disposition of
R
those sacs in the uterus.
At 28 days of pregnancy, the amniotic sac is spher-
ical in outline and about 2cm in diameter.It occu-
pies thefree portionof thegravid horn.The allantoic
sac is about 18cm long but the amount of contained
fluid is insufficient to cause a noticeable (ie.exter-
nally visible) distension and its width is negligible.
It occupies almost the whole of the gravid cornu. At
this stage the embryo is 0.8cm long, a quite inap-
preciable size.
At 35 days, fetal body length is 1.8 cm and the
Fig.3.9Ovariesof the cow at90 days cfpregnancy.CLV
orange.
diameter of the spherical amniotic sac 3cm.They
still occupy the free part of the cornua.The con-
joined portions of the cornua and the freeportion of
As pregnancy advances, theposition of the ovaries
the non-gravid cornua are not appreciably changed.
changes. Their location, however, in non-gravid ani-
It is possible, particularly in a heifer easy of exam-
mals is not constanit. In heifers and young cows they
ination, that the distension in the free part of the
are generally situated on each side of, and slightly
gravid cornua will be detected.
below, the conjoined cornua at the level ofthe pelvic
At 60 days the fetal crown-rump length isapprox-
brim. They may lie in the pelvic cavity. In multipa-
imately 6cm.The amniotic sac is oval and tense,
rous animals they are often situated in the abdomi-
nal cavity5-8cm in front of the pelvis.where their
This causes the free part of the gravid horn to be
detection is more difficult. Consequent on the
distended to a width of about 6.5cm, compared
increase in the weight of the uterus and hypertro-
with 2-3cm in the quiescent stage in theheifer and
phy of the ovarian and terine ligaments,the ovaries
young cow. In such subjects this distension may be
pass deeper and deeper into the abdominal cavity as
recognized.
pregnancy advances. From the fifth month onwards
At 80 days the ferus measures 12cm and the total
theweight and size of the uterus issuch that it sinks
quantity of fluid is about 1 litre. Distension of the
down into the abdomen to rest on the abdominal
free part of the gravid horn varies from 7-10cm,
floor.Hammond (1927) found the weighr of the
while that of theconjoinedpart isbut little greatcr
uterus and its contentsinprimigravidae at 5monthis
than normal.Thegreater length ofthegravid hon
to be some 48 kg.Provided that the animal is com-
can often be detected.
By 90 days,uterine distension is such thatit can be
to palpate the ovaries with reasonable certainty up
detected with accuracy in the great majority of cases.
to day 100,by which time inhieifers the one on the
The conjoined cornua are tense,thiegravid one hav
gravid sideis about 8-10cm in front of,and slightly
ing a width of about 9 cm and the non-gravid one
89
Part
2
Pregnancy and itsparturition
P
Fig.3.10 Genital tracts of a nulliparous heifer (N)and a pluriparous (seven calves) cow (P).
Table 3.2 Uterine dimensions (non-gravid organ)
Unbred nulliparous
Pluriparous cow (cm)
heifer (cm)
Width af conjoined cornua immediately anterior to cervix
2.5
4.0
Width of each cornu at external bifurcation
2.0
3.5
Length cf externally connectedparts of cornua
9.0
14.0
Length of free portions of cornua
15.0
20.0
Thickness of wali of cornua
0.5
1.2
Length of cervix
5.0
10.0
Widthofcervix
3.0
5.0
about 4.5 cn. In nost individuals the organ is still
By the 4th month,the uterus sinksbelow the pel
high up at the pelvic brim and it is generally pos-
vic brim and distension is less easy to recognize as
sible topass the hand well over therurvature of the
the fluid gravitates towards the extremities of the
distended horn,but in some multigravid cows the
cornua.The cervix lies on thie pelvic brim.
uterus lies in the abdomen and topalpate it effec
Changes in the size and shape of the gravid uterus
tively it is necessary to retract the organ.Sometimes
during the first 4 months of gestation are shown in
it is possible to detect the fetus at this stage. Tapping
Figure 3.11.
the distendedcornuawith thefingersmayreveal the
Fetus.Several workers (Hammond 1927,Winters
fetus rather like a piece of wood floating in the fluid
et al 1942) have recorded fetal body lengths (crown-
beneath. By gently squeezing the uterus one may be
rump) during the various stages of pregnancy. Data
able to pick up the fetus.Its body lengtl is about
have been collected chiefly from pregnant heifers
15 cm1.
and thus allowance must be made for the greater
90
B
Fig.3.11Gravid genital tracts from cows atdifferent stagesof gestation.(A)Right horn at 6weeks.(B)Right hornat 12weeks.
(C)Lefthornat16weeks.(D)Righthornat19weeks.
91
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
Table3.3Fetal bodylength incowsatvarious stagesof
myometrium,which allowed the calf todescend
pregnancy
into the abdomen.
Non-gravdhorn.The extent towhich theallanto
Pregnancy(months)
Fetal body length (cm)
chorionic sac occupies the non-gravid horn varies
1
0.8
greatly.In the great majority of bovine pregnancies
2
6
the sac occupies some part of it,in some extend
ing to the apex. In others, the caudal two-thirds
3
15
28
or one-half onlyis occupied,whilein exceptional
4
cases the non-gravid horn is entirelyunoccupied by
5
40
fetal membranes. In the majority of cases, the non-
6
52
gravidhorn alsoplays itspartinplacentation and
7
70
itscaruncleshypertrophy,although the degree of
8
08
caruncularenlargementisnotasgreat asihatofthe
9
06
pregnant horn (see Figs. 2.5-2.8). Occasionally the
non-gravid horn,although occupied by the allan-
tochorion,playsnopart n placentation and its car-
unclesremiain undeveloped.In such cases,and also
sizeofthefetusincowsparticularlyinthelaterperi-
in those in which the non-gravid horn is unoccu-
odsof pregnancy （Table3.3).The fetal bulk inrela-
pied,theplacentomes in the gravid horn,particu-
tion to these body lengths will be appreciated.More
larly thoseintheregion ofthefetal trunk,become
recently,changes in several fetal body measures have
grosslyhypertrophiedandmayatthetimeofpar-
also been measured repeatedly in the same ani-
turitionbeaslargeas8-12cm,
mals by means of ultrasonography (Ginther 1998,
Placentomes. Detection of placentomes is evidence
Breukelmanetal2004).
ofpregnancybutvariations occur intheir sizeat the
During theperiod120-160days,it will bepossible
variousstagesofpregnancyin differentindividuals.
to palpate the fetus in more than 50% of cases.The pre-
This is probably due io differences in number. Again
sentedextremitywillliewithinreachinfrontofand
there is variation throughout the same uterus.Those
below, the pelvic brim.In some cases,the fetus may
situated about the middle of the gravidcornu are
be touched transiently at thecommencementofexam-
larger than those of theextremities,whilethose in
ination andthensinksinto thedepthsoftheuteris
thenon-gravid horn are smaller than those in the
beyondreach.Similarly,if a series of examinations of
gravid one.Occasionally there isno placentation in
anindividual ismade during this period,thefetusmay
the non-gravid horn.As pregnancy continues, they
be detected on some occasions and not others.
become progressively larger,until in the terminal
Between5/and7/months,thefetusisdetected
stagestheymaybe5-6cmindiameterbut,because
less often than during theprevious period.We would
the pregnant uterus sinks into theabdomen,it may
putitat40-50%.Infavourablecasesthefetal head
notbepossibletopalpateplacentomesfromthe5th
and/orflexedlimbs arepalpatedjustanterior tothe
tothe7thmonth.Development(number and size)
pelvicbrim.Touchingthefetus oftenprovokesreflex
ofplacentomeswasfound tobedisturbed incows
movements.
carrying fetuses derived from in-vitro-produced
From 7/monthstotheendofgestation the
embryos（Farin etal 2000,Bertolini &Anderson
fetus will, in the majority of cases, be detected
2002;see also Ch.35).
readily.Again,however,caseswill be encountered,
Uterine arteries. Evidence of pregnancy is afforded
especially in deep-bellied,multiparous cows，in
by hypertrophy of the middle uterine arteries and
which the fetus cannot be detected,at any rate on
a characteristic change in their pulsewave,whichis
a singleexamination,evento term.Several authors
referred to as fremitus.Recently, bloodflow through
(Russe1968,Dufty 1973,Taverne et al2002) have
this enlarged uterine artery has been quantified by
shown variations in myometrial tone and activ-
means of transrectal Doppler sonography Bollwein
ity during late pregnancy. Dufty found that, in a
etal2002).
largenumberofHerefordheifersexamineddaily
Pregnant side.It is generally accepted that dairy
by rectal palpation near term,it was frequently
cows aremoreoften pregnant intheright horn and
impossibletopalpatethefetalcalf.Thereasonfor
that the CL is in the ovary on the side of thepreg
thisfindingwastheconsiderablerelaxation of the
nant horn.In a large series of pregnant bovine uteri
92
Chapter
31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
 examined by one of us the proportion has been 60%
developing fetuses - and the aggregate recorded sta-
right-side pregnancies to 40% left-side; in only one
tistics for identical twinning is 4-6% of all twins.
case was the fetus present in the horn opposite to
The incidence of bovine triplets is about 1 in 7500
the ovary containing the CL; another case showed a
single births.
CL of normal size in eachi ovary with a single fetus in
the right horn. In a series of 1506 uteri of dairy cat-
Methods of pregnancy diagnosis
tle examined in the USA, Erdheim (1942) found the
fetus in the right horn in 1015 (67.4%) and in the
A variety of different methods have been, and are
left in 474 (31.4%). In a series of 2318 uteri of beef
still, used to detect the presence or absence of preg-
cattle, however, the side incidence of pregnancy was
nancy in the cow. These range from the identification
approximately equal: right, 1178 (50.8%); and left,
of substances that are present in body fluids using
1121 (48.3%).Among all Erdheim's specimens there
laboratory assays, and from different ulurasound
modes, to simple clinical methods such as transrectal
found the Ci,in the left ovary and fetus in the right
palpation; the latter has been the most ubiquitously
horn.Of133pregnantuteri fromSwedishHighland
used method for the last 70 years (Figs. 3.12-3.15).
cattle, Settergren & Galloway (1965) found 59.4%
Table 3.4 lists the methods of pregnancy diagnosis
pregnant on the right side and 40.6% on the leff.
and the earliest times that they can be used. In terms
This series also included one specimen in which the
of efficient livestock production, it is the early idlen-
CL was in the left ovary and the fetus in the right
tification of the non-pregnant cow that is important,
horn.So transuterine migration of the embryo
since immediate measures can be taken to attempt to
induce pregnancy again as soon as possible.
in cows.
Twinning. in the past, the incidence of twinning
Management methods
was about 1% in dairy cattle and 0.5% in beef cat-
tle. Individual breed records showed higher fig
Failure to return to oestrus and persistence of the CL.
ures: 2.7-8.85% for Brown Swiss, 3.08-3.3% for
Failure of regression of the CL at about 2l days, as
Holsteins, 2.8% for Ayrshires,1.95% for Guernseys
determined by transrectal palpation or ultrasonogra-
and 13% for Jerseys (Meadows & Lush 1957,
phy,provides a method of anticipating that thecow
Johansson 1968).The rateincreases with age,figures
is probably pregnant. It is seldom used as a practical
for Holsteins showing 1.3% for heifers rising to 7%
proceduure and there are reasons for the CL persist-
in 10-year-old cows. In dairy cattle twinning rates
ing in the absence of pregnancy (see Ch. 22). Rectal
have significantly increased over the past decades,
examinationat about this timein an individual that
alongside the increase in milk production (Nielen
was close to,or at, oestrus would demonstrate the
et al 1989),with double ovulations reaching more
presence of a turgid, coiled uterus and a mucoid
than 20% and twin birth rates exceeding 9% in very
vaginal discharge.
high-producing animals.
How reliable is failure to return to oestrus as a
In the majority of cases,one CL is present in each
method of diagnosing pregnancy? This depends on
ovary and a fetus in each horn. Not infrequently,
the efficiency and accuracy of oestrus detection. In
however, two Cls are found in a single ovary with
a large group of dairy cows it can be expected that
gestation bicornual. In a recent study on 2ll cases
about 50%, or fewer in many cases,will become
within a large dairy farm (Lopez-Gatius & Hunter
pregnant after artificial insemination and thus50%
2005) 41% were found to be bilateraland 59%
will not. Those that are pregnant will not return
unilateral twin pregnancies, with at least two CLs
to oestrus, while those that are not pregnant will
present in each of the animals.'This observed nat-
return.However,a substantial number returning to
ural preponderance of unilaterally disposed twins
oestrus will not be detecied (see Ch. 22),and thus
does not conform with the experimental results of
will incorrecuy be assumed to be pregnant, although
Rowson et al (1971),which showed tliat induced
twin pregnancies were more stable when an embryo
quent oestruses.Assuming an oestrus detection rate
was transplanted into eachhorn than when two
of 60%（see Ch.22),30% ofcows will be incor-
embryos were placed in one horn.Arthur (1956)
Tectly assumed to be in calf. This constitutes a large
and Erdheim (1942) each encountered only one
error and fully justifies the use of other diagnostic
case of identical rwinning - a single CL with two
procedures.
6
Part
Pregnancy and its parturition
Fig.3.12Detecticn of pregnancy in the cowby transrectal palpation.Uterus gravid 70 days.
Fig.3.13Detection of pregnancy in the cow by transrectal
palpation.Uterusgravid90days.
Fig.3.14Detectionofpregnancyin thecowby transrectal
palpation.Uterusgravid 110 days.
Mammary glands.Mammary changes during preg-
the glands become grossly enlarged and oedematous
nancy arebest observed in primigravida.The teats
and the teats take on a waxy,tumefied appearance.
ofthepregnantheiferbegin to enlargeabout the
Theabdominalwall,particularlyin theregionof the
4thmonthandwithalituleexperienceitisaneasy
umbilicus,mayalsobecomeswollen byoedema.In
matter to distinguish them from those of thenon-
thedrymilch cow,mammaryenlargementoccurs
pregnant or early pregnant animal.From the 6th
during the last 14 or so days of pregnancy.After the
month the mammary glands become more firm
4th month a honey-like secretion may be withdrawn
tothe touci and their enlargeinent can be seen.
from the teats of pregnant heifers.
Hypertrophy is progressive and is particularly marked
Abdominal ballottement.This is often possible as
during the terminal month.As parturition approaches,
early as 7 months of gestation in some small breeds,
94
Chapter
31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
is to push the fetus,which isfloating in thefetal flu
ids,away from thebody wall and then identify itas
it swings back against thefist,which iskept pressed
against the abdominal wall.
Laboratorymethods
Identification of early pregnancy factor/early con-
ception factor. Early pregnancy factor (EPF) is an
immunosuppressive glycoprotein associated with
pregnancy. lt was first identified in the mouse
(Morion etal 1974) and subsequently in a large
number of domestic species;in thecow it has a
molecularweightof 200000 （Threlfall1994）.
Commercially available test kits are available that
usethe‘dipstick’principle and can detect early
Fig.3.15Detection of pregnancy in the cow by transrectal
conception factor (ECF) in serum and mill from
palpation. Pregnancy approaching term.
as early as 3 days after artificial insemination,
although more accurateresults are obtained if sam-
plesare taken later at7-8days(Adams &Jardon
Table3.4Methodsofpregnancy diagnosisincattle,and the
1999,Threlfall&Bilderbeck 1999).However,in a
timesingestationwhen theycanbe firstused
morerecent report the accuracy ofa commercial
Day of gestation
test still appeared tobe unacceptably low (Cordoba
Diagnosticmethod
et al 2001). Obviously an accurate early pregnancy
Realtime ultrasound(direct imaging)
13-21
test would have important practical application in
Failure to return tc oestrus and
21
the early identification of the non-pregnant cow in
persistence cfCL
theluteal phase after an unsuccessful insemination;
Progesterone concentration in
21-24
thus thecowcanbe treatedwithPGFtoinducea
plasma or milk
premature oestrus,when it can be rebred; thus sav-
Assayof pregnancyspecificprotein
24
ing time(see Ch.22）.
B(PSPB)orpregnancy-associated
Assay of bovine pregnancy-specific proteins B
glycoprotein (bPAG)
(bPSP-Bs), also known as bovine pregnancy-associated
Palpation of the allantochorion
33
glycoproteins(bPAGs).These proteins are members
('membrane slip')
ofalargefamilyofglycoproteinsthatbelongtothe
Unilateral enlargement of horn and
35
subclass of aspartic proteinases.Their biochemical
disparityin size,thinning of the
uterine wall,fluid-filledfluctuation
andstructuralcharacteristicshavebeen extensively
of enlarged horns
teviewed bySousa etal (2001).Theyhavebeeniden-
tified in the maternal serum ofcows from 24 days
Palpation of theearly fetus when
45-60
of gestation onwards; their concentrations are mea-
amnion loses its turgidity
sured byradioimmunoassays (Sasser&Ruder 1987,
Palpationofplacentomes
80
Hypertrophy of the middle uterine
85
between the 6th and 35th week of gestation but
artery until presence of fremitus
they increase steeply during the final 6weeks and
Oestrone sulphate inblood and milk
105
Palpation of fetus
120
a few days before calving (Zoli et al 1992a).
The proteins,presentinmany different glycosylated
isoforms,are secretedby thebinucleatecells ofthe
suchastheJersey.Hlowever,infatcowsoflargebreeds
trophoblasticectoderm（Reimers etal1985,Zoli
it is sometimesimpossible even at term.Themethod
et al 1992b)and thus their presence can be used
involvesfairlyvigorouspummellingoftheventral
to confirm pregnancy. However, since they have a
abdomen andflankwith clenched fists.Theobject
longbiologicalhalf-life（some3days)andplasma
95
Part
121
Pregnancy anditsparturition
levels areextremelyhigharoundcalving.theproteins
In 1969,Heap et al showed that progesterone
can also be identified in serum for up to7weeks
crossed the mammary gland and appeared in milk.
post-partum;for the same reason,false positives ie
Laing&Leap（1971)confirmed thatthechangesin
non-calving cows tested as pregnant) can occur after
progesteroneconcentrations in themilkclosely fol-
spontaneous (Szenci et al 2000, Chavatte-Palmer
lowed thoseinthebloodorplasma.Furthermore,
etal2006)orinduced(Szencietal2003,Breukelman
since progesterone isvery soluble in milk fat there
etal2005a)embryonicorfetaldeath.
werehigher concentrations per unit volume in milk
Atpresent,PSPBs orbPAGs aremainlymeasured
than in the blood or plasma.Heap et al (1973)
by autologous orheterologousradioimmunoassays
described the use of the technique to diagnose preg-
but development and testing of suitable enzyme-
nancy and since then a large number of different
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) methods are
workers in many different countries have described
in progress, enabling the use of an‘on-farm' diag-
similar methods.The technique dependsupon the
nostic test(Sasser & Ruder 1987).Lising radio-
herdspersoncollecting about 20ml ofmilk,usually
immunoassaytodetectPSPB,Humblotetal(1988)
at the afiernoonmilkingbecausethefatcontentis
higher, into a glass or plastic bottle.Then a tablet of
It has been shown that there is a good correlation
potassium dichromate and mercuric chloride as a
beiweenPsPBinperipheralplasma concentrations
preservativeisadded;providerthatthesampleisnot
and fetal numbers,and thus the method could be
exposedtohigh temperature orexcessive ultraviolet
used toidentify twinsDobson etal 1993,Patelet al
light,there svery litleloss of progesterone activity.
1995).In a field study (Szenci et al 1998),the accu-
Initially,progesterone concentrations in the milk
racies ofboth abPAGandPSPBradioimmunoas
were assayed using radioimmunoassay;it is an
saysmethodwerecomparedwiththatof transrectal
effectivemethod ofmeasurement butrequires the
ultrasonography at different intervals after insemi-
useofradioisotopesand theequipmenttomeasure
nation(Table3.5).
radioactiveemissions.Itcan onlybeperformed in
Progesterone concentration in plasma and milk. In
aspecialistlaboratoryandhencehasthebigdis
1971,Robertson & Sarda described a method of
advantage of taling several daysbefore a result is
diagnosing pregnancy by the determination of the
known.
progesterone concentration in the plasma of cows.
A number of qualitativecow-side'tests have been
SincetheCLpersistsas a resultof thepregnancy,ifa
developedthatcanbeusedonthefarm andhence
blood sample is taken at about 21 days after thepre-
enable the herdsperson to obtain a result within
vious oestrus,progestcronelevels remain elevated.1f
1 hour of collecting the mill sample All the nec-
the cow is not pregniant and is close to or at oestrus,
then the progesterone levels will be low;this can be
form.Semiquantitative or fully quantitative tests
seen if the progesterone curves in Figures 1.28 and
are also available but these are designed for use in
3.3 are studied.Although this is a perfectly valid and
aveterinarypracticelaboratory,sincetheyrequirea
reliable laboratorymethod,it hasthe onedisadvan-
minimum amount ofequipmentand some expertise.
tagethatitrequires thecollectionofabloodsample.
Both tests arebased on ELISA.
three different stages after artificial inseminaticn(after*Szenci et al 1998)
Ultrasonography
bPAG-1
bPSP-B
Daysafter artificial
29/30
33/34
37/38
29/30
33/34
37/38
29/30
33/34
37/38
insemination
Sensitivity(%)
06
97
100
95
95
96
92
98
100
Specificity(%)
96
99
66
69
77
72
E8
87
84
Detectionofallantoicfuidduing transrectalscanning witha7.MHlineararrayransducerwasusedasapositive criterionintheulrasound tst.
In the bPAG-1radioimmunoassay a value>0.8ng/ml and in thebpSP-Bassay a value >0.5ng/m was used as apositive criterion.
96
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
Thelaboratory-based quantitative tests have a
·inadequate mixing of milk so that a low fat sam-
series ofprogesterone standards that enable a stan-
ple is obtained.
dard curvetobedrawn.ltisusuallyrecommended
Thereasons for false-positiveresults are:
that duplicate assays are done for each sample,at
·cows with shorter-than-average interoestrous inter-
leastuntiltheoperatorbecomesconversantwith
vals,i.e.18 days.When milk samples are taken 24
the procedure.There are a few problems in using
days afterservice or artificialinsemination,if the
the assay on the farm.Thesecan be summarized as
cow is notpregnant shewill already bein the early
follows:
lutealphaseofthenextcycle
·Instructions are not always readily understood by
·embryonic death, if it occurs after the day when
persons not used to laboratory procedures
themilk was collected(see Ch.24)
Simple equipment requires a fair degree of man-
luteal cysts that produce progesterone (see Ch.22)
ual dexterity
·incorrect timing of insemination.Several reports
·Instructions should be closely adhered to, par-
(Hoffmann et al 1976) have shown that up to15%
ticularlywithregard to timing of incubation and
of cows are presented for artificial insemination
quantities of reagents
when they arenotinoestrus.Thus ifamill sample
·The kits should be kept in a refrigerator at 4°℃
is taken24days after thecowwasincorrectlyinsem-
and shouldbe allowed towarm toroom tempera-
inated in early or mid-dioestrus,and theinterven-
turebeforeuse;they shouldnotbeheated
ing oestrus has not been observed,then she will be
·Interpretation ofthecolour differencescanbedif-
in the subsequent dioestrus with a functional CL
ficult for some persons
and elevated milk progesterone concentrations
·Millk samples should be kept at 2-s°C until
pathological prolongation of the life span of the
assayedand therecommendedpreservativetablets
CL:this will be discussed in Chapter22
must be used.
The main advantage of the milk progesterone test
The optimum time for collecting themilk sam-
is that it identifies those cows that are not preg-
ple is 24 days after service or artificial insemina-
nant before itispossibleto do soby some other
tion(Heap et al 1976).This time interval prevents
methods, such as rectal palpation.A 24-day sam-
those cows with a longer-than-average interoe-
plewill thenenabletheherdspersontoanticipate
strous interval from giving false-positive resulis;
thereturntooestrus42daysaftertheserviceifthe
however,in those animals witha shorter-than-
cow is not pregnant, or enable the veterinarian to
average interoestrous interval false positives will
examine the animal, if she is a problem, before
occur.The accuracyof themethod in the diagnosis
she returns again. Cows that are found to be preg-
of pregnancy is between 80% and ss% (Heap et
nantat24daysshouldbeexaminedatalaterdate
al 1976,Hoffmann et al 1976,Koeg0od-Johnsen
by transrectal ultrasonography or palpation.The
&Christiansen 1977);the accuracyofthemethod
on-farm tests canbe used asearly as19 days after
for detecting ihe absence of pregnancy is nearly
servicesincealow progesteroneconcentration at
100%.However,Pieterse etal(1990)reported
this time is indicative of non-pregnancy and thus
quitedifferentvaluesfrom afieldstudyinwhich
thefirst return to oestrus canbeanticipated(see
milksamples were taken on theday ofinsemina-
p.541).Daily sequential samples can be taken at
tion andonday21:sensitivitywas86% and93%
or around this time but it is expensive and time-
for a radioimmunoassay and a cow-side enzyme
consuming for the herdsperson.It is likely that,
immunoassay test respectively,while specific-
fairly soon, a reliable automated system will be
itywasonly48%（radioimmunoassay)and39%
available that will be capable of measuring proges-
(enzymeimmunoassay)
terone concentrations in milk as it is collected at
Thereasonsforfalse-negativeresultsare:
the tiime of milking; a so-called‘in line'system.
In a recent report (lsobe et al 2005),it has been
·mistakenidentityoftheanimaleitheronthefarm
demonstrated that faeces collected between days
or in the laboratory
18-24 after artificialinsemination or days 11-17
mill storage problems due to excessive heat or
after embryo transfercanbeutilized to substitutefor
ultravioletlight
plasmaormilktomeasureprogesteroneforthepur-
· low progesterone production by the CL
pose of pregnancy diagnosis in dairy and beef cattle.
97
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
Oestronesulphateinmilk.Oestronesulphateis quan-
beforetheuterine andrectalwallsarelostfrom the
titativelyoneofthemajoroestrogensinthemilkof
tograsp thewholewidih of the hornbecause as the
During gestation the concentration increases gradu-
allantochorion isvery thinatthisstage;the structure
ally so thatafter day 105it is present in themill
that can be morereadily identified istheconnective
ofall pregnant animals,whereas in non-pregnant
tissue band that contains theblood vessels supply-
individuals it is low or undetectable;the source of
ing the allantochorion (see Fig.2.1).Fincher(1943)
thehormone is theplacenta.The identification of
recommended thatthismethodshouldnotbeused
oestronesulphateinthemilkofacowat105daysof
before40daysofgestation andthatitwasinfallible
gestation, or later, is a very reliable method of preg
upto95days.The advantageofthemethod is that it
nancy diagnosis (Hlamon et al 1981).Furthermore, enables the differential diagnosis of pregnancy from
unlike progesterone assays,the precise date of sam-
mucometra or pyometra.In somecases.particularly
pling is not required.However,it has limited appli
after 60 days ofgesiation,it can be more readily
cationsbecauseofthelatenessof thetime thata
elicited in the non-gravid horn since the tension on
positive diagnosis can be made.
the wall is less and this allows it to be grasped more
readily.For the beginner it is a worthwhile exercise
Clinicalmethods
topractiseitonafreshgravidgenitaltractfromthe
Transrectalpalpation
abattoir.
Unilateral horn enlargement.LInless there are twin
Palpation of the amniotic vesicle.This method
conceptuses, one in each horn, it is possible to
involvesthepalpationofthe aimnion towardsthe
detect a difference in the size of the two horns.This
end of the first month of pregnancy. It proceeds
is largely due to the presence of fetal fluids,in par-
briefly as follows.The bifurcation ofthe uterine
ticularallantoicfluid,whichgives theuterine horn a
horns is located,then the horns areuncoiled and
fluctuatingfeel withgood tone.Itcanbelikened to
gently palpated along theirentire lengthbetween
the feel of a balloon that has been filledwithwater
the thumb and middle iwofingers.The amniotic sac
toapoini when thewall just starts to stretch.At the
can befeltas a distinct,round,turgid objectm
same time,if thewall of the horn is squeezed it is
in diameter floating in the allantoicfuid.The ves-
nouiceable thatit ismuch thinner than that ofa non-
icle should not becompressed directly but gently
gravid tracl.
pushed backwardsand forwards.Some(Rowson&
In manycases,a definite diagnosis ofpregnancy
Dott 1963,Ball& Carroll 1963,Zemjanis 1971)con-
can be made on these signs alone.Thepresence of
sider that this techniqueis dangerousbecause of the
a CL in the ovary adjacent to the enlarged horn is
possibilityofruptureoftheamnioticsacorofthe
a useful confirmatory sign;however, a false diag-
embryonicheart.Aswith all rectal techniquescare is
nosis ofpregnancymaybemadeintases ofpyo-
the rule,and excessive pressure and rough handling
metra,mucometraorincompleteuterineinvolution
should be avoided.
(see Ch.7).
Palpation of the allantochorion(membrane slip).This
Palpation of the early fetus.At about 45-50 days of
method is dependent upon thefactsthatinthecow,
gestation the amniotic sacbecomes less turgid and
attachmentofthe allantochorion to theendome-
itis sometimespossible topalpatedirectly the small
triumoccursonlybetweenthecotyledonsandthe
developingfetus.Thisshouldbedonewithcare.
caruncles,and that theintercotyledonary part ofthe
Palpation of placentomes. Placentomes first become
fetalmembraneisfree.Themethodwasfirstdescribed
recognizableby rectal palpation at1011weeks as
by Abelein in 1928(seeCowie1948),who reported
roughened elevations when the fingers are passed
thatitcouldbeusedfrom the5thweekofgestation.
back and forthoverthesurfaceoftheenlarged gravid
Themethodisasfollows:Identifythebifurcation of
horn.From about3months,theycanbeidentifiedas
the uterine horns,pickup the enlarged gravid horn
discretestructures in themidline,about 8-10cm in
between thumb and either index,or middle finger,
front of and over thepelvicbrim,bypressing down
just cranial to the bifurcation andgently squeeze
upon theuterine body andbaseof the horns.In the
androll thewholethicknessofthehorn.The allan-
earlystagesitis difficult toidentify them asdistinct,
tochorionwill eventuallybeidentifiedas averyfine
individual structures.The uterus feels as if it has an
structure asit slips between the thumb and finger,
irregularcorrugated surface;it hasbeenlikened to
98
Chapter
3|
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
palpating a sackful of small potatoes. As pregnancy
uterine arteries is usually recognizablefrom about
proceeds, the placentomes become larger but,one
day 100, and this indicates ihe side of the pregnant
the uterus has sunk inio the abdomen between
horn.Palpation of the middle uterine artery is usu-
5 and7monts,it is sometimes impossible to pal-
allypossiblein even thebiggest cow,and thus is par
pate them. Substantial pressure should be placed
ticularlyuseful inlargebeef sucklercows.
on thebodyof the uterus just cranial to the cervix
Palpation of thelate fetus.Palpation of the fetus,
withtheflatportionof thefingertips,asif attempt-
either perrectum or by abdominal ballottement,
ing to palpate the udder transrectally.Identification
is diagnostic of pregnancy. The ease of palpation
of placentomes is viriually diagnostic of pregnancy
depends upon the size of the cow, ihe degree of
butin theimmediate postpartum uterus they can
stretching of the suspension of the uterus and the
also be felt.
degree of relaxation of the rectum and uterine
Palpation of the cervix.Evidence of pregnancy can be
wall.
assumed when there is tension on the cervix.In the
Accuracy of pregnancy diagnosis by rectal palpation.
non-pregnant orearly pregnant cow or heifer thecer-
The most likely reason for a false-positive diagno-
vixis freelymovablefrom side to side.However,as
sisissubsequentembryonicorfetal death,whichis
pregnancy advances the cervix becomes less mobile
impossibletoexclude.Otherreasonsforfalseposi-
and is pulled forwards and downwards over the
tives are: incomplete uterine involution (see Ch.7),
pelvic brim.
pyometra, muicometra and hydrometra (see Ch. 22)
Hypertrophy of the middle uterine artery and devel-
and failure toretract the uterus.Thereasonsforfalse
opment of fremitus. In a non-gravid or early preg-
negatives are incorrect recording of the date of ser-
nantcow,identificationofthemiddleuterineartery
viceorartificialinsemination,sothatwhenthecow
by palpation is usually not possible transrectally.The
isexaminedsheispregnantbuta cyclelength ear-
arteryrunsinthebroadligament,alongatortuous
lierthan expected,and incompleteretraction of the
course,passing downwards,forwards and towards
uterus.Thelatterreason isworthyoffurther consider-
the midline over the pelvic brim close to the junc-
ation and can be a particular problem in large pluri-
tionbetween pubis andilium.LIsually,itisidentified
parous cows with deep abdomens.In orderto make
5-10 cm lateral toihecervix.Inexperiencedpersons
a complete examination of theuterusbypalpation,
sometimesconfuseitwiththeiliacandobturator
full retractionisnecessary.Theinexperienced person
arteries,but themiddleuterine arteryismobile and
maywell makea diagnosisof pregnancybecausethe
canbeencircledwithinthe thumbandforefinger.At
uterus is‘out ofreach'and cannot bepalpated.lt
some stage duringpregnancy it willcease tohave the
isinportant thatthediagnosisshouldbemadeon
usualpulse andinstead thiswill become a‘thrill'or
theidentification of positivesigns.ltisperfectlyper-
tremor, which is called fremitus.
missible to admit uncertainty,to note in writing the
Thereisconsiderablevariationin thetimeatwhich
changes that can beidentified and tore-examineihe
thechangecanfirstbefeltand alsowhen itbecomes
animalin 2-3 weeks'time.
continuous.The earliest one of us (D.N.)has been
Induced prenatal death due to rectal palpation.
ableto detect itis 86days.During the period 100-175
Concern is sometimes expressed thatrectal palpa-
days cases will frequently bemetwhere the initial
tion caninduce embryonicor fetal death.Therehave
'thrillbecomes a conventional pulse.It is probable
beenseveral studies toevaluate therisks,byrecording
thatthedegreeofpressureapplied to thearteryinflu-
if a cow failed to calve having previously been diag-
ences the feeling imparted to the fingers; light pres-
nosed as pregnant either by rectal palpation or, more
sure detectsa‘thrill'whereas apulsewaveisapparent
ecently,inassociationwitmilprogesterone assays
to heavy pressure.The‘hrill'generally becomes con-
or ultrasonography. The resulis have been equivo-
tinuous after day 175,although cases will be met in
cal but, although it is possible that certain methods
whichthereis distinctpulsation aslateas day200.
and certain individuals may increase the incidence
During he terminal stages of gestation,theuterine
ofprenatal deathtislikely that therectalpalpation
arteriesbecome greatly hypertrophied and tortuous;
ofcowsfrom 42daysofgestation is a safeand reli-
they can be distincty felt,with the thickness ofa
ablemethodwhenperformed carefully and skillfully.
pencil,with a continuous tremor-likepulse,later-
In those cows where the pregnancy failed,it would
allysituated2cmorso infrontofthecranialbor-
probably have occurred irrespective of the procedure
der of the iliacshaft.A difference in sizeofthe two
used.Inarecent controlledrandomized block-design
66
Part
21
Pregnancy and itsparturition
experiment it was convincingly demonstrated that the
Realtime B-mode grey-scale ultrasound scanning
use of thefetal membrane slip as a diagnostic tool,
is the method of choice for tlie early diagnosis of
once,between days 34 and 41 of pregnancy does not
pregnancyim the cow.Details of the principle of the
affect embryonic/fetal viability, as judged by uansrec
techiniqueand theequipment availablehavebeen
tal ultrasonography at days 45 and 60, in compari-
son with non-palpated animals (Romano et al 2006).
description, the reader is advised to consult Ginther
Furthermore, in experiments where attempts have
(1998]andBoyd&Omran(1991).
been made to induce abortion by damaging the fetus
Using a transrectal approach toimage theuterus
at rectal palpation,extensive trauma has frequently
and contents,a 7.5MHz linear transducer is prefer-
been necessary (Paisley et al 1978).
able for carly pregnancies, whereas a 3.5-5.0MHz
transducer is more useful for late pregnancies. After
Vaginalexamination
insertion of the transducer, both ovaries should
be examined to determine the presence of a CL,
Examination may bemanual orvisual,In Lhe lat-
followed by theright and left horns.Because of the
ter case, an illuminated speculum is used. The con-
shape of the probe, the diameter of the rectum and
dition of the vaginal mucous membrane does noi
the coiled nature of the horns, it is impossible to
afford definite clinical evidence of pregnancy, for
scan each horn along its length ai the same time;
the degree of'dryness' and blanching that occur dur-
thus cross-sectional images of the horns are fre-
ing the dioestrous period are very similar to those of
quently identified (Fig. 3.16). A tentative diagnosis
pregnancy. It is to the external os of the cervix that
of an early pregnancy can be made on the identifi-
attention is directed,During pregnancy, the secre
cation ofa non-echogenic(black)area within the
tion of the cervical glands becomes gelatinous and
lumen of theuterine horn due to thepresence of
tough, forming a plug for sealing the canal. In many
fetal fluids; however, it must be remembered that
cases the seal covers or protrudes from the external
fluids other than those nssociated with pregnancy
os. It has developed by day G0.
can give a similar result. Since this occurs first in
On manual examination,the finger should be
the horn ipsilateral to the CL of pregnancy, ovar-
pressed gently into the os. The detection of an adhe-
ian imaging for the presence of this structure is
sive, tenacious secretion rather than a slimy,moist
important.However,the definitive determination
one is strong evidence of pregnancy. With a specu-
ofpregnancy is dependent on theidentification of
lum the seal, light brown in colout, can sometimes
an embryo or fetus.
be seen covering the os.In many cases,however, the
Usinga7.5MHz transducer,Boydetal(1988)were
seal occupies the canal only and cannot be detected
able to recognize pregnancy as early as 9 days, while
with certainty. In general vaginal examination of
Pierson & Ginther (1984), using a 5MHz transducer,
mated or inseminated animals should be avoided,
were able to do soat 12 and 14 days inheifers before
unless there are clinical signs that urge to do so.
ihe blastocyst had elongated (see Ch.2). One has
torealize that thesevery early diagnoses took place
under controlled experimental conditions, with
Ultrasonographic methods
anirnals repeatedly scanned at short intervals.This
Using the ultrasonic fetal pulse detector,which
is very much unlike the on-farn situation, where
employs the Doppler principle,it is possible to
theveterinarian is usually asked tomakea conclusive
identify the fetal heart from 6-7 weels using a
rectal probe.Liltrasonic depth analysers (A-mode)
the blastocyst will have elongated and extended into
lhave also been used to detect pregnancy as early as
the contralateral horn; this can usually be easily
40 days. Although a level of accuracy of 85-95%
identified with ultrasonography by 26 days.
has been achieved in positively identifying preg-
Experienced persons may accurately diagnose preg-
nant cows, a large percentage of non-pregnant cows
nancy around thetimeoftheexpected dateofretum
(57-87%) were incorrectly diagnosed as being preg-
to oestrus in the non-pregnant cyclical animal, but
nant (Tierney 1983). Neither of these two ultrasonic
published data indicate that both sensitivity and speci-
methods would appear io have any advantage over
rectal palpation with regard to time of examination
(Szenci etal 1998,Romana etal 2007); after this stage
or accuracy of the diagnosis.
anaccurate andrapid diagnosiscanbe maderelatively
100
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
Fig.3.16Detection of pregnancy in the cowby transrectal ultrasonography.(A)Transversesectionalultrasonogram of theuterine
dueto theendometrial andmuscularis layersof theuterinewall.Note that thereisnoevidence of fluid(whichwould be anechoic)in
heuterinelumer.(B)Transverse sectionalultrasonogramof the uterinehorncfa cowat 22daysof gestation.Noe that,asin(A)
there arealternating bandsofanechoicandhyperechoictissue.Theuterinelumencontainsfluid,whichisanechoic,andjustabove
uterine hornof the same cowas inFigure3.16(B)at 28daysof gestation.As wellas thefluid-filledhorn,the embryoisnowclearly
visible(arrow).Inthereal-time imageit ispossibletosee theheartbeating.(D)Transversesectionalultrasonogram of theuterine horn
ofa cow at 28 daysof gestation.Ncte theembryo's heart(arrow)and anechoicallantoicfluid.(E)Transverse sectional ultrasonogram
of the uterine horn cfa cowat 32days of gestation.Note that the embryo hasvisible forelmbsbuds(arrows).(F)Transversesec-
tional ultrasonogram of the uterine horn of a cow at 35 days of gestation. The embryc is about 17mm long.The amnion (arrow) and
allantochorion(arrowhead)canbeidentified.(G)Transversesectionalultrasonogramof theuterinehornofa cowat42daysof
gestationNotethefetalbodyeadandlimbs.HTransversesectionalulrasonogramof theeinehonofacowat3dayf
gestationshawingaplacentome(arrow）.(FromSheldon&Noakes2002,bypermissionof InPractice,BVApublications.)
easily.The data inTable 3.5 illustrates this.Figuire 3.16
different fetal dimensions;of these,the crown-rump
shows images at various stages of pregnancy.
lengthwasleastfrequently capableofbeingmea-
The technique can be used to estimate fetal age up
sured,whereas thetrunkdiameter wasthemost
to 140 days of gestation(White et al 1985,Ginther readily assessed.In addition,it can also beused
1998)following themeasurementof a number ofto determine the sex ofthefetusby assessing the
101
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
relationshipbetweenthegenital tubercleand sur-
pig blastocyst synthesizes substantial amounts of
rounding structures. Thus in the male the genital
oestrogens;(mainly oestrone and oestradiol-17β,
tuberclemigrates towards the umbilicus whereas in
whichpass through the uterine wall where they are
thefemaleitmigratestowardsthetail.Theoptimum
sulphoconjugated (Hleap et al 1981).These oestro-
stagefor determinationis55-70 days(Curran et al
gen metabolites in maternal blood and urine,or the
1989,Stroud1996).These authorsreachedalmosta
deconjugated oestrogens in thefaeces,reach a tem-
100% success rate.lt is important to stress that the
technique requiresconsiderableexperienceofuans-
(Robertson&King 1974,Choietal1987).This rise
canbeexploitedfortheearlydiagnosingofpregnancy,
using either plasma or faecal samples (see later).
Optimum time for diagnosing
Methodsofpregnancy diagnosis
pregnancy
Management methods
The aim of pregnancy tests is to identify,as early and
as accurately as possible,the absence of pregnancy
Traditionally,failure to return to oestrus at 18-22
sothatstepscanbetakento ensurethat thecow
days after service or arificial insemination has
is served again and thus ensure an optimum calv-
been regarded as apossiblefirst sign ofpregnancy.
ing pattern (see Ch. 24）. However, it is important
However the detection of oestrus can be difficult,
that inexperiencedveterinariansshouldselectatime
and it is time-consuming;even the back pressure
when they are confident of their accuracy inmaking
orridingtest,which isgenerally accepted tobethe
the diagnosis,irrespective of the method used.
most reliable（Reed 1969),is inconsistent.Failure to
returntooestrusmaybeduetoareluctancetoshow
signs,anoestrus or ovarian cysis (see Ch.27).It is
Pregnancy and its detection
inportant to know as soon as possible if a sow or
in the pig
gilt is not pregnant, so that she can be served again,
treated or culled. A reliable method is also necessary
Endocrinology
so that breeders can certify that an animal is preg-
nant before sale.Any lechnique must be accurate,
In the non-pregnant sow the plasma progesterone
capableofbeingusedearly in gestation andfairly
concentration falls rapidly 15-16 days after the
inexpensive.
previous oestrus,butif conception occurs the CLs
persist and theperipheralprogesteroneconcentra-
Clinicalmethods
tions remain elevated at between 30 and 35ng/ml.
Transrectalpalpation
Although thereisaslightfallto17-18ng/mlonday
24,the elevated concentration persisis for most of
This method has been described in detail by
gestation,decreasingrapidly justbeforefarrowing.
Meredith (1976)and Cameron(1977).It is depen-
The ovaries and CLs are alwaysnecessary for the
dent upon palpation perectum of thecervix,uterus
maintenance of pregnancy.The number of embryos
andmiddleuterinearteries.Thedetailsofthemethod
present in utero doesnot influence the progesterone
according to Cameron (1977) are as follows.
concentration（Monk&Erb1974）.Theminimum
0-21 days ofgestation.The cervix and uterus feel
concentration of progesterone in the peripheral cir-
very similar to their state at dioestrus (see Ch.1).
culation for the maintenance of pregnancy is about
However, during this period the bifurcation of the
6ng/ml(Ellicott&Dziuk1973）;at lower levelsthe
cornuabecomes less distinctand theuterus becomes
pregnancy is lostbut higher levels do not appear to
slightly enlarged,with softwalls.hemiddleuterine
increaseembryonicsurvival.
Total oestrogen concentrations remain fairly con-
towardsthethirdweek.ltislocated asitpasses across
stant in plasma during pregnancy but about 2-3
theexternal iliacartery(thelatter canbeidentified
weeksprepartum theybegin to increaseto about
asit runs along the anteromedial borderoftheilium
100pg/ml,witha sudden surge to values about
towardsthehindleg,ventrally andslightlyposteri-
500 pg/ml a few days before farrowing. This is fol-
orly; it is about 1 cm in diameter in the adult sow)
lowedbyarapid decline afterparturition.The early
runningforwards towards the abdominal cavity.
102
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
21-30 days of gestation.The bifurcation of the cor-
accuracy in identifying pregnant sows and a 96%
nua is less distinct,and thecervix anduterinewalls
accuracy for non-pregnant sows.These resulis were
areflaccid and thin.Themiddleuterine artery is
obtained between30 and 90days of gestation;unre-
5-8mmin diameter and more easilyidentified.
liableresultswere obtainedbefore30 days.Taverne
31-60 days of gestation.The cervix feels like a soff-
elal（1985a)reported an equally high sensitivity
walled tubularstructure;theuterusisill definedand
(97.5%),buta much lower specificity (55.8%) when
thin-walled.Themiddleuterinearteryhas enlarged
this techniquewas usedbetween days31 and37.
10 about the same size as the external iliac.Fremitus
B-modedirectimaginghasproved tobevery suc-
can be first identified al 35-37 days (Meredith
cessful in the sow(Martinat-Botteetal20oo).The
1976);thepulsepattern canbe compared with that
transducer probe is applied to the abdominal wall
of theexternal iliac artery.
of the standing sow about 5 cm caudal to the umbili-
60 days to term.The middleuterine artery is greater
cus, to the rightor the left of the midline and just lat-
indiameter than theexternaliliacandithasstrong
eral to the teats,and is directed towardsthe caudal
fremitus;itnowcrosses theexternaliliacarterymore
abdomen; a coupling medium is always required.
dorsally than before.Only towards theend of gesta-
Pregnancy diagnosis is based on the recognition of
tionisitpossibletopalpatepigletsatthelevelofthe
nonechogenic irregularly shapedblack spots,repre
cornualbifurcation.
senting sections through allantoic fluid-filled fetal
The techniquecan beperformedwithout the need
sacs within the uterus （Fig.3.17B,D).Frequenuly
ofmuch restraint,preferably when the animal is
the embryos can be identified （Fig.3.17)but are
feeding.nfortunately,it isnot possibletoperform
usually not required to reach a positive diagnosis.
the technique in gilts because they are too small,
This impliesthat accumulation of pathological
andeven in large sows a slender arm isadvanta-
（mucometra)or physiological (oestrus,semen)
geous.Cameron(1977) found that between 30 and
fluid within the uterus may result in a false-posi-
60days ofgestationhewas94% accurateinmak
tive diagnosis.In a study of 145 sows,Inabe et al
ingadiagnosisofpregnancyand97% accurate in
(1983)reporteda 100%accuracyfor the diagnosis
diagnosing non-pregnancy, while Meredith (1976)
of pregnancy from 22 days of gestation. Similarly
reported an accuracy of99%and 86%,respectively.
Jackson[1980)reporteda100%accuracyfor iden-
Theaccuracyimproveswithexperienceand advanc
tifying non-pregnant sows and a 99% accuracy for
ing pregnancy.
diagnosing pregnancy from 24-37 days of gesta-
tion.Thesmall numberoferrorsinthisstudyof285
sows was due to prenatal death.In a study with 881
Ultrasonographicmethods
animals, scannedwith a 3.0MHz linear array trans-
The use of the Doppler technique to diagnose preg-
ducerbetween days24and32,Taverneetal(1985a)
nancy in the sow(on the basis of detecting a pulsat-
alsoreacheda 100% sensitivity,but specificity was
ing uterine artery and/or fetal heart beats)wasfirst
90.6%,mainly becauseofembryonic/fetal death
describedbyFraser&Robertson(1968).Theearliest
occurring after the day of scanning.A similar con-
diagnosis madeusingarectal probe is about 25 days
clusionwasreachedbySzencietal (i997) andVos
ofgestation.The accuracy of themethodis reason-
etal (1990),when comparing the results ofultra-
ablefor the diagnosis of pregnant sows (92-100%)
sonography and a faecal unconjugated oestrogen
but it is less reliable for non-pregnant sows (25-
test(seebelow)concurrentlyperformedinthesame
100%) (McCaughey 1979). With a single investiga-
animalsbetween days26 and32.
tion at 5weeks after mating,a sensitivity of98.9%
Transrectal scanning (with an elongated trans-
andaspecificity of67.2%wasreached(Atkinson
ducer) has also been used (Fig.3.17A,C),which
etal 1986) and thesefigures did notimprovewhen
enables a slightly earlier diagnosis （Thayer et al
testingtookplacebothat5and8weeks.
1985),although after the 4th week results with a
Llltrasonic amplitude-depth analysis (A-mode
3.5and 5.oMHzwereequally accurate,regardless
ultrasound)has provedto be more reliable and
ofwhether transabdominalortransrectalmeth-
wasthemostfrequentlyappliedtechniqueuntil
ods were used (Fraunholz et al 1989).However,
B-mode ultrasonography was introduced. In a study
thetransrectalapproachtakesslightlylongerandis
involving1001sowsusinga2MHzexternaltrans-
moredifficulttoperform,especiallywhen sows are
ducer probe, Lindahl et al (1975) reported a 99%
not restrained.
103
Part
2
Pregnancy and its parturition
Btientde
Fig.3.17 Transrectal B-mode (5 MHz transducer) ultrascund images of pregnant sows at 23 days (A-C) and 24 days (D) afler
service.Black areas represent sections through the allantoic fluid filled uterin= horns; in (C) there are three visible below the
bladder. In one of these sections in (D)an embryo is visible. (Figures A and B;by courtesy of Dr Roy Kirkwcod).
Laboratorymethods
Plasma oestrogen assay. Robertson et al (1978) were
unable to deiect oestrone sulphate in the blood of
Estimation of plasma progesterane. Since therc is
a decline in progesterone concentrations in the
mals it was detectable from day 20 of gestation.
peripheral blood from about day 16 in non-preg-
Therefore this can be used as a method of diagnosing
nant cyclical animals (see Fig.1.32), estimation of
pregnancy. A small volume of blood sufficient for the
progesteronieconcentrationsfromthistime afterser-
assay can be collected from the ear vein; ihe optimum
vice is worthwhile. Ellendorff et al (1976) reported
timefordiagnosis,whenmaximumconcentrations of
that when sows were bled 16-24 days after service a
Oestrone sulphate are present, is at abouit 24-28 days.
sensitivity of 99.6% and a specificity of 85.3% was
Because these oestrogens appear in an unconjugated
achieved. Subsequently much lower specificities
form in the faeces (Choi et al 1987), the problem of
have been reported by several other workers, mainly
blood sampling can be avoided by analysing faecal
attributable to late embryonic and fetal mortality of
samples collected within the sametime period.In this
whole litters after the day of testing. However, the
way, Vos et al (1999) obtained a sensitivity of 96.5%
biggest problem with this technique remains the dif
and a specificity of 93.5%, using an oestrone concen-
ficulty of obtaining blood samples.
tration of 3.65 ng/g faeces as a discriminatory value.
104
Chapter
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
Pregnancy and its detection in the
Oestrogenconcentrations intheperipheralcir-
sheep and goat
culation remain low throughout gestation.A few
days before parturition they start to gradually rise,
then suddenly increaseto about 400pg/ml at the
Endocrinology
time of lambing,followed byarapid fall (Challis
Sheep
1971).
Prolactin concentrations fluctuate during preg-
In thenon-pregnant cyclical ewe,rogesteronecon
nancybetween20and80ng/ml;towardstheend,
centrations in theperipheral blood fall rapidly just
however, they start to increase and reach a peak of
before the onset of oestrus (see Fig. 1.29). Following
between 400 and 700ng/ml on the day of lambing
conception, ihe CL persists and peak dioestrous val-
(Davis &Reichert 1971, Kann &Denamur 1974).
ues are maintained and gradually increase to about
Placental lactogenhasbeen detected inmaternal
60 days of gestation,when there is a considerable
plasma from 48 days of gestation; it reaches a maxi-
increase; this rise being due to the placenta contrib-
mumbyabout140days,graduallydecreasinguntil
uting to progesterone production.Levels remain
lambing.It has been identified in trophoblast tissue
high until the last days of pregnancy, when they
from 16-17-day blastocysts(Martal &Djiane1977).
decline rapidly to 1ng/ml at parturition.The con-
Therole of thishormoneisstill unclear:itmay have
centration of progesterone is significantly higher in
arole in the luteotropliccomplex of thepregnant
multiple pregnancies(Basset etal1969),sinceit has
ewe and also in controlling fetal growth and mam-
been calculated that in late pregnancy the placenta
mary development.
producesfive times as much progesterone asthe
Bilateralovariectomyafter55dayswillnotresult
ovary (Linzell &Heap 1968).Maximum progester-
in abortion because by this stage of gestation the
oneconcentrationsintheperipheralbloodofewes
placenta has taken over the major role ofproges-
with a single lamb were 3.8ng/ml between days 105
teroneproduction.However,it should beremem-
and110,with twins5.1ng/mlbetweendays125and
bered that the CLs persist for the duration of the
130, and with triplets 9.2ng/ml between days 125
pregnancy and regress only at the time of parturi-
tion (see Ch.6).
Ovulation
Parturition
Progesterone
Toialoestrogens
....Prolactin
600
400
10
(1/bu）
oestrogens(pg/ml)
(/bu)
300
200
Prolact
Total
Q
50
100
150
Days
Fig.3.18Schematicrepresentationcfhe trendsinhormone concentrationsin the peripheral circulationof the ewe during
pregnancy and parturition.
105
Part
2
Pregnancy and itsparturition
Goat
Beyond 100 days of gestation the fetus may be
palpated thurough the abdoninal wall, and devel
As in the ewe, progesterone concentrations in the
opment ofthe udder is then obvious in primipara.
peripheral blood and milk decline around the time
The best way toballotte thefetus is to have the ewe
of oestrus; thus sampling approximately 21 days after
standing normally and to lift the abdomen repeat-
service or artificial insemination will enablea distinc-
edly immediately in front of the udder, the fetus can
tion to be made between non-pregnancy and pseu-
be felt to drop on to the palpating hand.
until a plateau is reached,and then declinerapidly a
few days before parturition,Total oestrogens in the
Ultrasonographic methods
peripheral circulation are much higher than those
The fetal pulse detector (Doppler) has been used
recorded in the ewe.They increase gradually from 30
to diagnose pregnancy in ewes, and two types of
to 40 days of gestation,reaching a peak value of over
probe are available. The external probe is applied
600pg/ml justbeforeparturition(Challis&Linzell
lo the skin surface of the abdomen just cranial to
1971).Prolactin remains low during pregnancy but
the udder. The fleece in this region is sparse and
rises rapidly just before parturition.
with transmission gel applied to the end of the
Bilateral ovariectomy at any stage of gestation will
probe it is slowly moved over ihe surface. The ewe
result in loss of the pregnancy; thus extraovarian
can be restrained either standing or sitting on hier
sources would appear to be unable to produce suffi-
haunches.Characteristic sounds indicate the pres-
cient progesterone for the maintenance of pregnancy.
ence of the fetal heart (tack,tack, tack') or vessels
('swish, swish,swish');thefrequency greatly excees
Methods of pregnancy diagnosis
that of the mother's heart rate, except in late gesta-
in sheep
tion when the fetal heart rateis reduced.Between40
and 8O days ofgestation the acciiracy of detection is
There are a large number of published methods of
no better than 60% (Hulet 1968,Richardson 1972).
However, after 110 days, with a reasonable amount
historical, and these have been reviewed in detail
of prartice, it is nearly 100% accurate and it takes an
(Richardson 1972, Karen et al 2001). The number
average3or4minutesper ewe to makeadiagnosis
andvariety of methodspoint tothefact thiat thiere
(Watt et al 1984).
was not a simple, accurate and inexpensive clinical
Using a rectal probe, Lindahl (1971) obtained a sen-
method of diagnosing pregnancy in the ewe until the
sitivity of 9o% or more at the start of the second tri-
advent of B-imodeultrasonography,whichiswithout
mester, while Deas (1977) obtained a sensitivity of
doubt the method of choice. Given the rather high
82%and a specificityof91%between days 41and
fertility of sheep, determination of fetal numbers
G0 of gestation.There are several reports giving simi-
(for a more efficient use of feedstuffs in late preg-
lar results.The rectal probe is safe and relauively easy
nancy), rather than diagnosing the pregnancy itself,
to use and requires limited restraint of he ewe. With
appears to offer the main economic benefit of sheep
the fetal pulse detector the diagnosis of falsepositives
farmers(Russell 1989).
should be virually nil; themajor source of error being
the confusion of the maternal pulsesounds with those
of thefetus.However,falsenegatives are always a pos-
Management methods
sibility, especially when testing is taking place too early
Traditionally the method used by shepherds is ihe
or too quickly. The external probe can also be used
observation that ewes, wlich have been marked by
between80 and100 days to differentiatebetween sin-
a‘keeled’or‘raddled’ram,fail to be marked again
gle and multiple pregnancies, although the accuracy in
within 16-19 days.This is a sufficiently reliable sign of
identifying the precise number of fetal lambs is poor.
The B-mode ultrasound sector transducer probe,
onic death will reduce its accuracy, and 20-30% of
using the transabdominal approach,has proved to
pregnant ewes will show oestrus during early preg-
be an early, accurate and rapid method of not only
nancy. lt is important to ensure that the colour of the
g sm u  id 
raddle crayon is changed regularly every 16 days, that
also accurately determining fetal numbers (Fig.3.19).
it is sufficiently soft to produce a mark and that the
The cost-effectiveness of such a procedure is obvi-
colour sequence allows easy colour identification
ous,since it is possible not only to eliminate barren
106
Chapter
3
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
u
184315/10/91
15cm 5.0MHz
R.S.9
ShpTD=78dy
D
SOURHOPE
111512/B2/92
15cm5.8MHz50mm
Shp TD = 81dy
Fig.3.19Transabdominal B-mode ultrasound imagesof the ewe'spregnant uterus and itscontents using3.0 or5.0MHzsector
transducer.(A)At approximately 35 days of gestation.At thisstage it ispossible toidentify fluid-filled sectionsof the uterine
gestation.Note twinfetuses(t)surrounded bynon-echogenic（black)amnioticfluid.Theumbilicalcord canbeseen attached to
the left fetus(u).(C)At approximately 70 days of gestation.Note twin fetuses(t)andcotyledons(c).(D)At approximately80 days
ofgestation.Note thelarge singlefetus(f),inwhich the spine canbe identified;also cotyledons(c).(E)At approximately 81 days
ewesbutalsotoadjustfeedinglevelstoaccommo-
differentiatefetalnumbersis45-50days.Whiteetal
date the number of lambs.Not only does this save （1984）,using a 2.25,3 or3.5MHz transducer, exam-
on feed cost but also reduces the chances of preg-ined a total of 1120 ewes 36-90 days after tupping.
nancy toxaemia occurring.PregnancycanbedetectedThefleecewasshornontheabdomenofeachewe
as early as 30 days,although the optimum time to
extendingsome20cmcranial totheudderandacross
107
Part
127
Pregnancy and itsparturition
thewholewidth.Theewewasrestrained onherback
87afterartificialinseminationin synchronizedewes
and,usingvegetableoil as a couplingmedium,the
(Karen etal2006).
abdomen was scanned.A positive diagnosis of preg-
Pregnancy specific proteins. As in cattle, the
nancy,based upon the imaging of a fluid-filled uteris
binucleate cells of the ovine placenta producepreg-
andplacentomes,couldbemade quitequickly.Care
nancy specific proteins (ovPsPBs),also known as
wastakentoexaminethelimitsoftheuterussothat
pregnancy associated glycoproteins (ovPAGs)(Ward
fetalnumberscouldbedetected accurately.An expe-
etal2002).They are detectable in the maternalcir-
riencedpersoncouldexamineonaverage75ewesper
culation from week3of gestation until 2-3weeks
hour.Itis alsopossibletoexamine theeweina sitting
afterlambing.With antibodies tobovinePSPB,Ruder
position.Anexperiencedpersonwas over99%correct
etal(1988)obtaineda sensitivityof100%andasper-
in differentiating pregnant from non-pregnant ewes
and 98.9%in identifying fetal numbers (Fowler &
takenbetween days35and 106.Byusing a heterol-
Willins1984).Thecommonestsourceoferrorwas
ogous, double antibody radioimmunoassay against
failing to identify the third fetus in ewes with triplets.
abovinePAG 67kDa subunit,Karen etal(2003)
Inexperienced persons soon developed a high level of
obtained highsensitivity and specificityfromdays22
accuracy,especially at differentiating between preg-
of pregnancy onwards. Measurements of PAG were
nant and non-pregnant ewes.Commercially,B-mode
unreliableforan accuratepredictionof fetal numbers
ultrasoundscanningisdonewiththeeweplacedin
(Vandaele et al 2005, Karen et al 2006).
a rotating handling system, to allow easy movement
ofthetransducer over the(shorn) areainfront of the
Methods ofpregnancy diagnosis
udderandover theuterus(Whiteetal 1984,Russell
in the goat
1989),orwith the animalinstandingposition in an
elevated restrainingcrate,with the transducerprobe
Many ofthemethodswhich havebeen described
placed on the hairless area just cranial and lateral to
above for the ewe are also applicable to the goat.
iheudder(Taverneetal1985b).Yet,with the animals
Usingthefetalpulsedetector areliablediagnosis of
in the supine position and without shaving,Karen
pregnancy is possible at 50 days using an abdomi-
etal(2006)recentlyreportedratherlow accuracies
nalprobe and25days witha rectalprobe.Excellent
for discriminatingbetweensingleandmultiplepreg-
resultshave alsobeen obtainedwithB-modedirect
nancies during afield studywith AwassixMerino
imagingwithrectalorabdominalprobesfrom about
sheepbetweendays43and87ofgestation.Transrectal
30daysofgestation(Lavoir&Taverme1989,Hesselink
scanning has also been explored in sheep,although
&Taverne 1994,Gonzalez etal 2004,Holtz2005),
oftenwith smallernumbersofanimals Buckrell et al
andthemethod alsoenablestheaccuratedetermina-
1986,Garciaetal1993,Karenetal2004),andallows
tion of fetal numbers (Fig.3.20).Scanning at an early
forasomewhat earlierdiagnosis.
stageafter matingorartificial insemination(before
days 30) may result in a false-positive diagnosis if
the presence of fluid in the uterus of pseudopregnant
Laboratorymethods
does (mucometra) is mistaken for a sign of pregnancy
Milk and plasma progesterone.Pregnancy can be
(Hesselink &Taverne 1994,Lopes Junior et al 2004).
diagnosed on the fact that in the pregnant ewe
Themilkprogesteronetesthasbeen usedexten-
the CLs persist and hence peripheral progesterone
sively, since most parous goats are lactating at the
concentrationswillremain elevatedat15-18 days
time of mating. Whole milk samples are collected
after mating.The presence of a persistent CL in the
from the bucket after thorough mixing oni, or aboul,
absenceofa pregnancymay occur,resultingina false
the day of mating and in the absence of return to
result.Using a 2.5ng/ml discriminatory value using
oestrus,22and26dayslater（lloldsworth&Davies
anenzyme immunoassayforsamplescollected 19
1979).The accuracy for identifying the absence of
days after intravaginal progestogen sponge removal,
pregnancy was 100%; however, some false-positive
Boscoset al(2003)obtaineda sensitivity of98.3%
results were obtained due to pseudopregnancy, ovar-
anda specificity of 85.5%.Plasma levels,when mea-
ian cysts and elevated progesterone values at oestrus.
sured usingradioimmunoassay, did not prove accu-
However, given the advantages of B-mode ultra-
ratein discriminatingbetweensingleandmultiple
sonography,it seems unlikely that the method will
pregnancies in samples talen between days 43and
everbecomeroutineingoat husbandry.
108
Chapter
|31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
ANG7OL00FO
earlypregnancy
Oestrone sulphate is producedby the placen-
bitches are similar to thiose ofnon-pregnant indi-
tomes;its presence in plasma,milk or faeces is a
vidualsandforthisreason,unlikeinotherspecies,
positive indication of pregnancy,thus enabling dif-
cannot be used to diagnose pregnancy. Concannon
ferentiationfrompseudopregnancy.Althoughit has
etal（1975)obtainedmeanmaximum values
been shown that oestrone sulphate concentrations
of 29ng/ml for pregnant and 27ng/ml for non-
from 30 days of gestation exceed those in non-preg-
pregnant bitches. However, there was a lot of indi-
nant individuals(Heapetal1981);the earliestopti-
vidualvariation,withpeakvaluesobtainedbetween
mum timeis50 daysorlaterafter service(Chaplin
8and 29 days after theLil peak inpregnant bitches,
&Holdsworth1982）
and between 12 and 28 days in non-pregnant bitches.
Determinations ofPSPB（Humblot etal 1990)
From about 30 days ofgestation,thereis a gradual
or PAGs(Gonzalezetal 2004)in plasma have also
decrease inprogesterone sothat by about day 60val-
been used for pregnancy diagnosis in goats,and
ues of5ng/ml areobtained,followedbya sudden
appeared accurate from 3-4 weeks of pregnancy
decline justbeforeparturition tozero just afterwards.
onwards.Because the proteins also appear in the
Inthenon-pregnantbitchthereisnorapidfall;low
milk,this mightbecome an attractive testfor dairy
levels of progesterone persist.The number of days in
goats farms.
whichvalues≥1ng/mlwereobtainedwere68daysin
non-pregnant compared with 63.8 days in pregnant
bitches(Concannon et al 1975).
Pregnancy and its detection
Peripheral plasma oestrogen(Fig. 3.21) values are
in the dog
pregnant bitch,with someevidenceofanincreaseat
Endocrinology
thetimeofimplantation（Concannonetal1975)
They remain fairly constant during therest of gesta-
Thebitchhasaprolongedlutealphasewith the CLs
tion,beforedecliningtobasalnon-pregnant values
remaining active for 65-75days in the non-pregnant
by the day ofparturition(Baanetal 2008)
animal. The uterus does not appear to have a role in
Prolactin is themainluteotrophichormone,espe-
influencing the life span of the CL in the non-preg-
cially during the second halfofgestation (Okkens
nant state(Okkens et al1985).Progesterone con-
et al 1990, Onclin et al 2000). Although prolactin
centrationsinthe peripheral circulationof pregnant
concentrations increase during the first half of the
109
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
Mating
Parturition
Progesterone
....Prolactin
Total oestrogens
Corticosteroids
bu
P
30
20
stercid
(
(/
/6d)
/Bu)
20
oestrogens
05
10
Q
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Days
pregriancy andparturition.
luteal phase in both pregnant and non-pregnant
gestation length of 61.4 days was calculated (Okkens
bitches, there is a much greater rise in the second
et al 2001). In a recent retrospective study, breed and
half of theformer.The gradual rise during pregnancy
litter size, but not age and parity, appeared to influ-
ends with a sudden surge during the rapid decline in
ence gestation length in dogs (Eilts et al 2005)
progesierone which occurs 1-2 days before whelping
(De Coster elal1983,McCann etal 1988).
Methods of pregnancy diagnosis
Relaxin has been detected in the peripheral circu-
lation of pregnant Labrador and Beagle bitches at
Since the bitch is not polycyclic,pregnancy cannat
20-30 days of gestation, whereas it was absent in
be anticipated by a failure to return to oestrus.It is
non-pregnant bitches at all stages of the reproductive
generally accepted that the period of oestrus ends
cycle (Steinetz et al 1989). The ovaries of the bitch
more abrupily when fertilization has occurred,
are necessary for the maintenance of pregnancy; their
although thereason for thishasremained unclear.
removal even as late as 56 days resulted in abortion
One of the problems in diagnosing pregnancy in the
(Sokolowski1971),Significantlylowerplasmarelaxin
bitch is that overt pseudopregnancy is rather com-
levcls have been found in pregnant bitches with a
mon, the intensity of the signs varying from indi-
high incidence of embryonic/fetal death (Gunzel
vidual to individual.
Apel et al 2006).
The deposition of abdominal and subcutaneous
The average gestation length in the bitch is normally
quoted as 63-64 days bur the interval from first mar-
port the demands of the suhsequent lactation, since
ifgestation length is measured from the time of the
The gravid uterus and its contents cause no appreci-
preovulatory LHpeak,itisvery constant at between64
able increase in body weight during the first 5 weeks.
and 66 days (Concannon et al 1983). When the pre-
From this point, body weight rapidly increases
ovulatory increase of plasma progesterone was used
according to the number of fetuses. The increase will
as a guide for the optimum time of mating, an average
vary from 1 kg in a 5lkgbitch to 7kgor more in one
110
Chapter
3
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
A..10kg
Cocker spaniel
These changes are more easily recognized in prini-
4.1kg
gravidae.At about day 35, in unpigmented skins, the
B
Dachshund
6 puppies
teats become bright pink in colour, enlarged and tur
C
10.9kg
Mongrel
seiddnd g
gid, and they protrude. This condition persists until
11.4kg
Cocker spaniel
7puppies
D
about day 45,when the teats become larger still but
softer and tumefied; they may become pigmented.
Appreciablehypertrophyofthe glands comrnenices
5
at day 50 and progresses until at term the mam-
mary glands comprise two parallel, enlarged and
oedematous areaswitha depressionberween them,
extending from thepelvic brim to the cranial thorax.
A watery secretion can generally be expressed from
the teats 2-3 days before parturition;however,the
onset of milk secretion coincides with parturition. In
multigravidae,mammary hypertrophy commences
about 7 days before term, and in some cases mill
can be expressed from the teats several days before
parturition.
2
Abdominalpalpation
The ease and accuracy of abdominal palpation will
depend upon the following factors:
the size of the animal: the smaller, the easier
· its temperament: whether palpation is resisted
2
3
Weeks
made
Fig. 3.22 Increase in body weight in bitches during
·the number of fetuses in utero
pregnancy.
whether the bitch is of normal size or grossly fat.
Days 18-21. A1 this stage the embryos represent a
of 27kg, but by the time the increase in body weight
series of tense,oval distensions in the horns, about
has ocurred, there are other very definite signs of
12mm long by 9mm broad.In small bitches that
pregnancy (Fig. 3.22). Where there a large number
of fetuses, abdominal distension becomes progres-
estimate approximately the number present. Those
sive and obvious from the fifth week onwards,but in
situated in the caudal parts of the horns are most
animals gravid with one or two fetuses only, particu
easilyfelt;if there are only one or two and theyare
larly when the bitch is large or very fat, distension
located cranially,theymaynot beidentified.In large
may not be noticeable.
or fat bitches it is unlikely that theconceptuses will
There are several causes of abdominal distension
be detected at this stage. Care must be taken not to
in the bitch that must be differentiated from preg
confuse the conceptual swellings with faecesin the
nancy. The most important is pyometia; othiers are
colon.
ascites, peritonitis with effusion, splenic enlarge-
Days 24-30.This is the optimum period for the early
ment and neoplasia of the liver; abdominal lym-
diagnosis of pregnancy.By day 24 these distensions
have become spherical in outline, from 6-30 mm in
phatic glands or uterus are less common.
diameter.They remain tense and are easily recognized
(fig.3.23). Sometimes there is variation in size, the
Clinical methods
caudal ones beingrathersmaller than the cranial ones,
Mammary glands. Characteristic changes occur in the
but impending lateembryonicorfetal mortalitymay
mamary glandsUnfortunately,sinilarbulessdef
alsohavecaused a size difference.The embryonicunits
inite changes may occur during pseudopregnancy.
maintain this spherical form until about day 33.
111
Part
21
Pregnancy and its parturition
Days35-44.The constrictedportionsof the horns
be detected.High in the flank the one occupying
between the embryonic units progressively dilate,
the apexofthehornwill befelt,whilein themid
the distensions become elongated and lose much of
linejustinfrontofthepelvicbrim isthe onewith
their tenseness.Atthis time theuterus comes into
itsextremityin theuterinebody.Ifmanipulation is
contactwith the abdominal wall and in thebitch
resisted,digital examination per rectum is helpful.
pregnant with many fetuses abdominal distension
Thebitch'sforepartsshouldberaisedandtheuterus
is starting to become obvious.Nevertheless, palpa
pressed backwards towards the pelvic inlet by pres-
tion of thefetuses themselves isnot yetpossible.As
sure on the abdomen.Thepresentedpart of thecau-
theuterusitselfhaslostmuchofitstension and the
dalfetuswill bedetectedbeneath thefinger.Inbig
amountoffetal fluids hasreacheditsmaximumvol-
orfatbitches,pregnant with onlyoneor two,doubt
ume, a positive diagnosis may be difficult, particu-
may still exist,although by this time the mammary
larly in those pregnant with one or two only.
glandsaffordvaluableconfirmatoryevidence.
Days 45-55. During this stage, increase in the size
The accuracy of abdominal palpation is sometimes
of the fetuses is rapid. At day 45 it may be pos-
questioned,particularlyin differentiatingpregnancy
sibletodetectthecaudallysituatedonesbetween
fromovert pseudopregnancy.Allen&Meredith
thefingers;in a9kgbitch they areapproximately
(1981)andTaverneetal(i985c)havereportedonthe
63mm long and 12 mm broad.It is during this stage
accuracy of this method. The former authors found
thatthedisposition oftheuterus intheabdomi-
that,although pregnancywas detected at 21-25 days
nal cavity changes. In animals pregnant with many
of gestation, the accuracy was only 52% compared
fetuses, each horn represents an elongated cylin-
with87%from26-35days.However,in thecaseof
der, 38-51 mm in diameter and 228-300mm long.
the correct diagnosis of bitches that did not subse-
Caudally，they extend into theuterinebody,which
quently whelp, the accuracies were 92% and73%,
hasbythis timebecome dilated.Eachhornisin two
respectively,for the same gestational ages.The opti
segments: the caudal, which lies on the abdominal
mum timeforaccuracyisbetween26and35daysof
floorandpassesforwardstothemarginsoftheliver,
gestation.Taverne et al (1985c) concluded,on the
andthecranial,whichlies dorsaland lateralto it,
basis of91investigationsbetween days 25 and 35
withitslongaxisdirectedbaclwards towardsthe
after first mating, that sensitivity of abdominal pal-
pelvis.In the last stages theuterus almost entirely
pation (by anexperienced clinician)was 9o% and
fills the abdomen.
specificity91%.Theseaccuracieswereonlyslightly
Days55-63.Duringthisperiod thereshouldbeno
lowerthantheonesobtainedwithultrasonography
difficulty in diagnosing pregnancy provided the
(with a3MHz transducer)in the sameperiod.Small
bitch readily accepts palpation of the abdomen.
litters appeared tobe the major cause of false-neg-
The size of the fetuses is such that they can readily
ativediagnoseswithboth techniques.The authors
112
Chapter
31
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
suggested that it is worthwhile for small animals
depending on thesizeof thebitch and theamount
clinicianstopraciisethe technique ofabdominal
ofbody fat(Royal et al 1979). In interpretingradio-
palpation. It is important for a high level of accu-
graphs, three points require identification: fistly,
Tacy that the interval from mating to examination is
displacement of the intestinal mass by the early
known,since assessment of whetherabitch ispreg-
gravid uterus;secondly,identificationof theuterus;
nant ornotisdependentupon theidentification of
and,thirdly,thepresenceof fetalskeletons.Itisos
conceptual swellings of a sizecomparable with the
sible toseefetal sacs as early as 23-25daysofgesta-
gestational age of the bitch.
tion(Royaletal 1979).Attheendof6weeksthere
may be evidence of fetal skeletons,with the skulls
identifiable by 45 days. At the end of 7 weeks it is
Radiography
normally possible to identify the whole fetal skel-
Radiography is a particularly useful diagnostic aid
eton.The accuracy of radiographic diagnosis is very
in the terminal stages of pregnancy,especially in
muchdependentupon thequalityof theradiograph
theobesedogwhereadifferentialdiagnosisfrom
that is obtained (Fig.3.24).
presumedsmall number offetuses thatmay suf
Ultrasonographicmethods
ferprolongedgestation.It may alsobevaluable in
dystocia cases to disclose the presence of retained
Using the Doppler methodwith an external trans-
puppies and the disposition of a presenting puppy,
ducerplaced on the abdominalwall adjacent to
although ultrasonography will usually be the tech-
he mammary glands, fetal heart sounds were
nique of first choice in such cases.
detected as early as 29 days ofgestation(Helper
Inmostcasesa singleradiographwith thebitch
1970),althoughin allthe25bitchesconfirmed to
inlateralrecumbency will suffice,although in an
bepregnant the fetal heartswere heard by32 days;
attempt to identify fetal numbersmore accurately
theywereconsistently twicethematernal heartrate.
a dorsoventralview maybeuseful.An intensity of
Riznar&Mahek(1978) found that theearliest time
lessthan100mA,voltagebetween65and90kVand
a positive diagnosis couldbemadewas at 44 days.
a speedof 0.15-0.03 seconds should be adequate,
They stressed itsvaluein lategestation,61-70 days
Fig.3.24Radiograph of theabdomenof a pregnant bitch near term.Note the fetal skeletons.
113
Part
21
Pregnancyand itsparturition
after mating, especially as a method of confirm-
accuracy from 50 days to term has been reported
ing the presence of live or dead puppies.Llsing two
（Bondestametal1984),withoverestimationofsmall
different instruments,Allen &Meredith （1981）
litters and-underestimation of large litters.
founda lowlevelofaccuracybetween25and35
For merely diagnosing pregnancy it is gener-
days of gestation,which improved with advancing
ally unnecessary to clip the hair of dogs,even in
gestationalagetoreach100%withoneinstrument
those breeds with long coats, provided that he
between43and64days.
hair is parted and plenty of coupling gel is used.
A-mode ultrasound depth analysers have been
Many owners do not object totheclippingof the
employed to diagnosepregnancy using an external
hair between the tworows of teats,enabling more
transducer probe. Smith & Kirk (1975) were able to
clear and detailed imaging through the midventral
detect pregnancy as early as 18 days after mating;
abdominal wall.
these authors stressed the importance of not scan-
ningtoofar caudallybecauseofthechanceofreflec-
Laboratorymethods
tions from a full urinary bladder.Using a similar
instrument with a2.25MHz transducer probe,the
Measurement ofserum proteins.Gentry & Liptrap
earliest correctpositive diagnosis ofpregnancywas
(198l)observed a threefold risein serum fibrino-
madeat26days(Allen&Meredith 1981).From32
gen concentrations during pregnancy,with peak
daystotermalevelofaccuracyofabout90%was
valuesoccurring4-5weeks aftermating.Sincethis
obtained for ihe correct diagnosis of pregnant and
phenomenon did not occur at the corresponding
non-pregnant bitches.
stage of the luteal phase innon-pregnant bitches,
As with other domestic species,B-mode ultra-
it can be used as a method of detecting pregnancy.
sonography is now one ofihe most frequently
used methods of diagnosing pregnancy in thebitch
response in pregnant bitches as demonstrated by
(Fig.3.25).In addition,the technique has been
therisein serum C-reactive protein(CRP)in mid-
widelyexploredtopredictthedayofwhelpingin
gestation.Morerecently,significantdifferenceshave
bitches with an unknown mating date (Son et al
been reported between pregnant and non-pregnant
2001,Kutzleret al2003;Luvoni&Beccaglia2006).
bitches for a wide range of serum acute-phase pro-
With the development of improved transducers,it
teins(Vannucchietal 2002)and theauthors also
became ahighly accurate diagnostic tool,notonly
suggested that determination of someof thesepro-
for pregnancy diagnosis but also for the study of
teinsmightbeuseful for(early)pregnancy diagno-
pregnancy failure(England&Russo2006).Theini-
sis.They are likely to be produced in response to the
tial studies reported in the literature mainly used
implantation of the embryo causing tissue damage
low-frequency transducers.Using a 2.4MHz linear
However,precisematingdatesarerequiredforthese
array probe placed on the abdominal wall,positive
tests and there is always the danger that false posi-
identification ofpregnancy at a high level of accu-
tivesmay ariseifthere isinfectionand inflamma-
racy was achieved 28 days after natural mating or
tionelsewhere.
artificial insemination(Bondestam et al 19S4).Of
Measurement ofhormonesin theperipheral circula-
77bitches that whelped,only one was incorrectly
tion.Whereas persistent elevated progesterone con-
diagnosed as being non-pregnant, an accuracy of
centrationsintheperipheralcirculation are used to
99.3%,and she expelled a macerated fetus, while
detect pregnancyin the polyoestrous species,they
all 58 that were diagnosed as non-pregnant failed to
areofnovaluein the bitch because of theprolonged
givebirth topuppies.In a studyincluding some135
luteal phase (pseudopregnancy) in non-pregnant
bitches,investigatedbetween days20and49after
animals.Yet,the initialrise inpreovulatory proges-
firstmating,Taverne et al (1985c) found a sensitivity
lerone concentrationsappeared to be an accurate
of92.9% and a specificity of96%.Early identifica-
predictorfortheparturitiondate(Kutzleretal2003).
tion of the conceptus has beenreporied at 14 days
Thecanineplacenta does not produce gonadotrophic
(Tainturier&Moysan 1984)and21days（Taverne
hormones butit doesproducerelaxin(Steinetzet al
1984).However,theformer workers suggested that
1987,1989,Klonischetal1999).Peripheralplasma
it was preferable to wait until 20 days.
concentrations are elevated from 20-30 days of ges-
The accurate estimation of litter size hasproved to
tation,whereas they are not in the non-pregnant
be difficult,especiallyin largerbreeds of dog.A figure
!animal;pregnancydetectionkitsarenowcommer
e so
cially available.
114
Chapter
[31
Pregnancy and itsdiagnosis
Fig.3.25Utrasound magesofapregnanteagle bitchat(A)day24,(B)day27and(C)day35aftera singlemating.caning
tookplace abdominallywitha7.5MHzlineararray transducer.In(A),beneath thebladder,a singleoval-shaped uterine
implantatiochamber can beseen,inwhich the embryo can berecognized.In(B)the fetus can berecognizedwith its head
downwards and the umbilical cordasa double horizontal line.In(C) the headof thefetus is toright.On the left side,beneath
the thoraxwithribs,a section through theplacental girdlecanberecognized.
115
Part
2
Pregnancy and its parturition
Pregnancy and its detection in
the cat
Ovulationoccurs 23-30hours aftermating
(Concannon et al 1980), and serum progesterone
concentrations rapidly increase from the baseline
ofunder10umol/l toreachipeakvaluesofaround
100nmol/l between the 1st and 4th weeks of preg
nancy (Verhage et al 1976) (Figs. 3.26, 3.27).
Cats are unusual in that queens may continue to
display oestrous behaviour and accept mating even
40
though ovulation has occurred and there is signifi-
cant production of progesterone (Stabenfeldt 1974).
This evidently favours the occurrence of super-fecun-
dation, the presence of offspring from more than
one sire in a single litter (see p. 143).
At 3-4 weeks of pregnancy, hyperaemia of the teats
occurs. This is particularly prominent in maiden
queens. It is a progesterone-depenclent phenome-
non and is also seen in pseudopregnancy. There is
conflicting evidence concerning the relative roles of
口
the CLs and the placentas in the synthesis of proges
terone during pregnancy. Scoit(1970) and Gruffydd.
720
Jones (1982) have reported the maintenance of
00
pregnancy following ovariectomy after 45-50
and 49 days respectively and 3-β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase activity an enzyine essential for
progesterone synthesis, is present in the feline pla-
centa (Malassine & Ferre 1979). Yet Verstegen et al
(1993a) have reported abortion following ovariec-
110
100-
Dey
Fig.3.27 Plasma concentrations of total oestrogens(O—O)and
progesterone(—), and oestrous scores (-
--)throughout
oestrus,pregnancy and lactaticn inindividual queens.Day0
represents the dayof mating;K,the day of kittening;W,the day
ofweaning (by courtesy of T.I. Gruffydd-Jones).
tomy at 45 days of gestation.Progesterone concen-
trations gradually fall from their peak values during
the first month of pregnancy, the fall becoming pre-
cipitous during thelast 2 days prior to parturition
60
70
In many, but not all, queens there is a slight prepar-
Dey
turient increase in oestrogen concentrations bu ihis
declines just before parturition.
Fig.3.26 Mean (±SD) plasma concentrations of progesterone
Relaxin is produced by the placenta during preg-
throughout pregnancy (four cats). Day O represents the day of
nancy and isthought tocontributetoitsmaintenance
mating. (Courtesy of T. J. Gruffydd-Jones.)
by inhibiting uterine activity. It appears during the
116
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
3rd week of pregnancy, with concentrations declin-
et al 2004). The earliest ultrasonographic observa
ing just before parturition (Stewart & Stabenfeldt
tion of a gestational sac was on day 10 after mat-
1985).Prolactin is considered a luteotrophichor-
ing (with a 10MHz transducer),while the embryo
mone during the last third of pregnancy (Jochle
proper could be visualized from day 18 oniwards
1997) and concentrations decline as weaning takes
(Fig.3.28). Davidson et al (1986) were the first to
place(Banksetal 1983)
report the use of ultrasonography for pregnancy
The average gestation
1lengthis63-65days
diagnosis. Fetal cardiac activity can be detected from
(Prescott 1973) but is reported to vary between 59
day 16-17 onwards t0 assess fetal viability (Root
and 70 days. Kittens born after a gestation length
Kustritz 2006b). In a recent study (De Haas van
shorter than 59 days generally show decreased via-
Dorsser et al 2006) urinary relaxin levels in domes
bility. The fact that ovulation may not necessarily
tic and non-domestic felids appeared to mirror the
occur after the first mating may partly explain the
profiles in plasma, and measurements of relaxin in
considerable variation in gestation length.
urine thereforeprovide a sensitive and specificbio-
The modal litter size for non-pedigree cats is four
chemical method for pregnancy diagnosis in cats.
with a range of rwo to seven,but there is variation in
litter sizebetween pedigreebreeds.Oriental breeds
tend to havelarger litters, sometimes in excess of 10
Prevention and termination
kittens,whilepedigreelonghair queens tend to have
of pregnancy
smaller litters,often of only two or three kittens.
Singleton litters are unusual,which may reflect fetal
resorption due to inadequate fetoplacental endo-
In all domestic species there will be occasions when
crine contribution to the maintenance of pregnancy.
it will be desirable to either prevent pregnancy occur-
A proportion of queens will displayoestrousbehiav
ring or terminate it prematurely. Such occasions may
iourwhilepregnant.Some of thesecatswill mate,and
follow an unintended mating (misalliance), where
this could lead to superfetation (see p. 144), although
pregnancy and parturition may present a severe
this has not been convincingly proved (Root Kustritz
risk to the dam's health, or where thie owners of the
2006a). Free-living queens may mate with several
animal do not want the pregnancy to continue.
competing toms during oestrus and hence superfe-
cundity is common (see p. 143).
Horse
Methods of pregnancy diagnosis
The management and treatunent of twinning are
discussed in detail in Chapter 26.If the pregnancy
Cats lend themselves particularly well to pregnancy
needstobecurtailed forthis andotherreasons,such
diagnosis by abdominal palpation.This is most
as mismating, the treatment of choice is PGF or
satisfactorily performed 16-26 days after mating.
an analogue administered after the CL hasbecome
when conceptuses are readily identifiable as indi-
responsive to the hormone,i.e. 4 days after ovulation
vidual turgid spherical swellings. Pregnancy may be
(see Ch.1) and before the formation of the endome-
confirmed as early as 13 days after matingbutat this
lrial cups, i.e.about 35 days.Therefore, it is prefer
stage the conceptuses may be confused with fae-
able to treat approximately 10-15 days after mating.
cal boluses.After 6weeks,the conceptual swellings
Alternatively,intrauterine infusion of 250-500ml
increase markedly in size, elongating and merging,
of physiological saline during the same period will
thus making palpation more difficult. However, by
also be effective, since, as well as a physical effect
this stage, there will usually be significant abdomi-
influshing out the conceptus,it also stimulates the
nal enlargement.Radiography has also been used
for pregnancy diagnosis and for an accurate predic-
tion of parturition date in cats (Haney et al 2003).
The first report on the use of ultrasonography in
Cattle
pregnantcatswasalready publishedin 1980(Mailhac
Pregnancy can be terminated from 4-5 to 100
et al 19s0). Detailed descriptions of B-mode ultra-
days after ovulation with PGF or an analogue,
sonographic pictures of the pregnant feline uterus
have been reported, both for the first (Zambelli
Subcutaneous injections of a progesterone-receptor
et al 2002) and second half of gestation (Zambelli
antagonist at days 46 and 47 appeared also effective
117
Part
21
Pregnancy and itsparturition
FROZE1
h6-UH-81
13:16:06
7.5HA2
PBEPR2
POST PR S4
Note thefetus(arrowed)
asanabortive treatmentincattle(Breukelmanet al
（Taverne et al 2006).During the finalweeks ofges
2005b).After150 days,theplacenta forms an addi-
tationcorticosteroidswillbenecessarytoterminate
tional source ofprogesterone for themaintenance
pregnancy (see Ch.6).
ofpregnancy,until about 270 days of gestation;this
implies that in many cases the use of PGF alone
Pig
will not be effective.During this period,long-acting
corticosteroids either aloneorincombinationwith
Pregnancy can be terminated at any stage with PGFa
PGF,are required (see Ch.G).
although repeated injections are sometimes neces-
sarytoaccomplishexpulsionofallconceptuses.
Goat
Dog
Pregnancy can be teriminated at any stage with a
luteolytic dose of PGFa
Pregnancycanbepreventedinthebitchbythestra-
tegicuseof oestrogens during thefirst5days after
Sheep
mating.They exert their effect by interfering with
the transport of the zygotes from the uterine tube to
PGF is effective in terminating pregnancy after day
the uterine horns,probably by causing oedema of
4and before day 12.During the days 12-21period,
the endosalpinx and thus a temporary tubal occlu-
there will benoresponsebecauseof theprotective
sion. For many years, estradiol benzoate was used
effect ofolFN-t,which ensures the survival ofthe
asa single intramuscular or subcutaneous injec-
CL.Thereis alsosome suggestion of another refrac-
tion ata doserate of5-10mg.More recently the
toryperiodbetweendays25and40.After45-55
use of lower doses of estradiol benzoate 0.01 mg/kg
days, the CL is no longer the main source of pro-
gesteroneforthemaintenanceofpregnancyandthe
aftermatinghasbeen advocated,sinceitispossibly
placentastartstobethedominantproductionsite.
a safer option.
During the3rd and4th month of gestation,induc-
Attention has also focused on the termination
tion of abortion is more difficult,although the use
ofpregnancyatalater stage.NaturalPGFrather
of theprogesterone-receptor antagonist aglepristone
than analogues hasbeen found to be effective
appears to be effective in some ewes at this stage
when administered at a doserateof150-270μg/kg
118
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
subcutaneously twice daily consecutively on days
cabergoline and low-dose cloprostenol appear to be
10-14 after the bitch has entered metoestrus or preg-
most promising (Onclin &Verstegen 1997).More
nancy, as confirmed by exfoliative vaginal cytology
recently,aglepristoiie was shown to be effective in
(see Ch. 1) (Romagnoli et al 1993). Earlier reports
midpregnancy in a controlled clinical study with 66
in which pregnancy was terminated at a later stage,
queens with known breeding dates (Fieni etal 2006).
namely 25-30 days, resulted in unacceptable side-
Two subcutaneous injections, given 24 hours apart,
effects (Lein et al 1989). At present, it is doubtful if
resulted in expulsion ofall fetuses inS8.5%of the
PGF. should be used for this purpose. The use of
animals within 14 days after the first injection.
progesterone-receptor aniagonists appeared a more
effective and acceptable treatment (Concannon el al
1990, Linde-Forsberg et al 1992, Galac et al 2000,
References
Fieni et al 2001).Abortion can beinduced not only
by blocking the effect of progesterone at tlhe level of
Adams CS,Jardon PW 1999 BovinePrue32:240
Allen WE1971VetRec88:508
the CLs with an antiluteotrophic therapy.
AllenWE 19751Reprod Feril Suppl 23:425
Dopamine agonists like cabergoline, which inhibit
Allen WR 2005 Anim Reprod 2: 209
prolactin secretion and hence indirectly withdraws
Allen WE,Meredith MJ 1981 J Small Anim Pract 22: G09
the luteotrophic support for the CLs,have been used
AllenWE,Newcombe IRI981EquineVet I13:51
Arthur GiI1956J CompPathol 66:345
to terminate pregnancy in bitches. It has been used
Atkinson S,Buddle JR,Williamson Petal 1986
at a dose rate of 1.65μg/kg subcutaneously for 5
Theriogenology 26:483
days at 25-40 days of gestation (Onclin et al 1993).
BaanM,TaverneMAM,deGieret al 2008Theriogenology
Unlike theprolactininhibitor bromocriptine,it does
69:399
not have unpleasant side-effects but, since a resul-
Ball L,Carroll EJ 1963 I Am VeiMedAssoc143:373
tant uterine inertia (see Ch. 10) may result in reten-
Banks DR,Paape SR,Stabenfeld ClI 1983 Biol Reprod 28:923
tion of puppies that become macerated (see Ch. 4),
Bartol 11:RobertsRM,Bazer FWetal 1985Biol Reprod 32:681
Bassett JM, Oxborrow TI,Smith ID, Thorburn G 1969
it is not without dangers. Most commonly, caber-
JEnlocrinol 45:449
goline is administered orally daily (5μg/kg), while
Bazer FW, Marengo SR, Geisert RD, Thatcher WW 1984
cloprostenol (5μg/kg) is given by other parenteral
Anim Reprod Sci 7: 115
routes on alternate days.Abortion/resorption usu-
Bazer FW.Thatcher WW, HansenP) et al 1991 J Reprod Fertil
ally follows within 10days afterthe start oftreat
Suppl 43:39
ment. Terminationi of an unwanted pregnancy in the
Berg Sl,Ginther OJ1978AnimSci47:203
bitch should always be closely monitored, particu-
Berglund IA,ShapDCnnMThatherWW92
1Reprod Fertil Suppl32:335
larly with sequential transabdominal B-mode ulura-
Bertolini M,Anderson GB 2002 Theriogenology 57:181
sonography (Taverne et al 1989).
Botander FF,ulberg LC,Fellows RE 1976 Endocrinology
99:1273
Cat
BolhveinHamgarter StollaR002heriogenology
57:2053
Estradiol cypionate, by intrainuscular injection at
Bondestan S,Karkkainer M,Alitalo T,Forss M 1984 Acta Vet
a dose rate of 125-250μg within 40 hours of mat-
Scanid25:327
ing, has been shown to be effective in preventing
Boscos CM,Samarzi FC,Lymberopoulos AGet al 2003
pregnancy, prabably by interfering with the nor-
Reprod Domest Anim38:170
mal transport of ihe zygotes within the uterine
Boyd JS,Omran SN 1991 In Pract 13:109
Boyd JS,Omran SW,AyliffeTR1988VetRec123:8
tubes (Herron &Sis 1974). Similarly, injections of
Breuelman SP,Reinders IMC,Jonker FHet al 2004
diethylstilbestrol have been used. However, there
Theriogenology 6l:867
are few data on possible side-effects and such treat-
Breukelman SP, Perenyi Z, de Ruigh L et al 2005a
ments should onlybe used in exceptional circum-
Theriogenology 63:1378
stances. A single 5 mg dose of megestrol acetate is
Breukelman SP,Szetci O,Beckers IFet al 2005b
used by some within 1 day of mating.
Theriogenology 64:917
Buckrell BCBonnett BN,Iohnson WH 1986Theriogenology
Both PCF,, and thie dopamine agonist cabergo-
linehavebeen shiown to be fairlyeffective in caus-
25:665
Butterield RM,Mathews RG1979 1 Reprod Feril 27:447
ing abortion;however, the former has unpleasant
Cameron RDA 1977Aust VetI53:432
side-effects (Verstegen et al 1993b).Regimens using
CencicA.la Bonnadiere C2002 Vet Res 33:139
119
Part
210
Pregnancy and its parturition
Challis JRG1971 Nature(Lond)229:208
FischerHE,BazerFW,FieldsMJ1985IReprodFeril75:69
Challis JRG,Linzell }L1971|ReprodFeril26:401
Forsyth1A1986]Dairy Sci69:886
ChaplinVM,HoldsworthRI 1982VetRec111:224
FowlerDG,Winins JF1984LivestockProdSci11:437
Chavatte-Palmer P,De Sousa N, Laigre P et al 2006
Fraser AFRoberison JG 1968BrVet J124:239
Theriogenology 66:829
FraunholzJ,KahnW.LeidlW1989Mh VetMed44:425
Choi IIS,Kiesenhofer E,Gantner Hetal 1987Anim Reprod
GalacS,KooistaHButinaretal2000Theriogenology53:941
Sci15:209
GarciaA,NearyMK,Kelly GR,Pierson RA1993
Concannon PW,Hansel W,VisekW] 1975 Biol Reprod
Theriogenology 39:847
13:112
Geiser RD,ZavyMT,MoffattRetal1990IReprod Feril
Concannon PW,Hodgson B,Lein D 1980Biol Reprod
Suppl40:293
23:111
Gentry PA,Liptrap RM1981JSmall AnimPract22:185
Concannon PW,Whaley S,LeinD,WisslerR1983AmIVet
Ginther O)1986Ultrasonic imaging andrepraductiveevents
Res44:1819
in the mare.Equiservices, Cross Plains,WI
ConcannonPW,YeagerA,FrankD,yampillai A 1990
Ginther Oj1998Ultrasonic imagingand animalreproduc-
IReprodFertil 88:99
tion:cattle.Equiservices,Cross Plains,WI
Cordoba MC,Sartori R,Fricke PM2001 JDairy Sci84:1884
Ginther Ol,KotK,KulikL] et al1996JReprod Fertil108:271
CostineBA,InskeepEK,Blemeings KPet al2007Domest
Gnatek GG,Smith LD,DubyRT,GodkinJD 1989Biol
Anim Endocrinol32:106
Reprod41:655
CowieAT 1948 Pregnancy diagnosis tests:areview,no 13.
Godkin JD,Lifsey GJ,Gillespie BE 1988 Biol Reprod 38:703
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau,Edinburgh
GonzalezF,Cabrera EBatista Met al 2004Theriogenology
CoxJE1975Reprod Fertil23:463
62:1108
Cox IE,Galina CS 1970 Vet Rec86:97
Gruffydd-Jones Tj 1982 PhD Thesis,Iniversity ofBristol
CrossJC,RoberisRM1989Biol Reprod 40:1109
Gunzel-Apel AR,Zabel S,Bunck CFet al 2006
CuboniE1937ClinVet Milan 60:375(absurVet Rec1938;
Theriogenology 66:1431
50:791)
Hammond I1927Physiology ofreproduction in the cow.
Curran S 1992 Theriogenology 37: 17
Cambridge University Press,Cambridge
Curran S,Ginther Oj 1989]EquineVet Sci9:77
HamonM,FleetIR,Holdsworth RJ,Heap RB1981 BrVet 」
Curran S,KastelicIP,Ginther O]19S9AnimReprod Si
137:71
19:217
HaneyDR,Levy JK,Newell SMetal2003AmVetMed
Daels PF,AlbrechtBA,Mohammed HO 1998Biol Reprod
Assoc 223:1614
59:1062
Harney IP,Bazer FW1989 Biol Reprod41:277
DavidsonAP,NylandTG,TsutsuiT 1986VetRadiol27:109
HauzidakisG,Katrakili K,KrambovitisE1993ReprodFeril
Davis SL,Reichert LE1971 Biol Reprod 4:145
98:235
DeasDW 1977Vet Rec101:113
Hleap RB,Linzell JL,Slotin CR1969JPhysiol (Lond)200:38
De CoslerR,Beckers JIBeerens D,DeMay1983Acta
Fleap RB,GwynM,LaingA,WalersDE197381:151
Endocrinol Copenh 103:473
Heap RB,Holdsworth RI,Gadsby Eetal 1976BrVetJ
De Hlaas van Dorsser FI, Swanson WE, Lasano S, Steinetz BG
132:445
2006 Biol Reprod74:1090
Heap RB,Flint APF Hartmann PEet al 1981 JEndocrinol
Dobson H,RowanTG,KipaxIS,Humblot P 1993
89:77
Theriogenology 40:421
HelperLC1970JAmVetMedAssoc156:60
Douglas RH, Ginther O) 1976Prostaglandins 11:251
Herron MA,SisRF1974Am IVet Res35:1277
DuftyIH1973AustVet]49:177
FlershmanL.DouglasRH1979JReprodFeril Suppl 27:395
EckersallPD,HarveyMJAFergusonMetal993Rprod
HessclinkJW,TaverneMAM1994VetQ16:41
Fertil Suppl 47:159
Hloffmann B,Gunzler O,HamburgerR,Schmidt W1976Br
Eilts BE,DavidsonAP,Hosgood Getal2005 Theriogenology
Vet]132:469
64:242
HoldsworthRI,Davies|1979VetRec105:535
Ellendorff FMeyerJN,ElsaesserF1976BrVet |132:543
HoltanDWetTMEsgreenVL975RrodF
Ellicoti AR,DzuilP1973Biol Reprod9:300
Suppl 23:419
EmadyM,Hadley IC,NoakesDE,Arthur GH 1974Vet Rec
HoltanDW,Squire EL,LapinDR,CintherOJ1979Reprod
95:168
Fertil Suppl 27:457
England GCW,RussoM2006Theriogenology66:1694
HoltzW2005Small Rumin Res 60:95
ErdheimM1942]AmVetMedAssoc100:343
Hulet CV 1968JAnim Sci 27:1104
Fain PWStockurgerMRodriguezKFet al2000
Humblot P,Camous S,Martal etal 1988JReprod Feril
Theriogenology55:320
83:215
FeoJCSA 1980VetRec106:368
Humblot P,DeMontigny G,JeanguyotNetal 1990 Reprod
Fieni FMarnet PG,Martal ]et al 2001J Reprod Fertil
Fertil 89:205
57(suppl):243
Hunt B,Lein DH,FooteRH 1978AmVetMedAssoc
Fieni Maal ,MaetPGetal2006Theriogenology 66:1721
172:1298
FincherMG1943 Cornell Vet33:257
InabeT,Nakazima Y,Maisui N1983Theriogenology20:97
120
Chapter
131
Pregnancy and its diagnosis
Isobe N,Akita M,NakaoT et al 2005 Anim Reprod Sci
Malassine A, Ferre F 1979 Biol Reprod 21: 965
90:211
Martal 1, Djiane J 1977 CellTissue Res 184: 427
Jackson GH 1980 Vet Rec 119:90
Martal J,LacroixMC,Lourdes Cet al 1979Reprod Fertil
Jaeger LA,Johnson GA,Ka H et al 2001 ReproductionSuppl
56:63
58:191
Martinat-BoteFBariteau F,Badouard B,Terqui M 2000
Johansson 1 1968 Genetics and Animal Breeding. Published
JReprod Fertil Suppl 33:211
by Freeman, San Francisco
Mayer RE,Vernon MM,Zavy MTet al 1977 1n:Proceedings of
Jochle W 1997Reprod Domesi Anin 32:183
the 69th Annual Meering of the Sociery for Animal Science.
Kahn W,Volkmann D,Kenney RM1994 Veterinary
University of Wisconsin,no 466
Reproductive Ultrasonography. Published by Mosby-Wolfe,
Meadows CE,Lush IL1957 I Dairy Sci 40: 1430
London
Kann G,Denamur R 1974 1 Reprod Fertil 39:473
Pig Veterinary Society Congres,Ames,1O.p D3
Karen A, Kovacs P,Beclers 1 E Szenti O 2001 Acta Vet Brno
Monk EL.Erb RE 1974 IAnim Sci39:366
70:115
Moor RM 1968 J Anim Sci 27:97
Karen A,eckers If,ulon Ietal 2003 Theriogenology
59:1941
Suppl 23:391
KarenA,zabadosK,Reiczigeltal2004Thriogenology
Morton H Hegh V, Clunie GJA 1974 Nature 249:459
61:1291
Net TM,HoltanDW,EstergreenVL1975 I ReprodFertil
Karen A,El Amiri B,Beckeis JF etal 2006Theriogenology
Suppl 23:457
66:314
NielenM,Schukken YH,Scholl DTetal 1989
Kidder HE,CasidaLE,Crummer RH 1955] Anim Sci 14:470
Theriogenology 32: 845
Kindahl H,Knudsen O,Madej A,Edquist LE 1982 I Reprod
Northey DL,French LR 1980 IAnim Sci 50:298
Fertil Suppl 32:353
Okkens AC,Dieleman SJ,Bevers MM,WillemseAH 1985Vet
KlonischT,Hombach-Klonisch S.Froehlich Cet al 1999 Biol
Q7:169
Reprod 60:305
Okkens AC,BeversMM,Dieleman S],Willemse Al1 1990Vet
Koegood-Johnsen HI1, Christiansen J 1977Annu Rep R Vet
Q12:193
Agric Ulniv Copenh:67
Okkens AC,TeunissenJM,Van OschWet al 2001 I Reprod
Kornalijnsliper JE.Bevers MM,van Oord HA,Taverne MAM
Fertil Suppl 57:193
1997Anin Reprod Sci46:109
Onclin K, Silva LDMM,Donnay I, Verstegen JP 1993  Rrod
KutzlerMA,Mohaued HO,LambSV,Meyers-WallenN
Fertil Suppl 47:403
2003b Theriogenology 60:1187
Onclin K,Vers1egen JP 1997J Reprod Fertil Suppl 51: 259
La Bonnardiere C1993Reprod Fertil Suppl 48:157
Onclin K,Verstegen JP, Concannon PW 2000 J Reprod Fertil
Laing IA,Heap RB 1971 Br Ve1 J 127:19
118:417
Lavoir MC.TavermeMAM 1989 In:TaverneMAM,Willemse
Paisley LG, Miclelsen WD, Irost OI.1978Theriogenology
AH (eds) Diagnostic ultrasound and animal reproduction.
9:481
Curent lopics in Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science
Patel OV,Domeki1, Sasaki N et al 1995 Theriogenology 44:
51. Kluwer, Dordrecht: 89-96
827
Lein DH, Concannon PWHornbuckle WE et al 1989
Pierson RA, GintherOl 1984 Theriogenology 22: 225
Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:231
PieterseMC.Taverne MAM 1986Theriogenology 26:S13
Lindahl IL 19711Anim Sci32:922
PieterseMC, Szenci O,Willemse AHetal 1990
Lindahl IL,Totsch JP,Martin PA,Dziuk P] 1975 1 Anim Sci
Theriogenology 33:397
40:220
Pimentel M,Pimentel CA.Weston PGetal 1986Am / Vet Res
Linde-Forsberg C,Kindahl H,Madej A 1992 I Small Anim
47:1967
Pract33:331
Plante C,Hansen P,Martinod S etal 1989] Dairy Si72:1859
Linzell JL, Heap RB 1968 J Endocrinol41: 433
Prescoti CW 1973Aust Vet I49:126
Lopes Junior ES.Cruz JE, Teixeira DIA et al 2004 Vet Res
Reed HCB 1969Br Ve1 J 125:272
Commun 28:119
ReinersT),Sasser RG,Ruder CA 1985 Biol Reprod32
Lopez-Gatius F Hunter RHIF 2005Theriogenology 63: 118
(suppl 65):abstr
Luvoni GC, Beccaglia M 2006 Reprod Domest Anim 11: 27
Richardson C 1972VetRec90:264
McCann JB, Temple M, Concannon PW i988 Cited by
Riznar S,Mahel Z 1978 Anim Brceding Abstr46: abstr 5183
Concannon PW,McCann JP,TempleM1989 I Reprod
Robertson HA, King GJ 1974 J Reprod Fertil 40: 133
Fertil Suppl 39:3
RobertsonHA,Sarda IR 1971 1 Endorrinol 49:407
MeCaughey WI 1979 Vet Rec 104: 255
Roberson HA, King GJ, Dyck GW 1978 I Reprod Fertil 52:337
McDowell Ki,Sharp DC,Fazleabas Aet al 19821 Reprod
Robinson RS, Mann GE, Lamming GE,Wathes DC 1998
Fertil Suppl 32: 329
J Endociinol 160:21
McDowell KJ, Sharp DC,GrubaughWet al 1988Biol Reprod
Romagnoli SE,Canillo FCela M1993」 Reprod Fertil Suppl
39:340
47:425
MailhacJM,Chaffaux S,1egranid etal1980RecMedVetEc
Romano JE,Thompson JA,Forrest DWE et al 2006
Alfort 156:899
Theriogenology G6:1034
121
Part
[21
Pregnancy and its parturition
Romano JE,Thompson IA.Kraemer DCet al 2007
thedog.Royal Veterinary andAgricultural University.
Theriogenology 67:486
Copenhagen, p71-88
Root KustritzMV2006aTheriogenology 66:145
TaverneMAMBreeveld-DwarkasingVNA,vanDissel-
Root KustritMV2006hTheriogenolngy 66:267
Emiliani FMF et al 2002 Domest AnimEndocrinol 23:329
Rowson LEA,Dott HM 1963VetRec75:865
TaverneMAM,egelingJI,SulonJ,BeckersJF006Reprd
RowsonLEA,LawsonRAS,MoorRM1971I Reprod Feril 25:
Domest Anim 41:310
261
Terqui M,Palmer E1979IReprodFertil Suppl 27:441
Royal L,FernegJ,TainturierD 1979RevMedVet130:859
ThaicherWW,Lewis GS,EleyRMetal1980In:Proceedings
Ruder CA,StelflugIN,Dahmen JI,SasserRG1988
of the IXth International Congress onAnimal
Theriogenology29:905
Reproduction andArtificial Insemination,Madrid
Russe M1968Arch ExpVet Med19:963
ThatcherWW,MeyerMD,Dane-Desnoyers G1995IReprod
RussellAJF 1989 In:Taverne MAM,WillemseAH(eds)
Feril Suppl49:15
Diagnostic ultrasound and animal reproduction.Current
Thayer KM,Zalesky D,Knabe DA.Forrest DW 1985
Topics inVeterinary Medicine andAnimal Science 51.
J Ultrasound Med Suppl 4:186
Kluwer,Dordrecht:73-87
Threlfall WR 1994 Theriogenology 41:317
SasserRG,RuderCA1987] Reprod Fertil5uppl34;261
ThrelfallWR,BilderberkGM1999In:Proceedings of the
Scott P1970 In:Hafez ESE(ed)Techniques for laboratory
32nd Annual Conference of the American Association of
animals.Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia,p192-208
BovinePractitioners,Sept 1999
TierneyT11983AustVet|60:250
edn.Current Conceptions,Pullman, WA
VandaeleL,VerberclmoesS,El Amiri Betal 2005
Settergren lGalloway DB1965NordVetMed17:9
Theriogenology 63:1914
Sheldon IM,NoakesDE2002 In Pract 24:310
VandeplasscheM1957Vlaams DiergeneeskTijdschr
Short RV1957JEndocrinol15:1
26:60
Short RV1969lmplantation andthematernalrecognition of
VannucchiCl,Mirandola RM,Oliveira CM2002Anim
pregnancy in foetal autonomy.  &A ChurchillLondon
Reprod Sci74:87
SmithD11,Kirk GR1975JAmAnim HospAssoc11:201
Verhage HG,BeamerNB,BrennerRM1976BiolReprod
Sokolowski JH1971]AnimSci21:696
14:579
Son CH,JeongKA,Kim JH etal2001Vet Med63:715
Verstegen J,Onclin K,Silva LDM et al1993a ReprodFeril
Sousa NM,FiqueiredoR,Beckers F2001 In:Renaville R,
Suppl 47:165
Burny A (ei) Biotechnology in animal husbandry. Kluwer
VerstegenJ,OnclinK,SilvaLDM,Donnay11993bJReprod
Academic,Dordrecht,Netherlands.p179-208
Fertil Suppl 47:411
SpencerTE,BazerFW2004ReprodBiol Endocrinol2:49
Vos PL,PieterseMC,van derWeyden GC,TaverneMA1990
Squire EL,GintherO)1975JReprodFertil Suppl23:429
Vet Rec127:502
SquireEL,DouglasRH,SteffenhagerWP.Ginther Oj1974
VosEA,Van Oord R,TaverneMAM,KruipThAM1999
JAnim Sci38:330
Theriogenology 51: 829
StabenfeldtGH1974IAmVetMed Assoc164:311
Ward JW,WoodingFBP,FowdenAL2002Placenta23:451
Steinetz BG,Goldsmith LT,Lust G1987Biol Reprod 37:719
WattBR,Andreson GA,CampellIP1984Aust VetI61:377
Steinetz BG,GoldsmithLT,Harvey Hi,Lust G1989 Am Vet
Weems CW,Weems YS,Randel RD2006Vet |171:206
Res50:68
White IR,Russel AIF,Fowler OG1984Vet Rec115:140
StewariDR,StabenfeldtGH1985BiolReprod32:848
White IR,Russel AIEWright 1A.WhyteTK1985VetRec117:5
Stout TAE,AllenWR2001 Reproduction121:771
WintersLM,GreenWW,ComstockRE1942UnivMinnTech
StroudBK1996VetMed91:663
Bull:151
Szenci O,PalmeRTavereMAM etal1997Theriogenology
Zambelli D,Castagnetti C,BelluziS,Bassi S2002
48:873
Theriogenology 57: 1981
Szenci O,Beckers JHumblot Petal 1998Theriogenology
Zambelli D,CastagnetiC,eluzi Paladini0
50:77
Theriogenology 62:1430
Szenci O,Humblot P,Beclers JFet al 2000Vet] 159:287
Zarco L,Stabenfeldt GH,Kindahl Hetal 1984AnimReprod
Szenci O,Beckers JF,Sulon」etal2003Vet」165:307
Sci7:245
Tainturier D,MoysanF1984RevMed Vet135:525
ZarcoL,Stabenfeldt GH,BasuSetal 1988IReprod Fertil
TaverneMAM1984TijdschrDiergeneesk109:494
83:527
TaverneMAM,WillemseAH 1989Diagnosticultrasound and
ZavyMT,Mayer R,VernonMWet al 19791ReprodFertil
animal reproduction.Kluwer Dordrecht
Suppl27:403
TaverneMAM,OvingL,VanLieshoutM,WillemseAI1985a
Zemjanis R1971Diagnostic and therapeutic techniquesin
VeQ7:271
animal reproduction.Williams &WillinsBaltimore
TaverneMAM,LavoirMC,Van OordR,VanderWeijdenGC
ZiecikAJ 2002Domest Anim Reprod23:265
1985bVeQ7:256
ZoliAP Guilbault LA,Delahaut Petal 1992aBiol Reprod
TaverneMAM,OkkensAC,Van Oord R1985cVet Q7:249
46:83
TaverneMAMVan derWeijdenGC,VanOordHA1989
Zoli AP,Demez P, Beckers JFet al 1992b Biol Reprod 46:623
In:Christiansen 1l(ed) Symposium on reproduction in
122
4
Chapter
Susan Long
Abnormal development of the conceptus
and its consequences
The early developmentoftheconceptushasbeen
Detection ofembryonic/fetal loss
describedin connection withthedevelopmentof
thefetal membranes(see Ch.2).A nunber of factors
In polyoestrous species embryonic loss can be sus-
can influence embryonic development. The concep-
pected when there is an irregular extension ofthe
tus may be exposed to harmful agents during the pre-
interoestrous interval.However,thiswillbeanunder-
attachment,embryonicorfetalstagesofdevelopment,
estimateoftotallossbecauseitwillnotdetect that
andvulnerabilitytotheseagentsvarieswith thesedif-
which is occurring early on, before the maternal rec-
ferent stages.For example, during he pre-attachment
ognition of pregnancy and the resultant extension of
stage the embryo isvery resistant io teratogens,and
the life of the corpus luteum (see Ch.3).Furthermore,
thezona pellucidaisanefficientbarriertomany
inpolytocousspecies,likethepigembryosmay be
viruses.By contrast,the embryonic stage,with rapid
lostwithout terminationofpregnancy.
cellgrowth and differentiation,ismost susceptible
More accurateestimationsofembryoniclosscan be
toteratogens.Furthermore,each organ has a critical
made by slaughtering at different times during gestation
period of development.Forexample,hepalate,cere
andcorrelatingthenumber ofembryoswith thenum-
bellum andurogenital systems developrelatively late
berofcorporalutea.However,thismethodrequiresthe
inthefetalperiod.Itshouldalsoberememberedthat
sacrifice of the animal and hence theloss of the preg-
the membranes are part of the conceptus and so any
nancy.A non-invasive method is preferable,but one
impairment to their development will affect thefetus.
suchastheperrectum examination ofthefetushasthe
Embryonicorfetal death,togetherwiththebirth
disadvantage that it can be carried out only in the larger
ofabnormal offspring,represent a considerable bio-
domestic animals.Furthermore, since the pregnancy
logical and economic waste.
canbepalpatedonlyrelativelylate,earlyembryonic
loss goes undetected. More recently, ultrasonic scan-
Fertilization failure
ningsuchasreal-timeB-mode techniques,has allowed
and embryonic/fetal loss
the very early detection of pregnancy and embryonic
loss in anon-invasivemanner.
Fertilization rates in domestic animals are generally
Time ofembryonicloss
veryhigh.Undernormal circumstancesonewould
expect approximately90%of ova shed tobefertil-
The various techniques for estimating embryonic
ized.However,ahighproportionoftheovashedfail
loss have shown thatmost occurs very early in gesta-
todevelop tofull-term offspring.In someinstances
tion.That which ocurs before fetal maternal recog-
as many as 65% arelost during embryonic and fetal
nition,andthereforedoesnotinvolvetheextension
development (Table4.1).Commercially,this loss is
ofthelifeofthe corpus luteum,is referred to as
ofgreateconomicimportance.
early embryonicdeath (EED).Loss after the life of
123
Part
21
Pregnancy andparturition
Table 4.1 Embryonic wastage in domestic animals
Table 4.2 Some teratogenic agents in ruminants
Species
Wastage (%)
Reference
CattleSheep
Goats
Cattle
45-65
Ayalon1981
Viruses
Pig
30-50
Scofield 1976
Akabane virus
Sheep
20-30
Edey1969
Bluetongue virus
Horse
15-24
Ball1993
Border diseasevirus
+
Bovine viral diarrhoea virus
+
the corpus luteum has been extendedistermed late
Cache valley virus
embryonic death (LED). In mares, most loss occurs
Riftvalley fevervirus
between days 10 and14 post-service, in beef cattle
+
Wesselbronvirus
it is before day 15 post-service, and in dairy heif
+
ers lossesplateau after about day 19post-service.
Plants
Insheepmost lossesoccurbetween days15and18
Veratrumcalifornicum
+
post-service.In the pig, there appears to be two criti-
Lupins
+
cal stages ofembryonicloss,i.e.when the blastocyst
Others
begins toexpandonday9andaroundimplantation
Hyperthermia
at day13post-service.
lodine deficiency
Causesofembryonic/fetal loss
arelethal andresultinthe deathof theconceptus.If
Prenatal developmentis a continuousprocessof tissue
thegeneis dominantasinglecopymaybesufficient
differentiation, organogenesis and maturation.The
tocausedeath,whileinotherinstancesitis only the
processiscomplex,andcriticalperiodsofdevelopment
homozygous state that is lethal (e.g. the dominant
occur at different times in the different species.Agents
Manx gene (M) in the cat). Recessive genes only
causing embryonicloss are thereforehighlyvariable.
exert their effect in the homozygous state.
Broadly speaking,embryonic loss may be due to
Not all genetic defects are lethal. Some abnormal
eithergeneticorenvironmentalfactorsoracom-
fetuses survive to term,which is biologically and
bination ofthetwo.Theexacteffectofeachfactor
economically wasteful.Therefore,carrier animals
depends upon when,during gestation,it is encoun-
shouldbe eliminated from thebreeding programme
tered and how it exertsits influence.
wherever possible. Traditional methods of test mat-
ing toidentify animals that are carriers ofa reces
Environmental factors causing
sivegene[backcross to therecessive)arelaborious
and in some cases not justified on welfare grounds.
embryonic/fetal loss
However, new molerular genetic techniques have
Environmental factors include climate,nutrition,
enabled thedevelopment ofrelatively simpleblood
stress, ovulation rate, failure of the normal feto-
tests for carriers of some recessive genes.The list of
maternal recognition factors,uterine conditions,
genes that canberecognizedis growing as the genetic
hormones,infectious agents and teratogens.Some
maps for the different species are expanded (Piper&
infectious agents causing embryonic or fetal loss in
Ruvinsly 1997,Fries &Ruvinsky 1999,Bowling &
the different species are described in Chapters 23,
Ruvinsly 2000).Databases oninherited disordersin
25, 26, 27 and 28.Teratogenic agents are discussed
domestic animals are available on the Internet, e.g
below,and some areshown inTable4.2.Theremain-
·http://www.angis.org.au/Databases/BIRX/mis/
ing environmental causes of embryonic orfetal loss
are discussed under separate species headings.
·http://www.angis.org.au/Databases/BIRX/ocoa/
·http://www.angis.org.au/Databases/BIRX/omia/.
Geneticcauses ofembryonic/fetal loss
Some genetic and congenitalabnormalitiesin
domestic animals are shown in Tables 4.3-4.9. (For
Genetic factors causing embryonic loss include
reviews, see: pig-Woollen 1993, sheep -Dennis
single-gene defects,polygenicabnormalities and chro-
1993, dog -Stockman 1982, 1983a,b;Robinson
mosomal anomalies.A few single-gene mutations
1990,cat-Robinson 1991.)
124
Table 4.3 Genetic abnormalities in cattle (recessive condlitions)
Table 4.5Some innerited defectsin sheep
Abnormality
Breed
Abnormality
Probable genetic cause
Achondroplasia
Holstein-Friesian
Agnathia
Lethalrecessive
Amputates
Holstein-Friesian
Brachygnathia
Recessive (also teratogens)
Dedematous calves
Ayrshire
Arthrogryposis
Recessive(also teratogens)
Tibial hemimelia
Galloway
Inguinal hernia
Recessive
Arthrogryposis
Charolais (linked tc produc-
Atresia ani
Recessive
tion characteristics?)
Cryptorcnidism
Recessive
Hip dysplasia
Charolais
Bilateral cystic renal
Dominant
Familial ataxia
Charolais
cysplasia
Hairless condition
Many
Neuraxonal dystrophy
Recessive
Factor XI deficiency
Hclstein-Friesian
Entropion
Unknown
Syndactyly
Holstein-Friesian
Cataracts
Dominant in New Zealand Romney
DUMS*
Holstein-Friesian
Split eyelid
Unknown
Weaver
Brown Swiss
Photosensitivity
Recessive
Arachnomelia
BrownSwiss
(hyperbilirubinaemia)
Spinal muscular atrophy
Brown Swiss
Micrcphthalmia/
Recessive
anophthalmia
α-mannosidosis
Aberdeen Angus
Cerebellar ataxia
Recessive
BLAD
Holstein-Friesian
Muscular dystraphy
Recessive
DuMs, deficiency of uridine moncphosphate synthesis
Goitre
Recessive (alse nutritional)
*BLAD. bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency
Dwarfism
Recessive
Table 4.4 Common hereditary defects in pigs
Abnormality
Progency with defect (%)
Probable genetic basis
Large White
Landrace
Congenitel tremors
0.02
0.05
Possibly sex-linked or recessive
Congenital splay leg
0.14
1.43
Recessive,may be sex-linked
Porcine stress syndrome
Recessive genes linked to genes for lean (malig-
nant hyperthermia) carcase. Mainly in Pietrain
Inguinal (scrotal) hernia
0.44
0.71
Recessive
Atresia ani
0.25
0.32
Recessive,50% penetrance
Cryptorchidism
600
0.23
Recessive, Incomplete penetrance
Clefi palate
Recessive
Pityriasis rosea
0.09
0.42
Unknown
Umbilical hemia
0.13
0.07
Recessive
Intersex
0.06
0.08
Unknown
Dermatosis vegetans
Recessive
Inherilted thick forelegs
Recessive
Crooked tails
Dominant
Microphthalmia
Dominat,wihlwpenetae
Epithelicgenesis imperfecta
Recessive
Arthrogryposis
Recessive(dominant in Large White)
Cerebrospinal lipodystrophy
Recessive
Bilateral renal hypop asia
Recessive
Renal cysts
Dominant
125
Part
2
Pregnancy and parturition
Whileblood is themostconvenient source of
Table 4.6Some inherited defects in goats
dividing cells,slonger-term fibroblast cultures can
Abnormality
Probable genetic cause
be established from almost any tissue, e.g. skin and
peritoneum.Direct preparations (i.e.without any
Myotonia congenita
Unknown
culture)can bemade from tissuethat isnormally
B-mannosidosis
Recessive
rapidly dividing, such asbone marrow,but this is
Intersexuality
Recessive(associatedwith the
difficult and often painful to obtain and the prepa-
polling gene,whichisdominant)
rationstendtobeofapoorer quality.
Afibrinogenaemia
Incompletely dominant
Various differential staining techniques enable
Anotia/microtia
Incompletely dominant
chromosomestobeindividuallyidentified andsmall
Udder hypoplasia
Polygenic
abnormalities to be detecied.The simplest staining
technique (conventional staining)reveals the chro-
Extra teats(polythelia)
polygenic
mosomal number and morphology, while differen-
Achondroplasia
Incompletelydominant
tial siainingtechniquesidentify eitherareas ofhighly
repetitiveDNA sequences(Cbanding)orbandsof
euchromatinandheterochromatin(Gbanding and
Itwas once thought thatchromosomalabnor-
Rbanding).Moleculargenetictechniques,involving
malities might be an important cause of loss of
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISHI), can be used
the conceptus because, in humans,it was found
toidentify specificDNAsequencesorwholechro-
that approximately50%of spontaneously aborted
mosomes(chromosomepaints').Thechromosome
fetuses had a chromosomal abnormality(Lauritsen
spreads can be photographed, cut out and arranged
et al 1972).However,investigations in domestic
in an agreed order to construct a karyotype(Fig.4.1).
animalshave shownthatprobablylessthan10%of
The normal diploid chromosome number in our
preimplantationlossesarecausedbygrosschromo-
common domestic speciesisshowninTable4.11
somal abnormalities(Table4.10).
Chromosome abnormalities may be numerical
Certain specific chromosomal abnormalities -
(e.g. aneuploidy or polyploidy) or structural, and
for example,reciprocal translocations - do result
mayoccurin the sexchromosomes(XorY)or the
inreducedlitter sizesbecauseofembryonicdeath.
non-sexchromosomes,which arecalledautosomes.
Theseare discussedseparatelybelow.
Furthermore,anindividualmayhavemorethanone
cell line and thereforebe a mixaploid.
Chromosome abnormalities as a
cause ofinfertility and embryonic
Aneuploidy
death In domestic animals
Aneuploidy is when the chromosome number is
almostdiploidbutthereareoneortwochromosomes
Itisnowwellrecognized thatchromosomal abnor-
toomany or toofew.Aneuploidy arises if there is non-
malitiesplay an importantrole in infertility in
disjunction duringmeiosis so thatthechromosomes
some species.The chromosome complement can
do not separate in a balanced fashion.X chromosome
be determined from any dividingcell.The most
aneuploidy in females(XO(Turner's syndrome)and
common cell type used is peripheral blood lym-
XXX（triple-Xsyndrome))results ininfertilitybecause
phocytes.A heparinized blood sample is required,
twoXchromosomes arerequiredfornormalmeiosis in
and this should be sent foranalysis as soon aspos-
theembryo.Deviationfromthenormalnumberresults
sible after collection.The process depends upon
inoocyteatresiaduringembryonicdevelopment
obtaining dividingcells after a2-or3-dayculture
Extra X chromosomes in the male （XxY,
i.e.
ina simpletissue culturemedium with suitable
Klinefelter's syndrome)result in infertility because
supplements.After this short-term culture,thecells
theextraXchromosomeinterfereswith spermato-
areinhibited from completing their division by the
genesis at puberty.Animals with Klinefelter's syn-
additionofaspindleblocker to ihemedium,The
drome are phenotypicmales but with small testes
effect of ihis is to accumulate cells at mitotic meta-
and are azoospermic and sterile.
phase.Thecellsarethenfixed and dropped on to
Aneuploidyof the autosomes results in either too
slides,which makes the chromosomes spread out
many (trisomy),or too few(monosomy),copies of
sothattheycanbe analysed.
aparticularchromosomeanditsassociatedgenes.
126
Chapter
141
Abnormal development of the conceptus and its consequences
Table4.7Some genetic defectsin dogs
Abnormality
Breed
Possible cause
General
Elbow dysplasia（ununited
Manybreeds
Polygenic,multifactorial
anconealprocess)
Hip dysplasia
German Shepherd Dog,Labrador
Polygenic,multifactorial
Retriever and others
West HighlandWhite Terrier,
Autosomal recessive but possibly
Perthes disease
Miniature and Toy Poodle
polygenic
Giant axonal neuropathy
German Shepherd Dog
Autosomal recessive
Progressive axonopathy
Boxer
Autosomal recessive
Scottiecramp
Scottish Terrier
Autosomalrecessive
Cryptorchidism
Many
？
High uric acid secretion
Dalmatian
Autosomal recessive
Dermoid sinus
Rhodesian Ridgeback
Autosomal recessive?
Deafness
Dalmatian
Polygenic?
Clottingfactor deficiencies
FactorVll deficiency
Beagle
Autosomal recessive
Haemophilia A (factor VIll
Many
X-linked recessive
deficiency = classic haemophilia)
Haemophilia B(factor Ix
CairnTerrier,StBernard,AmericaCocker
X-linkedrecessive
deficiency=Christmas disease)
Soaniel,French Bulldog,Scottish Terrier,Od
English Sheepdog,ShetlandSheepdog,Alaskan
Malamute,Black and Tan Coonhound
VonWillebrand'sdisease
ScottishTerrier,ChesapeakeBayRetriever
Autosomalrecessive
Many other breeds
Autosomal dominant
Oculardefects
Progressiveretinal atrophy
Many breeds
Dominant orrecessive depending
upon type and breed
Hered tary cataract (HC)
Many breeds
？
Collie eye anomaly(CEA)
Collies
7
Cataract
Many
Many different typesandgeneticcauses
Entropion/ectropion
Many
Polygenic
Merleeye
Many
Dominant gene affecting coat colour
and tapetum formation.The homozygote
ismore seriously affected
The outcome of this depends upon the genes
andtetraploidyis four timesthehaploidnumber.
involved.Either the individual has developmental
Polyploidy ariseswhen thereisafailureoftheblock
abnormalities or,if these are notcompatiblewith
topolyspermyor if thereisretention of thefirst or
life,thereisembryonic death
second (or both) polar bodies during oogenesis.
Polyploidy
Structural abnormalities
Thisiswhentherearewholemultiplesofthehaploid
Problems caused by structural chromosomal
(i.e.halfthediploid)chromosomenumberinexcess,
abnormalities will depend upon whether genetic
e.g.triploidy is three times thehaploid number
materialhasbeenlost(deletions)orjustrearranged
127
Part
2
Pregnancy and parturition
Table 4.8Somehereditary defects incats
Table 4.9Some inherited defects of horses
Abnormality
Probable genetic
Abnormality
Probable genetic
cause
cause
Oesophageal stenosis
Recessive?
Cryptorchidism
Recessive?
Cataract
Recessive?
Haemophilia
Sex-linked recessive
Chediak-Higashisyndrome
Recessive
Combined imrnunodeficiency
Recessive
Cutaneous asthenia
Dominant
(CID)
Deafness in white cats
Dominant?
Primary agammaglobulinaemia
Sex-linked recessive?
Aniridia
Dominant
Episodicweakness
Recessive
Hereditary ataxia
Recessive
Flat-chestedkittensyndrome
Recessive
Occipito-atlanto-axial
Recessive
Fourears
Recessive(semilethal?)
malformation(OAAM)
Gangliodosis GM1
Recessive
Torticollis
Recessive
Gangliodosis GM2
Recessive
Atresia coli
Recessive
Haemophilia A
Sex-linked recessive
Cvershot/undershotjaw
Unknown
HaemophiliaB
Sex-linked recessive
White foal syndrome
Reressive
Hageman factor deficiency
Incornpletedominant
Epitheliogenesisimperfecta
Recessive
Hairlessness(hypotrichosis)
Recessive
Umbilical/inguinal hernia
Unknown
Hydrocephalus
Recessive
Lethal dominanwhite
Dominant
Hyperoxaluria
Recessive
Cerebellar abiotropy
Recessive?
Hyperchylomicronaemia
Recessive
Hereditarymultiple exostosis
Dominant
Mannosidosis
Recessive
Manxtaillessness
Ulnar/tibial malformation
Recessive
Dominant (lethal in
homozygous state)
Meningoencephalocoele
Recessive
Table 4.10 Incidence of chromosomal abnormalities in
Mucopolysaccharidosis I
Recessive
pre-implantation embryos of domestic animals(data from
MucopolysaccharidosisVI
Recessive
King 1990)
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
Recessive
Species
Abnormalities (%)
Polydactyly
Dominant
Sheep
Porphyria
Dominant
6.6
Twoforms,onerecessive.
Cattle
10.4
Progressiveretinalatrophy
one dominant
Pig
5.0
Spheroid lysosomal disease
Recessive
Horse
0
Sphingomyelinosis
Recessive
Umbilical hernia
Unknown
participate in fertilization events, produce unbal
anced zygotes (trisomies or monosomies). Such
unbalanced embryos areusually not viable.
(insertions,inversions and translocations).In the
Different abnormalities are found at different fre-
case of deletionscarriersof the anomalymay have
quenciesin thedifferent species.Themorecomimon
developmental abnorinalities,depending upon
anomalies in each speciesare discussedbelow,but
which genes have been lost, which may cause embry-
for a more comprehensive description the reader
onic death.With rearrangements, balanced carri-
should consult McFeely1990.
ers of the anomaly arephenotypicallynorimalbut
problems arise during meioticprophasebecause the
Horses
chromosomes have problems at pairing. This often
results in non-disjunction and the production
of
Chromosomalanomaliesareanimportantcauseof
chromosomallyunbalancedgametes,which,if they
infertilityinmares.Between50%and60%ofmares
128
Chapter
41
but is in fact a genetic male. It is difficult to assess the
incidence ofsuch anomalies since there have been
few random studies of mares.H-lowever, in a study of
204 mares presented at stud for breeding. Nie el al
A
(1993) found that one mare was 65,xxX, one was
63,XO/64,XX and one was a 64,XY sex-reversed male.
XO mares are usually small for their age and some
1
2
3
have poor body conformation. They usually fail to
C
X
show any signs of oestrus,and the ovaries are small
XX
nn
fibrous and underdeveloped. The uterus is small and
1
F
2
often described as infantile.All XO mares to date
have beeninfertile.In women,the infertility is dueto
accelerated oocyteloss during fetal development and
 ovarian atresia in the prepubertal period. A similar
mechanism is believed to beinvolved in the horse.
XXXmaresoftenpresent withthe same clinical his-
tory as XO mares. Others have shown irregular cyclic
activity, but all have been infertile. In humans, some
XXXwomenhavebeenfertile,althoughwithareduiced
fertility. Since itis only infertilemares that are usually
examined,it maybe that some XxX horses are fertile
XY sex reversal is not uncommon in the horse. Most
cases have been seen in Arabs and thoroughbreds.but
this maymerely reflect thecommonbreeds examined.
Fig. 4.1 Karyotype and spread from a female domestic cat,
All are phenotypically female but are genetic males.
Felis cattus.2n=38.
The clinical signs are variable. Some aiimals fail to
showsigns of cestrus at all while others have irregular
but strong oestrous
behaviour.Some animals
Table 4.11 Chromosome number in domestic animals
have had small, undifferentiated gonads while
others have had apparently normal ovaries with follic-
Species
Chromosomenumber
ularactivity.Mostareinfertile,butaveryfewhavebeen
Cattle
60
fertile and at least one hasproduced an XY'filly
In some cases the mare may be a mixaploid and have
Sheep
54
nommal as well as abnormal cells, e.g. XO/xx, xx/xxx.
60
XO/XX/XXX or XO/XY.In animals with a very low inci-
Horse
64
dence ofabnormal cellsin anotherwisenormal xx
Donkey
62
population, diagnosis of the condition can be difficult.
Pig
38
The fertility in mixaploid animals with a normal
XX cell line is difficult to predict because, although
Swampbuffalo
48
most have been infertile, some have produced a foal.
River ouffalo
50
If the animal is actually showing oestrus and folli-
Bactrian camel
74
cles are palpable on the ovary it is probably advis-
Cat
38
able not to declare the animal infertile.
Dog
78
Diagnosisofachromosomal causeofafertilityprob
lem cannot be made on the basis of the clinical his-
tory alone because animals with a normal laryotype
with gonadal dysgenesis have an abnormal chromo-
present with the same history and clinical findings.
some complement.Tlie commonest chiromosomal
Few studies have been carriedout on stallions with
abnormalityin mares isXchromosome aneuploidy,
a fertility problem. Two colts have been reported
eg. XO or XXX.Another common anomaly is XY sex
with auitosomal trisomies(Power 1990).Onewas a
reversal, i.e.the animal presents as a phenotypicfemale
cryptorchid (Power 1987) and the other lhad small
129
Part
2
Pregnancyand parturition
testes(Klunderetal1989).Structuralabnormalities
Table4.12Catle breedscarying the 1/29 centric fusion
have alsobeenfound inchromosome1 in a stallion
translocation
with a history ofearly embryonic death in mares
that hecovered (Long1996).
Breed
Incidence(%)
Barrosa
65.1
Cattle
Bauole
Blonde d'Aquitaine
14.2-21.6
Thecommonestchromosomal abnormalityincattle
isastruicturalanomalyknown asacentricfusion
British White
65.6-78.8
translocation.Twochromosomesfusetogethernear
Brown Atlas
thecentromere,resultinginareductioninthechromo-
Brown Mountain
somenumberbutlittleornolossingeneticmaterial
Brown Swiss
0.2
(Fig.4.2).Over30 different centricfusion transloca-
Charolais
1.9
tionshavebeenreported in cattle,and thecommon-
Chianina
13.6
estoftheseisthe1/29 translocation,whichisfound
in a large number of breeds throughout the world
Corsican
40.0
(Table 4.12). Heterozygosity (i.e. carrying one copy)
CzechoslovakianRed Pied
for a centricfusion translocationresults in a drop in
De Lida
8.2
fertility,theextent ofwhich dependsuponwhich
Fleckvieh
3.1
translocation is being carried.Animals heterozy-
Galicia
11.8
gous for the1/29 translocation have a reduced fer-
tility of the orderof5%.Thedrop infertility is due
Gascons
tonon-disjunction atmeiosisand theproduction
German Red Pied
of chromosomally unbalanced gametes.The resul-
Grauviel
tantunbalancedembryosundergoearly embryonic
Hungarian Grey
8'E
death.The reduced ferility ismanifested as a small
JapaneseBlack
increasein servicesper conception in thefemaleand
Kuri
a lowernon-returnratein themale.Carriersofsome
ofthe other centricfusion translocations have an
Limousin
6.0
evengreaterreductioninfertility,e.g.46%with the
Marchigiana
18.9
25/27 translocation in the Alpine Grey.
Maremmana
Maronesa
49.5
Modicana
6.5
Montebeliard
2.2
Nguni
10.2
Norwegian Red
Ottenese
Pisa
Podolian
Red Poll
19.0
Romagnola
22.5
Russian BlackPied
Santa Gertrudis
Siamese
Simmental
3.0
Fig.4.2Chromosome spread from a cow heterozygous for
SwedishRedandWhite
13.4
the 1/29 centric fusion translocation.2n=59.The arrow
Vosgienne
indicatesthe translocationchromosorme.
24.0
130
Chapter
141
Abnorimal development of the conceptus and its consequences
Artificial insemination organizations in many
litter size or even infertility. In Sweden, 50% of
European countriesnow screen theirbull popula-
boars culled for small litter sizeswere found to be
tion, and animals carrying translocations are not
heterozygousfor areciprocal translocation.Of some
used. Many countries will not allow the importation
concern is the fact that most of these translocations
of animals carrying such translocations.
appear to have arisen denovo andwere not inher
A number of other chromosomal anomalies have
ited.This implies that there is something in the pig's
been reported in cattle but these are much less com-
environment that is inducing new translocations.
mon. Some phenotypically abnormal calves have been
Approximately45differentreciprocal translocations
bom with autosomal trisomies,a few cases of infertil-
havebeenidentified inthepigto date.
ity in the bull have been due to the XXY Klinefelter
syndrome, and xxx infertile rows have been found.
Sheep
Chromosomal analysis is used in the diagnosis
offreemartins because, in this condition, the fusion
Cases ofinfertility in theramhave been due to the
of the placental blood vessels not only allows the
XXY Klinefelter syndrome. Centric fusion transloca-
millerian inhibition substance(MiS) and testoster-
tions are found in New Zealand Romney, Perendale
one from the male to affeci the female development
   n    
but also allows the mixing of haemopoietic precur-
theRomney Marsh breed in the UK.However,unlike
sor cells and so leads to the establishment of male
in tatule,centric fusion tranislocationshavenotbeen
and female cells in theblood of each twin.This can
associated with a reduction in fertility in sheep.
be detected by a simple chromosome analysis at any
Reciprocal translocations have been reported in sheep
time after birth, and therefore freemartinism can be
with reduced fertility but these are rare(Glahn-Luft&
predicted (Long 1990). Diagnosis is easier if blood
Wassmuth 1980,Anamthawat-Jonsson et al 1992).
samples from both the suspect freemartin and the
In a survey ofbarren ewes,XX/XY(freemartinism)
male twin are analysed. This is because sometimes
was the commonest finding (Long et al 1996). The
thereisaverylownumberofmalecells in thefemale,
XO(Turner's syndrome) maybe another causeof bar-
but if ihat is so,therewill be al equallylownumber
ren ewes, since one or two cases have been reported.
of male cells in the male, if placental anastomosis
has taken place.Fxamination of the male saves con-
Goats
siderable time in these cases.However, diagnosis is
possible using samples from the female alone. No
Centric fusion translocations have been found in
samples are required from the sire or dam.
Saanen and Toggenburg goats but the effect on fertility
There is some debate as to the fertility of males born
is difficult to assess because of the confounding factor
twin to females. Some surveys lave shown reduced
 of the intersex gene associated with polledness in this
non-return rates(Cribiu& Popescu 1982), poorsperm
species.Nevertheless, it oes seem that heterozygos
freezability (Switonsli et al 1991) or poor sperm con-
ityfora centricfusion translocation is associatedwith
centration and motility in the ejaculate(Dunn et al
reduced fertility in the Saanen breed.
1979) of chimeric bulls. However, other surveys have
The intersex gene is an autosomal recessive that is
shown no reduced fertility (Gustavsson 1977), and
linked to the dominant gene for polledness. Thus,
a normal semen picture (Gustavsson 1977,Jaszrzak
females that are homozygous for the polling gene
etal 1988) in such animals.There is no obvious rea-
are also homozygous for the intersex gene and are
son for the contradictions in these findings.
intersexes.Males that are honozygous for the poll-
ing gene are usually normal.Hlowever,10-30% have
been inferile because of tubular blockage in the
Pigs
head of the epididymis.This intersex gene in goats is
In thepig,reciprocal translocations arethemostco-
thought tobesimilar tothesxrgene inmice,which
mon chromosome anomalies. These are structural
causes testicular developmentin geneticfemales
abnormalities where parts of chromosomes are
exchanged with little or no loss of genetic material.
Carriers of reciprocal translocations are phenotypi-
Cals
cally normal but have problemsat meiosis and pro-
Chromosomalabnormalities are not common in
duce unbalanced gametes. This leads to a reduced
the cat cxcept in association with the tortoiseshell
131
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
coat colour in the male.Many ofthese are XXY
Klinefelter cats,andthey are alwayssterile.However,
the mixaploid animals that have a normal XY male
cell linemay beferile.Fertilitypresumably depends
upon whether the normal xY cell line is found in the
testis.Fertile male tortoiseshell cats will breed as if
theywerenormal XYtoms,andwillpassonthecoat
colour genes in a normal mendelian fashion.While
male tortoiseshell cats are not common they are
probably less rare than is believed.A survey of 9816
cats in theUK,ofwhich 4598were males,revealed
20 male tortoiseshell cats(Leaman et al1999)
Since there is no reason to suppose that these chro-
mosomal anomaliesareonlyfoundin tortoiseshell
cats they areprobablyresponsibleforfertilityfailure
in other cats, but have gone undiagnosed because
very few cats are examinedcytogenetically.
The XO condition has been reported and is there-
fore a possible cause of infertility in thefemale.
Dogs
Chromosomalabnormalitieshavenotbeen associated
with infertilityinthedogexceptinonecaseof Klinefelter's
syndrome and one case of prolonged pro-oestrus in a
bitchwithXchromosomemonosomy(77,XO).Centric
fusiontranslocationshavebeenreportedbuttherehave
beenno consistent clinical findings.Theirinfluence on
fertilityhasnotbeeninvestigated.
Fig.4.3 Extreme example of cleft palate in a calf.
Mules and hinnies
The mule is a cross between a female horse anda male
may be caused by genetic factors or some other
donkey,and thehinnyisacrossbetweena femaledon-
agent.Ateratogenisanagentthatcaninduceabnor-
keyanda malehorse.Themalesof bothcrosses show
malities in a developing conceptus. Teratogenic
abnormalities of chromosome pairing at the pachyiene
agents maynot kill the developing conceptus but
stageofmeioticprophase,andlittleornomaturesper-
manyof the abnormalitiestheyinduceareincom-
matozoa are produced. Thus the males are infertile.
patiblewith life
Females are also affected during the fetal development
Teratogens have their major effect during the
of the germ cells,and most oogonia die as they are
embryonic stages. Before this, during pregastru-
entering meiosis. Hlowever, sometimes a mature fol
lation, the conceptus is relatively resistant to the
licle ispresent in theadult,andrarelyconfirmed foal
effects of teratogens and after thisat thefetal stage
ings havebeen reported inbothmules and hinnies.
it is only the late-developing systems such as the
palate,cerebellumandpartsofthecardiovascularand
urogenital system that are affected.A teratogenmay
be a drug, hormone, chemical, gamma-irradiation,
Congenital abnormalitiesand
teratogens
trace element,variations of temperature,or an
infectious agent (particularly viruses - see Oberst
1993 for a review).For example,in the pig, swine
Congenitalabnormalities areabnormalitiesthat
fever(hogcholera)viruswill produce neurological
are present at birth (Figs.4.3 and 4.4-4.17). They
abnormalities suchas demyelination,cerebellarand
132
Chapter
141
Abnormal development of the conceptus and its consequences
spinal hypoplasia, hydrocephalus and arthrogrypo
Another strange entity is that known as amor-
sis.Table 4.2 shows some of the known teratogenic
phous globosus, acardiac monster or fetal mole (Fig.
agents in ruminants. In the dog. some common
4.5). These are spherical bodies attached to the feta
pharmacological agents such as corticosteroids and
membranesofanormal fetus.They are formed from
griseofulvin are known teratogens,and care must
connective tissue surrounded by skin and may be of
be exercised in their use in pregnant bitches. In the
a different sexfrom that of the normal twin.Since
cat, the panleukopenia virus will cause teratogenic
there is not usually any gonadal development they
effects in pregnant queens.
do not pose a threat of freemartin cevelopment.
Congenital abnormalities may cause obstetri-
cal problems. For example, perosomus elumbis,
which occurs in ruminants and swine,is charac-
terized by hypoplasia or aplasia of the spinal cord,
which ends in the thoracic region.The regions of the
body, including the hindlimbs, which are nonnally
supplied by the lumbar and sacral nerves, exhibit
muscular atrophy,and joint movement does not
develop.The rigidity of the posterior limbs may then
cause dystocia.
Schistosoma reflexus,another abnorinality com-
mon in ruminants and swine,has as the main defect
acute angulation of the vertebral column such that
the tail lies close to the head (Figure 4.4). The chest
and abdominal cavitiesareincompleteventrally so
that the viscera are exposed. Again such cases may
Fig. 4.5 Three examples of amorphous globosus (fetal mole)
in the cow.
cause dystocia (see Ch.16).
Fig.4.45chistosoma reflexusina caif.
133
Part
Pregnancy and parturition
Double monsters(Figs.4.6-4.8),which are found
(Fig.4.12)and amputates(otter calves)（Fig.4.13) in
ina number of species,will present as absolutefetal
Friesians, double muscling and arthrogryposis (Fig.
oversize.Otherexamplesofcausesoffetaloversize
4.14),andedematous calves in theAyrshire breed
are hydrocephalus（Figs.4.9,4.10)and accessory
（Fig.4.15)(seeTable 4.3).Leipold&Dennis（1986)
limbs (Fig. 4.11).
described rectovaginal constriction inJersey cattle,
Some of thecongenital anomalies that are ofimpor-
due toa simple autosomalrecessive,as animportant
tanceinveterinaryobstetricshaveageneticcause.For
causeofsevere dystocia.Affectedanimals required
example,achondroplasia(dwarfcalves)in Dexters
episiotomyorcaesareansectionatparturition.
Fig.4.6Double-headed calf.
Fig.4.7 Conjoined Charolais calves at term.
Fig.4.8 Litter of fourkittens joined in the pelvicregion.
134
Chapter
|41
Abnormal development of the conceptus and its consequences
Fig.4.9 Hydrocephalus in a foal fetus.
Fig.4.10 Hydrocephalus in a live-born calf.
Fig.4.11Fetalcalf with accessory front limbs.
135
Part
Pregnancy and parturition
Fig.4.12 Achondroplasia in a Dexter calf
Fig.4.15 Oedematcus Ayrshire calf.
Fig. 4.13 Amputate (otter) calf.
Fig.4.16Spastic paresis in a15-month-old Friesian bullnote
hyperextension of the right hindlimb.
Embryonicfetal loss in the
different species
Pigs
Ovulation rate is notusually a limitingfactorinpro-
ductivity in the pigbut, in general, as ovulation rates
increase the embryo survival rate decreases.This can
be demonstrated in gilts, where the ovulation rate
Fig. 4.14 Arthrogryposis in a calf.
can be artificially increased but embryo survival
rate decreases.
Some congenital abnormalities, such as spastic
Even if early embryonic death does not occur with
paresis and flexor tendon contraction (Figs. 4.16,
high ovulation rates, a problem may arise later in
4.17), may resolve in time if treated
pregnancy with competition for uierine space. It has
136
Chapter
4
Abnormal developmentoftheconceptus and itsconsequences
Cattle
Considering the size and importance of the dairy
industry in Western countries there is actually rela-
tive little hard experimental data about the causes
of embryonic loss in cattle,most of which occurs
between days S and 16 after insemination.
The tining of insemination is important. Insemi-
nation too late in the oestrusperiod leads to ovum
aging and embryonic death. (In laboraiory species,
ovum aging has been showi to result in chromo-
somal abnormalities.) Artificial insemination during
pregnancy will induce loss, through either mechani-
cal trauma to feial membranes or the introduction
of infection. Specific infectious agents causing loss
are described in Chapter 23. Cows conceiving to0
soon after calving have a higher embryonic loss rate,
and this ispresumed to be due to apoor uterine
environment.
Nutritional causes such as β-carotene, selenium,
phosphorus and copper deficiencies have all been
implicated in embryonic loss but unequivocal data
are not available. Hligh intakes of crude protein, in
particular rumen-degradable protein (RDP), have
been associated with reduced fertility.This is said to
be due to the toxic effects of blood urea or ammonia
Fig.4.17 NewbornBelgian Blue calf with bilateral congenital
on the embryo.
contracted flexor tendons.
Suress, e.g. heat stress, has also been shown to
result in embryonic loss (Thatcher & Collier 1986).
A high rate of increase in milk yield and high milk
yield per se in early lactation are ncgatively corre-
latedwith fertility and this could beconsidered a
metabolic stress.
been suggested that a higher fetal death rate exists
when there are more than five fetuses per horn,
with those embryos in the middle of the horn heing
Horses
smaller (Perry & Rowell 1969).
Apart fron the above intrinsic factors, extrinsic
The commonest cause of embryonic loss in mares
factors such as nutrition and stress play an impor-
is twin conceptions (see Ch. 26). Competition for
tant part in embryonic loss in the pig. For example,
placental space usually results in one fetus growing
it is well documented that high energy levels after
more slowly than the other, and the smaller fetus,
service result in reduced embryo survival. Stress,
with a smaller placenta, dies.Death of one fetus often
associaledwithextremes oftemperature orcertain
results in the loss of the second. Other intrinsic fac-
management systems such as sow sialls or tethers,
tors that are thought to berelated to embryonic loss
is alsoknown toresult in increased embryomor-
in the mare include oviductal secretions, embryonic
tality. Other husbandry policies,such as laclation
vesicle mobility and uterine environment. Since the
length,also affect embryonic death rates, and lacla
mare's embryo is at a more advanced stage while still
tionlengthsof less than3weeksproduce amarked
in the uterine tube,the environment mayberela
rise in embryonicmortality (Varley&Cole1976),
tively more important in this species than others. In
presumably due to a poor uterine environment.
addition,the embryonicvesicleremains free in the
Some infectious causes of embryonic loss and
lumen of theuterine horn muchIonger inthe mare
abortion in the pig are discussed in Chapter 27.
than in otler species,and the degree of mobility of
137
Part
21
Pregnancy andparturition
thisvesicleisthought tobeimportant inmaternal
heat waves.However,ifthereis diurnal variation,as
recognition of pregnancy (Ginther 1985,McDowell
would occurnaturally, theloss is muchlower.
et al 1985).Greater mobility enhances the suppres-
Physiologital stress, such as that produced by
sionofluteolysis andresultsinhigherlevels ofpro-
overcrowding or handling of sheep, also increases
gesterone(Gintheretal 1985).Asregards the uterine
embryonicloss.Thismaybedueto excess secretion
environment,recurrent endometritis and post-ser-
of progesterone by the adrenals and/or raised corti-
viceinfectionleadtoperivascular fibrosis,and this
costeroidlevels(wilmutetal1986).
isa common causeofembryonicandfetaldeath
Theageof theeweis alsoimportant,since there
between 40 and90 days ofgestation (see Ch.26).
is some evidence that ewe lambs have a higher inci-
Increased maternal age has also been associated
dence of embryonic loss than mature ewes [Quirke
withincreasedembryonicloss,butthismaymerely
&Hlanrahan1977).
reflectincreased chronicuterinepathology.
Infectious causes of fetal loss are discussed in
Otherfactors such aslactationand serviceatihe
Chapter 25.
foalheatalsoresultinhigherembryonicdeathrates,
although the latter may be duetolactational stress.
Goats
Stress due to transportation is thought to cause
embryoniclosses inthemare.However,recent stud
Goats are particularly susceptible to non-infectious
iesfailed toconfirm this even though transport did
fetal loss,and this is particularly true of theAngora
result in raised plasma ascorbic acid levels,which
breed.Losses are also common in poorly fed ani-
have been associated with prolonged stress (Baucus
malsofanybreed.Anotherreportedcauseoffetal
etal1990).Nutritionalstress,intheformofrestricted
loss is dosing with anthelmintics such as carbon tet-
energyintake,doesincreaseembryonicloss
rachloride andphenothiazine.
Infectious causes of lossare discussed in Chapter 26.
Infectiouscauses ofabortionin goats are discussed
in Chapter 25.
Sheep
Dogs
Nutrition,specificallyenergylevel,isknowntoaffect
Verylittleinformationisavailableonthenon
Low body condition atmating is detrimental to
infectious causes ofembryonicloss in the dog.In
embryo survival,irrespective ofpost-matingnutri-
some instanceswholelittersareresorbed.Itused
tion.However,inewes thatloseweightpost-service,
tobethoughtthatthiswasdue toprogesterone
embryomortalityisincreased.Prolonged,moderate
insufficiencybut thereisnorealevidencefor this
undernutritionhasmore effect onewelambs than
proposition.Furthermore,highlevelsofexogenous
adult ewes. Nutritional energy may exert its effect
progesterone may cause abnormal sex differentia-
viaperipheral bloodprogesteronelevels since there
tion in themalepuppies.
is aninverserelationshipbetween food intake and
The commonest infectious cause of fetal loss is
progesterone levels.Other nutrients important in
Bcella canis.This organism isnot,however,found in
embryosurvival arevitaminEandselenium.
eUK.Canineherpesvirus can alsocausefetal death
Certainplants,suchaskaleandVeratrum californi-
and mummification.In his condition,infection of
cum,will cause embryonicdeath.The latteris also a
thefetus canbe transplacental inpregnant bitchesbut
teratogenic agent (Table 4.2).
more commonly the neonate is infected during passage
The effects of nutrition may be exaggerated or con-
through thebirth canalat parturition(see Ch.28).
foundedbydifferencesinovulationratesince losses
haveoftenbeenreportedtobe disproportionately
Cats
high in twin ovulations.Inbreedswith veryhigh
ovulation rates (i.e.litter-bearers),the embryonic
Verylittleinformationisavailableonthenon-infec
deathraterisesproportionatelybut thisisprobably
tious causes ofembryoniclossin the cat.Cats are
due to limitations of uterine space.
susceptible tothe loss ofembryos due to stress,
High environmental temperature, particularly in
and care should be taken not to distress a preg
the first week after mating,has been shown experi-
nant queen.Theinfectiouscauses ofembryonicloss
mentally to increase the embryonic death rate
include felineviral rhinotracheitis(FVR)and feline
dramatically.This could beiinportant in climatic
panleukopenia virus （FpV),which cause abortion,
138
Chapter
141
Abnormal development of the conceptus and its consequences
fetalmummificationandstillbornkittens,andfeline
pregnancy is maintained,the dead fetus will mum
leulaemia virus (FELV),which causes fetal resorp-
mifyandbedeliveredat termwiththelivefoal.
tion and abortion and is also responsible for pro-
In cattle, fetal mummification occurs with an
ducing the fadingkitten syndrome(see Ch.28).
incidenceof0.13-1.8%（Barth1986)andhaematic
mmmificationisthenorm.In thiscondition thefetal
fluids areresorbed but the fetus and membranes are
Sequelae to embryonic
surroundedby aviscous,chocolate-colouredma
or fetal death
terial (Figs.4.18,4.19).It was once thought that the
colourwasduetopigmentsfrom thebloodandthat
the condition was due to caruncular haemorrhage
Followingearlyembryonicdeaththeembryonictis
(hence the name),which resulted in fetal death.
sues are usually resorbed,and the animal returns to
However,thehaemorrhage is thoughtnow tobe an
oestrus if there is no otherconceptusintheuterus.
effect offetal death,rather than the cause.Various
Ifdeath occursbefore therehasbeenmaternalrec-
theories havebeen put forwardas to the aetiology
ognition ofpregnancy the oestrous cycle is notpro-
of the condition.It has been suggested that there
longed.Ifit occurs after recognition has taken place,
isa genetic cause,particularly since the condition
the oestrous cyclewill be prolonged.
appearedto bemore common in Channel Island
fdeath of the embryo is due to an infection
breeds (Jersey and Guernsey)and occurred with
then,even although theembryonicmaterialmaybe
ahigh frequency inaparticular familyofBritish
absorbed,a pyometramayfollow.In cattlethiscon-
dition is characterized bypersistence ofthecorpus
luteum,closed cervixandpusaccumulation in the
uterinebody and horns.Itis aparticular characteris-
ticofinfectionwithTritrichomonasfetus(seeCh.23).
If fetal death occurs after ossificationof thebones
has begun, complete resorption of fetal material can-
not take place.Instead,fetal mummification occurs.
The commonest form ofmummification is papy
raceous mummification,where the fetal fluids are
resorbedand the fetalmembranesbecome shriv-
elled and dried so that they resemble parchment
(hence the name).The uterus contracts on to the
fetus, which becomes twisted and contorted.In
polytocousspecies,ifmummificationoccursinonly
some embryos,tliis doesnotinterferewiththecon-
tinuation of the pregnancy of the live fetuses.The
mummifiedfetusis simplyexpelledatparturition.
Mummificationisverycommoninthepig,andisa
particular characteristicofinfection with theSMEDI
viruses.Itis alsoseen inlargelitters as aconsequence
of uterine overcrowding and placental insufficiency.
Inthecat,fetal ummificationisnot uncommonin
largelitters,andis again assumed tobeduetouter
ine overcrowding.In thedog.fetal mummification
is a characteristicof canine herpesvirus(CHV) infec-
tion.In the ewe,fetal mummification may beseen
with twins and/or triplets when one of the embryos
has died.In the mare,mummification is rare and is
always associatedwith twinpregnancies.If twinning
doesoccur,oneof thefetuses usuallydevelopsmore
slowlythantheother andissmaller.Thesmall fetus
Fig.4.18 Mummified fetal calf(f)with attached placenta(p).
usuallydies,and iftheotherfetussurvivesand the
139
Part
Pregnancy andparturition
Haematic nummification can ocur following
fetal death at ages ranging from 3-8 months of ges-
tation.Sincethiere is no fetal signal for the onset of
parturition the corpus luteum is retained and the
pregnancy'willbemaintainedforanunpredictable
time.Thecondition is often only diagnosedwhen
thecowisexaminedbecauseofaprolongedgestation
period.Treatment ofchoiceistheinductionofabor-
tion by luteolysisusingprostaglandins.The fetus is
normally expelled in 2-4 days.The prognosis for
further breeding is good since there has becn no
intrinsicdamagetothereproductivetract.However,
care needs to be taken that the mummified fetus is
Fig.4.19Mummified fetal calf in utero;note how theuterus
indeedexpelled,otherwiseapossiblesequelisfetal
has contracted down upon thefetus.
maceration.Fetalmacerationcanoccurinanyspecies
but itis describedmostfrequentlyincattle.It occurs
asa consequence of thefailureof an abortingfetus
Friesians (Logan 1973). Torsion of the umbilical
to be expelled,perhaps because of uterine inertia.
cord has been suggested as the primary cause of fetal
Bacteriaenter theuterusthrough thedilatedcervix
deathbutthishasnotbeenaconsistentfindingin
and,bya combinationofputrefaction andautolysis,
haematicmummies.On theotherhand,the condi-
the soft tissues are digested,leavingamass of ftal
tionhasbeeninducedhormonallyusingestradiol
boneswithin theuterus.Sometimes thesebecome
and trenbolone acetate(Gorse 1979),which sug-
embedded in theuterinewalland aredifficult to
gests that a hormonal anomaly may be the cause.
removeotherthanbyhysterotomy(Fig.4.20).Under
价
A
B
Fig.4.20Fetalbonesremovedfrom theuterusof cowfollowingmaceration
140
Chapter
141
Abnormal development of theconceptus and itsconsequences
Dropsy ofthe fetal sacs
Both the amniotic and allantoic sacs cancon-
tain excessive quantities of fetal fluid (see Ch.2);
when this occurs it isreferred to ashydramnios or
hydrallantois,depending on which sacisinvolved.
Hydrallantoisismuchmorecommonthanhydram-
nios,although the latteris always seen in association
with specificfetal abnormalities such as thebulldog
calf in theDexter.Although dropsy of thefetal sacs is
essentially abovine condition,Vandeplassche(per-
sonal communication,1973)has seen 48equine
cases inwhichpluriparousmares of10-20years of
age showed veryrapid onsetofthe condition between
7and 9 months of gestation.A fewcases havebeen
recorded in sheep,associated with either twins or
Fig.4.21Anencephaliclamb.
triplets, in which the excess of fluid-amounting to
about 18.5 litres -was in the amniotic sac.It has also
been reporied in the dog,involving all fetuses in a
thesecircumstancesa chronicendometritis ensues
litter.
and thereis severe damage to thieendometrium.The
Apart from the hereditary cases of hydramnios
animal shouldthereforebesentfor slaughter.
that accompany the Dexter bulldog' calf, which
Prolongedgestationneednotalwaysberelatedtomayoccurasearlyas thethirdorfourthmonth,
fetal death.Itis,forexample,acharacteristicofanen-
most instances ofdropsy ofthe fetal sacs ofcattle
cephalic pregnancies (Fig. 4.21), in which, because
are seen in the last 3 months of gestation.The cause
of the absence of the fetal pituitary, normal partu-
is notknown.Arthur(1957) found thenumber of
rition cannot be initiated(see Ch.6).If the fetus is
functioningcotyledonswas abnormallylow-the
aliveit continues togrow,and so theresult of pro-
longed gestation is absolute fetal oversize,which
placental formation-and there was a compensa-
leadstodystocia.
Other sequelae to fetal death are abortion and
nanthon.Histologically,therewasanon-infectious
stillbirtli.Abortionsareoftencausedbyinfectious
degeneration and necrosis of the endometrium
agents,and these are dealt with elsewhere (see Chs
and,as already observed,thefeius was undersized.
23,25-28).Stillbirths may occur because ofdevel-
Normally,in cattle, there is a markedly acceler-
opmental anomaliesincompatiblewithlife.
atedproductionofallantoicfluidat6-7monthsof
gestation and it is suggested that,where placental
dysfunction exists,this increase may become uncon-
Dropsy of the fetal membranes
trolled and lead to massiveaccumulation.ltis also
and fetus
frequently associatedwith twins.
All cases of hydrallantois are progresive but
theyvary in time of clinicalonset(within thelast
Threedropsicalconditions oftheconceptusmaybe
3months ofpregnancy) and in theirrate ofpro-
seeninveterinary obstetrics:oedemaoftheplacenta,
gression. The essential symptom is distension of
dropsy of the fetal sacs and dropsy of thefetus.They
the abdomen by the excess of fetal fluid (Fig.4.22).
may occur separately or in combination.
The later in gestation the condition occurs, the
morelikely it is thatthecowwill survive toterm,
whereasifthe abdomen is obviously distended at
Oedema of theplacenta
6or7months,the cow willbecome extremelyill
This frequently accompanies aplacentitis:for exam-
longbeforeterm.Thevolume ofallantoicfluidvar-
ple,Brucellaabortusinfectionincattle.Itdoesnot
jesupto273litresand suchlarge amountsimpose
causedystociabutisfrequentlyassociatedwith abor-
a seriousstrainon the cow andgreailyhamperres-
tion or stillbirth
piration and reduce appetite. There is gradual loss
141
Part
Pregnancy and parturition
of condition, eventually causing recumbency and
death (Fig. 4.23). Occasionally, the animal becomes
relieved by-aborting. The less severely affected reach
term in poor condition and, because of uterine iner-
tia(often accompanied by inconplete dilation of
the cervix), frequently require help at parturition.
The diagnosis of bovine hydrallantois is based on
the easily appreciable fluid distension of the abdo-
men, with its associated symptoms, in the last third
of pregnancy. Confirmation may be obtained by the
rectal palpation of the markedly swollen uterus and
by the failure topalpate the fetus either perrectum
orexternally.
The treatmenr ofhydrallantois calls for a realistic
approacli and a nicety of judgement. Cases that have
become recumbent should be slaughtered.Whiere
the animal is near term, a one- or two-stage cac-
sarean operation is indicated. With both methods
it is imperative that the fluid is allowed to escape
Fig.4.22 Jersey cow with the distended'pear-shaped
aemic shock associated with splanchnic pooling of
abdormen typical of hydrops allantois.
blood. Since hydrallantois is frequently seen in twin
142
Chapter
141
Abnormal development of theconceptus and its consequences
pregnancies in cows,it is particularly important to
there is still the difficulty ofdelivering thehead
search the grossly distended uterus for the second calf.
Caesarean seclionmaybeperformedbut thereisno
Cases of hydrallantoisthat calve or are delivered
merit in obtaining a livehydrocephalic calf;how
by caesarean operation frequently retain the pla-
ever,this operation maybenecessaryin severe cases
centa and,owingtotardyuterineinvolution,often
affecting pigs and dogs,and in cattle when the calf
develop metritis.This may lead toa protracted con-
is presented posteriorly or when hydrocephalus is
valescence and delayed conception.
accompaniedbyankylosisof thelimbjoints.
By using a synthetic corticosteroid (dexametha-
sone orflumeiasone)in conjunction withoxytocin,
Fetal ascites
Vandeplassche (personal communication,1973)
reportedimproved thierapyforhydrallantois.About
Dropsy of the peritoneum is a common accom-
4or5 days after an injection of 20mg of dexa-
paniment of infectious disease of the fetus and of
methasoneor5-10mgofflumetasonethecervix
developmentaldefectssuchasachondroplasia
relaxes and the cow is given oxytocin by means of
（Fig.4.12).Occasionally,it occurs as the only defect.
an intravenous drip for 30 minutes. Of 20cows so
Aborted fetuses are often dropsical;when the fetus
treated,17recovered.Inrespectofthemanagement
is full-term,ascitesmay cause dystocia.This canuu
ofequinehydrallantois,the samewriter advises that
allyberelievedbyincisingthefetalabdomenwitha
affected mares enter a spontaneous abortion phase
fetotomy knife.
butfail toexpelthefetus becauseofuterine atony.
Vandeplasschebreakstheallantochoriontorelease
Fetalanasarca
its fluid (commonly amounting to100 litres).The
mareisthengivenoxytocinbyintravenousdripand
Theaffectedfetus isusuallycarriedtoterm andcon
when thecervixhasrelaxed sufficienuythefetusis
cern is caused by the lack of progress in second-stage
manuallywithdrawn.Theplacenta itselfismarkedly
labour.This is due to the great increase infetal vol-
oedematous,andretention is prevented by furiher
ume caused by the excess offluid in the subcutane-
administrationofoxytocin.
oustissues,particularly of thehead and hindlimbs.
In the case of the head, there is so much swelling
Dropsy ofthe fetus
that thenormal featuresaremasked andtheresul-
Thereareseveral types of fetal dropsyand those of
point thatanundueproportionoftheseanasarcous
obstetric importance are hydrocephalus(Figs.4.9,
fetusesarepresentedposteriorly,in which case the
4.10),ascites (Fig,4.12) and anasarca (Fig.4.15).
enormous swellingofthepresentinglimbsisvery
The form of the fetus and the degree of obstetrichaz-
conspicuous.There is frequently an excess of fluid
ardare determined bythelocation and amount of
in the peritonealandpleural cavities with dilata-
the excess of fluid.Dystocia is due to the increased
tion of the umbilical and inguinal rings as well as
diameter of thefetus.
hydrocele.The substance ofthefetalmembranes is
alsooedematous andoccasionallythereisadegree
ofhydrallantois.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus involves a swelling of the cranium
Superfecundation
due to an accumulation of fluid,which may be in
theventricular system or between tie brain andthe
dura.It affects all species ofanimal and is seen most
Superfecundation is the condition in which off
commonly by veterinary obstetricians in pigs,pup-
spring fromtwo sires are conceivedcontempora
pies and calves (Figs.4.9,4.10)
neously.Because ofthenumber ofova shed and
In the more severe forms of hydrocephalus thereis
their longevity,as well as the length of oestrus and
marked thinningofthecranial bones.Thisfacilitates
the promiscuous mating behaviour ofthe species,
trocarizationandcompression oftheskullsoasto
superfecundation is most likely in the bitch.The
allowvaginal delivery.Where this cannot be done,
phenomenon is suspected when mating to two dogs
the dome of the cranium may be sawn off with feto-
of different breeds is known to have occurred, and
tomy wire or a chain saw. If the fetus is decapitated
the suspicion is heightened when the litter shows
143
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
from the delayed implantation reached maturity.
mation and size.Corroboration of suiperfecunda-
Vandeplassche and his co-workers believe that the
tion by inspection of the progeny is valid only when
cases of dodble parturition in pigs and in other spe-
pure-bred parters are involved. lt is likely that the
cies lial follow mating at separate oestrous peri-
majority of alleged cases are due simply to genetic
ods are also due to embryonic diapause rather than
variation in the offspring of impure parents.
to superfetation; also that occasional cases of pro-
Superfecundation has been reported when a mare
longed gestation may be due to the same cause.
gave birth to twin horse and mule foals, and when
aFriesian cow delivered twinFriesian and Hereford
References
calves.
Anamthawat-lonsson K,Long SE,Basrur PK,Adalsteinsson S
Superfetation
1992 Res Vet Sci52:367
Arthur GH1957 BrVer J 113:17
Superfetation is the condition that arises when
Ayalon N 1981 Zuchthygiene 16:97
Ball BA 1993 In:MckinnonAO.Voss )L (ed) Equine repro-
duction.Lea &Febiger,Philadelphia. p 517
conceives a second fetus or second litter.lt is not
Barth AD 1986 In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy in the-
uncommon for a cow to be mated when pregnant,
riogenology2.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,p205
but no evidence isavailablethat ovulation occurs
Baucus KL,RaistonSLNockelsCFetal 1990IAnimSci68:345
in a cow carrying a live fetus. Ovulation does occur
Bowling A,Ruvinsly A 2000 The genetics of the horseCAB
inpregnant mares,and in this species superfetation
International, Cambridge
Cribiu EP Popescu CP 1982 In: Proceedings of the 5th
is theoretically possible. Superfetation is suspected
European Colloquium on Cytogenetics of Domestic
when fetuses of very different size are born together
Animals,Milano-Gatgnano, p215
or when two fetuses. or two litters, are born at
Dennis SM 1993Vet Clin N Am Food Anim Praci 9:203
widely separated times. Apparently authentic cases
Dunn HO,McEnteeK,HallCEetal 1979Reprod Fertil57:21
havebeen described in whichtwonormally mature
Edey TN 1969Anin Breeding Abstr37:43
fetuses, or litters,have been delivered at times cor-
Fries RRuvinsky A 1999 The genetics of catule.CAB
International, Cambridge
responding in gestation length to two widely sepa-
Ginther Of 1985Equine Vet JSuppl3:41
rated and observed matings.
GintherOl,GarciaMC,BergfeldDR1985Theriogenology
ln general there is considerable doubt about
24:409
superfetation; however, Vandeplassche et al (1968)
Clahn-Luft B,Wassmuth R 1980 In:Proreedings of the 31st
have produced convincing proof that it does occur
Annual Meeting of the European Association for Animal
in the double parturitions of sows. They investigated
Produclion
12 cases of double porcine parturition following a
GorseM1979 Vet Bull49:349(abstr2729)
Gustavsson I 1977Ann Genet Sel Anim 9:531
singlemating,and in two of themthey explored the
Jaszczak K,Parada R,BoryezkoZet al 1958 Cenet Pol29:
369
farrowing. They concluded that double parturition
KingWA 1990Adv VetSci CompMed 34:229
followed a single mating at which an excessively
KlunderLR,McFecly RA,Becch 1,McCluneW1989Equine
Vet 121:69
distributed themselves normally throughoutboth
Lauritsen JG, Jonasson J,Therkelsen AI et al 1972 Hereditas
uterine horns. Instead of the more usual subsequent
71:160
LeamanT,Rowland R,Long SE 1999 Vet Rec 144:9-12
reduction of the litter size by embryonic death,
Leipold HN, Dennis SM 1986 In: Proceedings of te 14th
the embryos in the cranial halves ofboth cornua
World Congress on Diseases of Caitle,Dublin,p 3
remained unimplanitedinastateof'embryonicdia
Logan EF1973VetRec93:252
pause' for periods varying from 4 to 98 days, after
Long SE1990 In Pract12:208
which they were reactivated and implanted, thus
Long SE 1996 Cytogenet Cell Genet 72: 162
Long SE.Smith KC, Parlinson T] 1996 Arch Zooter 45:
nial parts of the horns.The embryos tliat innplanted
185-189
McDowell K, Sharp DC, Peck LS1985 EquineVet 」 Suppl3:23
in the caudal parts of the horns underwent a nor-
Mcleely RA 1990 Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 34
mal gestation and parturition;a second parturi-
Nie GJ, Momont HIW,Buoen L 1993 J Equine Vet Sci 13:
tion at variable intervals occurred when the piglets
456-459
144
Chapter
[4
Abnormal development of the conceptus and its consequences
OberstRD1993Vet ClinNAmFood AnimPract9:23
Stockman M1983a InPract5:103
Perry JS,Rowell JC1969|ReprodFertil19:527
StoclmanM1983bInPract5:202
Piper L,Ruvinsky A 1997Thegenetics of sheep.CAB
Switonski M,LechniakD,LandzwojczakD 1991 Genet Pol
International,Cambridge
32:227
PowerMM1987 CytogenetCell Genet45:163
ThaicherWW,CollierRj 1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Current
PowerMM1990AdvVetSci CompMed34:131-167
therapy intheriogenology2.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
QuirkeJEHanrahanIP19771Reprod Fertil51:487
p301
Robinson R 1990 Genetics for dog brecders.Pergamon,
VandeplasscheM,VandeveldeA.DelanoteM,GhekiereP
1968Tijdschr Diergencesk 93,19
Robinson R 1991 Genetics for cat breeders.Pergamon,
Varley MA,ColeDIA 1976AnimProd22:79
Oxford
Wilmut l,Sales Dl,Ashworth CI1986J Reprod Fertil76:851
Scofield AM 1976Vet Annu 15:91
WoollenNE 1993Vet ClinNAmFood AnimPract 9:163
StockmanM 1982 InPract4:170
145
15
Chapter
David Noakes
Prolapse of the cervix and vagina
Typically,prolapse ofthe cervix andvagina(CVP)is
costofreplacinga breeding eweminus thevalueof
a disorder of ruminants, normally in late gestation.
a culled affected ewe,lamb mortality and the cost of
Occasionally itisseenafterparturition andrarelyit
treatment.In addition,there are theunquantifiable
occurs unconnected with pregnancy or parturition.
welfareimplications.Thefinancialcosts of thedis-
It less frequently occurs in pigs.Itcanberecognized
order arebased on thefollowing assumptions:
by the protrusion of varying parts of the vaginal wall
·Some affected eweswill die
andsometimes thecervix through thevulvaso that
·If not treated some will abort
the vaginal mucosa is exposed.In some bitches,
hyperplasia of thevaginal mucosa occurs at pro-
·Somewill havereducedfertility
oestrus/oestrus,which may protrude through the
·Ewesmay be culled because of thepossibility that
vulva.This is sometimes referred to as vaginal pro-
prolapsemayrecur
lapse,although such a description isincorrectand is
·The stillbirth rate and neonatal mortality are
notcomparablewith thecondition in oiherspecies
increased
(see Ch.28）. Chronic prolapse during pregnancy
·There is a greater chance of dystocia in affected
in the bitch has been reported (Memon et al 1993,
Alan et al 2007) treated by hysteropexy,and a cae
ewes.
sarean followed by ovariohysterectomy, respectively.
Classification ofseverity
Long-term chronicvaginal prolapsein the absence
ofpregnancy has also been described (McNamara
Thedisorderisnormallyeasilyrecognized,although
et al 1997).
sometimes theprolapsed organcanbeconfusedwith
the allantochorion as it protrudes from thevulva
beforeit ruptures.Theseverity ofthe disorder varies,
Sheep
andanumberofdifferentclassificationshavebeen
used.Probably the simplest is that used by Bosse
Incidence and cost
etal （1989),which is as follows （Figs.5.1,5.2):
·Stage 1,in which the vaginal mucosa protrudes
The disorder is much more common in sheep
from thevulvawhen theeweisrecumbent but dis
thanin other speciesand isthus ofrealeconomic
importance. Average incidences are 0.53% (Edgar
appearswhen she stands
1952), 0.46% (Bosse et al 1989) and 0.98% (Low &
·Stage 2,in which the protruding vaginal mucosa
Sutherland1987),whichmayriseto20%and46%
remains visible even when the ewe stands;the
in someflocks.Thefinancial costissubstantial.For
cervixisnotvisible
example,Hosie（1989)calculated thatintheUK
·Stage 3,in which thievagina protrudes and the
each case cost 41.08; this was based on the average
cervix is visible.
146
Chapter
151
Prolapse of the cervix and vagina
following are said to bepredisposingfactors (Noakes
1999):
·hormonal excesses and imbalances
·hypocalcaemia
●large fetal load (twins or triplets)
· fat condition
thin condition
· inadequate exercise
·short tail docking
●bulky food (root crops)
·excess dietary fibre
Fig. 5.1 Moderate,early prolapse (stage 2) of the vagina in a
·dietary cestrogens and their precursors
ewe
· sloping terrain
· vaginal irritation
· previous dystocia
·inherited predisposition.
Irrespective of the alleged predisposing factors, there
are three requirements for CVP to occur (McLean
1956). They are:
- The vaginal wall must be in a state where it can
bereadily everted, and the vaginal lumen must be
large
·The vulva and vestibular wall must be relaxed
There must be a force that can displace the vaginal
wall, causing it to become everted.
  (i) ie ia   ss
to measure the changes in the compliance of the
Fig. 5.2 Severe prolapse (stage 3) of the vagina in a ewe.
vaginal wall (which will berelaied tothe casewith
which thewall can be everted) and the size of the
will assess the ease with which the everted vagina
Other systems of classification have been used that
alsotake into account the duration of theprolapse,
ran be expelled to the exterior). There are consid
its size and the other organs contained within the
erablebetween-aniinalvariations in theseparame
prolapsed organ; Cox (1987) uses the terms mild,
ters, which explains why CVP occurs in some ewes
moderate and severe. The bladder is most fre-
but not others. The compliance of the vaginal wall
quently involved as it becomes reflected to occupy
was greater during the second than the first preg-
the vesicogenital peritoneal pouch. This can be fol-
nancy, and this supports the observation that CVP
lowed bycomplete orpartial constriction ofthe ure-
is less frequently identified in primigravid than in
thra, causing urinary retention; the uterine horns
plurigravid ewes. Both endogenous and exogenous
and intestines can also be involved.Real-time ultra-
estracdiol and progesterone can influence the com-
sonography can be used to diagnose the contents of
pliance of the vaginal wall and the capacity of the
the prolapse (Scott & Gessert 1998).
vagina, The vaginal wall is comprised of collagen
and smooth muscle, so both parameters will be
influenced by either the amount, the distribution
Causes and pathogenesis
or the type of collagen present (Ayen & Noakes
Much of the evidence relating to the cause of the
1998). Extrapolation from work relating to geni-
disorder is anecdotal,and often contradictory.The
tourinary prolapse in humans suggests that it may
147
Part
21
 Pregnancy and parturition
well be a change in the collagen type that reduces
but the mildest prolapses; it also malkes the replace-
the mechanical strength of the vaginal wall (Jackson
ment much easier to perform.
et al 1996).Recent studies of human patients with
In sheep-tfe perineal wool, or string fastenied to
it, may be tied across the vulva, large safety pins have
total collagen, particularly subtype Ill, as well as
sometimes been used. For retaining the prolapsed
greater active expression of the matrix metallopro-
vagina ofewes,Fowler & Evans （1957)and Jones
teinases 9,compared with normal controls [Moalli
(1958) first described the use of a stainless steel stay
et al 2005). This, the authors considered, was an
in the form of the letter Ul,which is placed in the
indication of active tissue remodelling occurring.
vagina. The emerging ends are bent at right angles
Furthermore,the influence ofoestrogens on vaginal
and fitted with 'eyes' that are securely fastened
collagen metabolism was shown in a human study
with string on either sidetothewool oftheglu-
teal region. This type of prolapse retainer has been
women caused a significant reduction in total aged
improved by the development of a 'plastic spoon',
collagen but an increase in new collagen (Jackson
which is fastened in the same way as the U-shaped
etal2002）
device, or by combining it with a harnessmade from
baling twine or nylon strapping (Fig.5.3).Buhner's
Clinical signs and progression of
method,which is described in detail in the section
the disease
on cattle below, is equally applicable to ewes with
prolapsed vaginas:a suture oftape canbe laid by
The clinical signs are obvious; the only possible
means of a large half-curved,cutting suture needle,
confusion might be the protruding allantochorion.
although a small Buhner's needle, as described for
cows,is preferable.
weels of gestation.The only distinction that needs
The early replacement and retention of the pro-
to be made is the severity. In sheep a severe prolapse
lapse is very important to prevent trauma and to
withheavy strainingis notwell tolerated,and fatali
ensure that the ewe maintains pregnancy to term.
ties from shock, exhaustion and anaerobic infection
In so far as genetic aspects are concerned, it would
are common. Abortion, or premature delivery, often
seem unwise tobreed from animals thathave shown
of a dead fetus,may be followed by rapid maternal
vaginal prolapse.There is little doubt that by adopt-
recovery.In1 a study involving 129 ewes with CVP,
ing this culling policy over the years, stock owners
spontaneousparturition occurred in 26%,with dys-
have exerted a large measure of control over the
tocia in58%ofwhich70%sufferedfromincomplete
condition.Although the recurrence rate is variable,
cervical dilatation（ringwomb)(Kloss et al2002)
ranging from 72-3.6% (Stubbings 1971, Bosse et al
White(1961) first described a fatalcondition
of heavily pregnant ewes in which the intestines
ewes was reported by Ayen & Noakes (1997).
become prolapsed through a spontaneous rupture
of the dorsal or lateral wall of the vagina. This has
been shown to be associated with vaginal prolapse,
although why it should occur is not entirely clear
Cattle
(Knottenbelt 1988). More recently, a study involv-
ing theNorwegian Dala breed has questioned this
Causes and pathogenesis
theory and has presented information suggesting
that it might be due to a number of reasons, includ-
The exact cause of the disorder has not been ascer-
ing uterine torsion (Mosdol 1999).
tained but severalfactors are generallybelieved to
play a part. Cattle of the beef breeds, particularly
Treatment
Herefords,Simmentals and Charolais,aremostcom-
monly affected. Woodward & Queensberry (1956)
Treatment of ewes with CVP is often carried out
recorded 1.1% of vaginal prolapses in 7859 pregna11-
without any consideration for the welfare of the ani-
cies in Hereford cattle in the USA and it has been sug-
mal. It is relatively easy for veterinarians to reduce
gested that in this breed the anatomical anchorage
pain and discomfort during replacement by using
of the genital tract is less efficient than in other ani-
caudal epidural anaesthiesia. The technique, which
mals.An excessive deposition of fat in the perivagi-
is described in Chapter 12, should be used for all
1nal connective tissue,and ligamentous relaxation,
148
Chapter
151
Prolapse of the cervix and vagina
Anus
Vulva
B
Fig.5.3 (A) The positioning of a harness (constructed of baling twine or nylon strapping) in a ewe together with a plastic
retainer.The latter is not always used if pressurefrom themarness on e perineum is sufficient toretain the prolapse.(B)The
plastic retainer (r).This can be used without the harness, and can be attached to the wool using tapes.
may increase themobility of thevagina.Bot these
Clinical signs and progression of
effects mightbe due to a state of endocrine imbal-
thedisease
ance,in which oestrogenic hormones predominate;
the administration of diethylstilbestrol has been
Initially the lesion involves a protrusion of the
shown to soften the suspensory ligaments of the gen-
mucous membrane-moreparticularlyofthiefloor-
ital tract. Where oestrogenic substances are present
of that part of the vagina that lies just cranial to the
ininordinate amounts in the diet,as in subterranean
urethral opening.In severe cases the whole ofthe
clover pastures of Western Australia(Bennetts1944)
anterior vagina and cervix may protrude.The earlier
or in mouldy maize and barley, which are consid-
in pregnancy the disease develops, the more severe
ered to have a high oestrogen content, this can result
it is likely to become, because advancing pregnancy
in a high incidence of prolapse. When heifers are
tends to accentuate the condition.Most cases occur
fed these in their diet they may show vulvovagini-
in thelast 2monthsofgestation.In themildest form
tis, with oedema of the vulva, relaxation of the pel-
the prolapse appears only when the cow is recum-
vic ligaments, tenesmus and vaginal prolapse (Koen
bent;when the animal rises,it recedes.However,he
&Smith 1945,McErlean 1952).Predisposition t0
tendency is fortheprolapse tobecoine more severe
CVP is inherited,as shownby itsgreater frequency of
so that,in time, a large tissue mass protrudes and
occurrence in beef cattle. Mechanical factors, suich as
does not disappear in the standing position. The pro-
the increasing intra-abdominal pressure of laie preg-
truding tissues, with their circulation impaired, are
nancy and gravity, acting through the medium of a
prone to injury and infection. The resultant inita-
sloping byre floor when cattle are tethered,are con-
fion causes expulsive straining efforis.This increases
sidered to be significant (McLean & Claxton 1960).
the severity of the prolapse, and a vicious circle is
Postparturientprolapse ofthe vagina of catte is
established.Eventually the whole of thevagina,cer-
usually due to severe straining in response to vagi-
vix and even the rectum may become everted (Figs.
nal trauma, or infection, following a serious dys-
5.4,5.5).Thrombosis,ulceration and necrosis of
tocia. Vaginal contusion at parturition, followed by
the prolapsed organ,accompanied by toxaemia and
Fusobacteriumnecrophorum infection,exerisahighdegree
severe straining, lead to anorexia, rapid deteriora-
ofirritationwithfrequent exhaustingexpulsiveefforts.
tioninbodilycondition and occasionallydeath.
149
Part
2
Pregnancy andparturition
Fig.5.4Prolapse of vagina ina Charolais cross cowat
7monthsof gestation(Courtesy ofProfessorBarrie Edwards).
Fig.5.5Prolapseof vagina,cervix and,becauseofpersistent
straining, the rectum.
Treatment
If prompt attention is given, simple measures often
throughthe tissue,become displaced andprolapse
succeed.The aim is to arrest the process by early
recurs.While strainingmay becontrolled by caudal
replacementandretentionoftheprolapsedpor-
epidural anaesthesiaintheshort term,and although
tion.Caudal epidural anaesthesia(see Ch.12)is
xylazine will prolong its effect (see Ch.12),it is not
indicatedboth toobviate straining andtodesen-
practicable to provide continuous anaesthesia by
sitize theperineum for suturing.Theeverted mass
thismeans.Perineural injection of thepudicnerves
is cleaned,usingplainwater ora mild non-irritant
has the same effect, and the same disadvantage.
antiseptic,and replaced gentlywith the palm of
Tenesmus has beenprevented for several days and
the hand,being carefulnotto cause trauma tothe
for up to a week or moreby the induction of an arti-
inflamed andsometimesfragiletissue.Itisretained
1ficial pneumnoperitoneum.
by tapeorstoutnylonsutures thatcrossthevulva
Becauseofthedeficienciesofthesimplesuture
andareinserted in the perineal skin.Quill suturesmethods ofretention,in my experience thebest
tied over rubber tubing arebest.In caseswhere themeans of retaining thereplacedvagina is the tech-
vagina has suffered little damage and especiallynique described by Bihner (1958)（Fig.5.6).It
where parturition is imminent,such measures areentails the placing,by use ofa special needle,of
usually sufficient.However,where irritation from a subcutaneous suture of nylon tape around the
trauma and infection causes vigorous straining,vulva.To facilitate introduction of the large nee-
or even the trauma caused by the insertion of the dle two‘stab'incisions are made (under epidural
sutures themselves,the retaining sutures may tearanaesthesia previouslyinduced to aidreplacement
150
Chapter
Prolapseof thecervix andvagina
Nylon tape
卡
2cmincision
Incision
Vulva
Incision
3cm incision
Buhner'sneedle
(i)
(i)
_Vulva
Ends of the
tapetobe
Tape
tightened,
subcutaneously
knotled
and buried
subcutaneousl
Nyion tape
A(i)
(iv)
Fig.5.6(A)Buhner's method for the retention of vaginal prclapse.(B) Buhner's needle (n)and nylon tape (t）
of the vagina) in the midline; the upper one is
pulled backwards and outwards from the lower
midway between the dorsal commissure of the
aperture and unthreaded. The tape now encircles
vulva and the anus while the lower one is imme-
the vulva subcutaneously and its two ends hang
diarely beneath the ventral vulvar commissure.
from the lower incision. These ends are tied with
The needle is inserted into the lower incision and
a simple knot with such a degree of tightness that
gradually passed subcutaneously up the right side
four fingers can be inserted flatwise up to their
of the vulva until its point emerges through the
second joints into the vulva.The upper incision is
upper incision, whereupon the needle is threaded
closed with a couple of sutures of fine monofila-
witha double length ofnylontape.While one
mentnylon while the lower incision canbe either
end of the tape is firmly held, the loaded needle is
left open or sutured according to the cow's prox
pulled downwards nintil free ofthelower incision,
imity io parturition. The suture causes practically
when it is untlireaded, thus leaving a length of tape
no tissue reaction;the vulvar labia are not dam-
protruding from each incision.The needle is now
aged by it,and it can remain in situ for months,
inserted again into the lower incision and passed
until the cow is on the poini of calving, when the
subcutaneously up the left vulvar labium.When
knot should be cut so as to release the thread and
its point emerges the needle is threaded,then
allow the vulva to dilate for the birth of the calf.
151
Part
Pregnancy and parturition
Forcowsshowingrecurrentprolapseand thatare
anchoringit usingnon-absorbablesutures ornylon
remotefromparturition,andalsoforpostpartum
tapetotheprepubictendonorthesacrosciaticliga
cases, Roberts (1949) suggesied a method of almost
ments(Winkfer 1966）.Although Winkler describes
complete surgical occlusion of the vulva by a tech-
the technique as being done under caudal epidural
nique that isreally an extension of Caslick'splastic
anaesthesia,in my experience,while the approach
operationforpreventingvaginalaspirationinmares
to the sacrosciatic ligament ispossibleusing this
approach, attachment to the prepubic tendon
ralorlocal infiltration anaesthesia,strips ofmucous
requires general anaesthesia, with the cow in dor-
membrane,1.2cm wide,are dissected from the
salrecumbencyandacaudalmidlinelaparotomy
upper three-fourths of each vulvar lip. The denuded
between the two udder halves.
areasare then approximated bymeans offine non-
absorbable sutures,and a few mattress sutures of
Pigs
tapeorstoutnylonare deeplyplacedacross the
vulva toprotect thecoapted lipsfrom the effects of
straining.First-intention healing should occur,and
Vaginal prolapse (Fig.5.8) occurs in gilts at oestrus,
the suturelinemustbeincisedwhenparturition is
and also after thefeedingof mouldycereals,suppos-
imminent.
edly because of their high oestrogen content.
Farquharson(1949),who sawhundredsofcases
ofvaginalprolapseinHerefordrangecattleinColo-
Dogs
rado,successfullyappliedatechniqueofsubmucous
resection,or‘reefingoperation,on the prolapsed
organ.The object of the operation,which should
Vaginal hyperplasia, which occurs around the
notbeperformedlaterthan3-4weeksfromterm,
timeofoestrus,is sometimes incorrectlyreferred
is toexcisetheprotrudingmucosa-whichforms
to as vaginal prolapse(see Ch.28).A few cases
the bulk of the everted mass - and then approxi-
of true vaginal prolapse have been reported;both
mate the cut edges.The operation is performed
single case reports (Memon el al 1993,Alan et al
under posterior epidural anaesthesia. Subsequent
2007).One case was first seen around the time of
parturitionandconceptionarenotaffected,and
oestrus and recurred during pregnancy,while the
the cure is permanent.An alternative approach is
other first appeared in late gestation and resulted
toprevent displacement of the cervix caudallybyin dystocia.
Fig.5.7Chronicprolapseof thecervix,treated byusingRoberts'smodification of Caslick'soperation
152
Chapter
51
Prolapse of the cervix and vagina
References
Alan M,Cetin Y, Sendag S,Eski F 2007Anim Reprod Sci100:
411
Ayen E, Noakes DE1997 Vet Rec 141:59
Ayen E,Noakes DE 1998Vet I155:213
Ayen E, Noakes DE,Baker S] 1998Vet J 156:133
Bennetts HW 1944I AgricWest Aus1 21:104
Bosse P, Grimard B,Mialot IP 1y89 Rec Med Vet Ec Alfort
165:355
BuhnerF1958 Tierarztl Umsch 13:183
Cox JE 1987 In: Surgery of the reproductive tract of large ani-
mals,3rd edn.Liverpool University Press,Liverpool,
p129-132
Edgar DG 1952VetRec64:852
Farquharson J 1949 Rep 14th Int Vet Congr 3:264
Fowler NC,Evans DA1957Vet Rec69:501
Hosie BD 1989 In Pract 11:215
Jackson SR,Avery NC,Tarlton IF et al1996 Lancet317:1658
Jackson S,JamesM,Abrams P2002 Br I Obstet Gynaecol
109:339
Jones BV 1958VetRec70:362
Kloss S.Wehrend A,Failing K,Bostedi H 2002 Ber Minch
Tierarzt Wochenschr 115:247
Knoltenbelt DC1988Ve1Rec 122:653
Koen IS,Smith HC 1945Vet Med 40:131
LowJC, Sutherland HK1987 VetRec120:571
McErlean BA 1952Vet Rec 64:539
McleanJW1956NZVet J4:38
Fig. 5.8 Vaginal prolapse in a scw.
McLean [W, Clax1on JH 1960 NZ Vet J 8: 51
McNamara PS,Harvey HJ,Dykes N 1997 J Am Anim Hosp
Ass0c33:533
MenonMA,PavleticMM,KumarMSA 1993J AmVetMed
As50c202:295
Moalli PA,Shand SH.Zyczynski HMe1al 2005 Obstel
Cynecol106:953
Mosdol Q1999Vet Rec144:38
Noakes DE 1999 CPD Vet Med 2: 47
RobertsS)1949CornellVet39:434
Scolt PR, Gessert ME 199S Vet 155: 323
Stubbings DP 1971 Vet Rec 122:296
WhiteJB1961VetRec73:281
Winkler JK1966AmVetMed Assoc149:76S
Woodward RR,Queensberry IR 1956IAnim Sci 15:119
153
6
Chapter
Marcel Taverne
and
David Noakes
Parturition and the care of parturient animals
including the newborn
Parturition
potentialofthemyometrium;thefactorsinvolved
inthesetransformations arehumoral,biochemical,
neuraland mechanical.
Itis essential for the veterinarian to be perfectly
Ofthe humoral factors,the most important is
familiarwiththenormalcourseofparturition in
thereversalofthosemechanismsthat arenecessary
domestic species in order tobeableto differenti-
for the maintenance of pregnancy,in particular the
atebetweenphysiological andpathological birth.
removaloftheprogesteroneblock,which ensures
Thusitisimportanttospendtimeobservingnormal
that,during this phase of an animal's reproductive
parturition in these species;this cannot always be
life, the myometrium is largely quiescent.Together
achieved easily.An appropriateintervention at the
with the changes in oestrogen and prostaglandin
correct time can increase the likelihood of a suic-
synthesis and secretion,it also enhances the bio-
cessfuloutcomebyensuringthatbothmother and
chemicalripeningoftheconnective tissueswithin
offspring survive.
the cervixin preparationforits dilatation.
The mechanisms that are responsible for the ini-
tiation of parturition vary slightly between species.
Initiation of parturition
Initiallymuch of the experimental work to deter-
mine them was done in the ewe,because the sheep
Parturition isoneof themostfascinatingofbiological
was used as a research model for parturition in
processes,for although itsphysiologyis explicable and
women.This,togetherwith circumstantial evidence
its associated endocrine changes havebeen fairly well
obtained from cattle,sheep and goats,in whichit
established,thefactors thatinitiatebirth andthereby
was observed that prolonged gestation was usually
terminatepregnancy after a constant length ofgesta-
associatedwithabnormalitiesofthefetalbrain and
tionforagivenspecies arestill imperfectlyunderstood.
adrenal,supported thehypothesisfirstadvocated by
Themodernconcept,whichisfirmlybasedonexper-
Hippocrates,thatthefetusisresponsibleforcontrol-
imental studies and clinical observations(mainlyin
lingthe timewhenparturitionoccurs.
farm animalsand to someextent inhorses),is that
The mechanisms are fairly well defined in the
thefetusexertsan overridingcontrolonthelength
domesticruminant species but in the pig,horse, dog
of gestation and that themother can influence the
andcatthereareanumberofimportantareasthat
timeofbirth onlywithinnarrowlimits.
are not well understood. Since much of the work
Theuterine musculature is the key component
has been reported in sheep it is proposed to describe
of labour, and the essential physiological changes
in detail the mechanismsin this species and subse-
between gestation andbirth are a biochemical rip-
quentlytoindicatethosedifferencesthat havebeen
ening of the cervix and liberation of thecontractile
identified inother species
154
Chapter
161
Parturition and thecareofparturientanimals,includingthenewborn
Sheep
called‘adult'corticotrophs,which might reflect an
Parturitioninthe ewe occurs asresultof activation
increased potential forACTH secretion(Antolovich
of thefetal hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal(HPA)
etal 1988).Thereisanincrease incorticotrophin-
axis;the areasof thehypothalamusinvolved in this
releasing hormone (CRHl) and arginine vasopres-
process are theparaventricular nuclei.Thefetal HPA
sin(AVP)from the paraventricular and supraoptic
axisis similar to the adult HPA axis,exceptthat the
nuclei in the fetal hypothalamus,and these are
fetal brain is still developing in late gestation and
thoughttoberesponsiblefor theinitial (CRHl)and
theformer communicateswith thelattervia the
late (AVP; last 10 days)rise in fetal plasma ACTH
placenta. There is still uncertainty abou the mech-
levels. Endogenous opioids may also play a role in
anisms responsiblefordhe activation ofthefetal
stimulatingACTHI secretionvia theireffect upon the
hypothalamus. A number of theories have been pro-
fetal hypothalamus rather than the pituitary. It has
posed. These are:
been shown experimentally that,when exogenous
maturationofthefetal hypothalamus,which
opioids are infused into the fetal lamb, there is an
mightresultinthedevelopmentofcritical
increasein ACTH,which canbeabolished by the
synapsesintheparaventricularnucleus,allowing
administration of the opioid antagonist naloxone
an increaseinfetal neuroendocrinefunction
（Brooks&Challis1988)
The fetal adrenal becomes more responsive to
ability of the hypothalamus torespond to the
ACTH stimulationwith advancingage(Glickman&
effectsofplacental hormones
Challis1980).Maturation is induced by ACTH,par-
fetal stressors such as hypoxia,hypercapnia,
ticularlythepulsepatternofitssecretion.lt hasbeen
changesinbloodpressure and bloodglucose
shown that insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) may
(Wood1999).
have anautocrineand/orparacrineroleinregulat
It is also postulated that placentally-derived hor-
ingovinefetal adrenal finction(Hlann etal1992)
mones such as oestrogens.progesterone, PGE,or
Fetalgrowthhormone,whichiselevatedfrom50-70
corticotrophin-releasing factor(CRF)may also act
daysofgestation and thenfallsuntil 1o0days before
on the hypothalamus.
increasingto term,may also modify theresponse
Let us consider the interactions between the pitu-
ofthefetaladrenal toACTH(Devaskaretal 1981).
itary andadrenal cortex.Before120 days ofgesta-
There isrecent evidence thatmaternalundernutri-
tion,muchofthecortisolpresentin thecirculation
tion around the time ofconception,resultingina
of thefetal lamb is derived from theewevia transpla-
loss of maternal body weight of some 15%, may
cental transfer.During the last 15-20 days of gesta-
programme thedevelopment ofthefetal HPA axis
tion,hereisaprogressiveriseinasemi-logarithmic
insuchaway thatits activation(seebelow),andthe
pattern,infetal cortisol concentrations,whichreach
resultingbirth oflambs,take place some7-10 days
a peak 2-3 days before birth,thereafter declining
earlier (Kumarasamy et al 2005).
7-10 days post-partum.The source of the increase
A recently adaptedversion of the original hypoth-
infetalcortisolisthefetaladrenal,whichis dueto
esis suggests that intrauterine prostaglandin synthe-
both an increaseinthesizeof theorganinrelation
sisis affectedbythisriseincortisol bytwodifferent
tototal body weight and an increase in its sensitiv-
pathways (Whittle et al 20o0).The first,oestrogen-
ity toadrenocorticotrophichormone(ACTH),as a
independent pathway,involves theenhanced expres-
result of accelerated processing of ACTH from pro-
sion ofprostaglandin synthetase(PGHS-Il)within
opiomelanocortin(POMC);maternal cortisol con-
the fetal trophoblastcells of theplacenta.The result-
centrationsonlyrisearoundthetimeofparturition
ingrelease of PGE,as reflected by an early rise in
(Wood 1999). At the same time, the binding capac-
fetal plasma PGE,levels, stimulates the placental
ity of the fetal plasma increases, thus reducing the
conversion of pregnenolone to C, steroids and their
amountoffreecortisolinthefetalcirculationand
subsequent aromatization to oestrogens in the pla-
thereby reducing the negativefeedback effect onthe
centa, by activating the enzymes 17u-hydroxylase
secretion of ACTH by thefetal pituitary.
and aromatase (Fig. 6.1).One of the consequences
In sheepfetalpituitaries,the‘fetalcorticotrophs
oftheriseinoestrogensisa stimulation of PGHS-II
are replaced (probably accompanied bya change
inthematernal endometrium,leadingtoenhanced
in the distribution ofPOMCpeptides),around125
PGFproduction and releasewithin the uterine wall
days of gestation,by smaller stellate cells,the so-
andthiswillstimulatemyometrialcontractility.
155
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
contractions),oxytocin andprostaglandinreceptors
Pregnenclone
Fetal adrenal coriscl
and calcium channels. Oestrogens also stimulate
softening afhecervix by altering the structure of
Placental trophoblast
collagen fibres. Prostaglandins thus play a key role
P450C17hydroxlase
GE
PGHS-II
in initiatingparturition and areconsidered to bethe
main intrinsic stimulating factor of smooth muscle
CgSteraids
cells{Csapo 1977）and thus its release is crucial
in initiating myometrial contractions.Prostaglandin
P450aromatase
synthaseinhibitors haveshown tobeeffectivein
delaying onset of parturition in a wide range of spe-
Oestrogen
Endometrial PGHS-Il
cies,including sheep,pigs and women(Taverne et al
1982,Racet al2006).
Conlraction associated
The effect of the parturient contractions of the
PGF2x
prcteins (CAP)
myometriumistoforcethefetal lambtowardsthe
cervix andvagina,where itwillstimulate sensory
Uterina ccntractity
receptors and initiate Ferguson's reflex,with the
release of large amounts of oxytocin from the pos-
Fig.6.1 Model of endocrine events associated with the onset
teriorpituitary.Howeverinruminants,thisoxytocin
of ovine parturition(after *Whittle et al 2000)
release ismainly detected inperipheralplasma dur-
ingtheexpulsive stageofparturition(Hydbringet al
1999),i.e.many hours after the switch from a gesta-
This represents the second,oestrogen-dependent,
tional to aparturient type of myometrial activity has
pathway bywhich fetal cortisol affects prostaglan-
already taken place.At this rather late stage of par-
din production (Fig.6.2).In ruminants,such as the
turition,oxytocin will further stimulatemyometrial
cow and goat,where progesterone is predominantly
contractionsand enhancereleaseofPGF,from the
produced by thecorpus luteum,thisPGFmightalso
myometrium,and this positive feedbacksystem of
induce luteolysis(seebelow).
increasing magnitude thus supports a rapid expulsion
Oestrogensthemselves alsohavea directeffect
ofthe fetus.
upon the myometrium,by increasing several so-
Other important changes that arebrought about
called contraction-associated proteins(CAPs),such
as connexins (to form gap junctions, special areas of
by theendocrineeventsofparturition havebeen
observed. For instance,maturation of the fetal
contact between smooth musclecells,allowing the
lamb's lungs, especially the production of alveo-
passageofelectrical pulses and ensuringcoordinated
larsurfactant,isstimulatedbycortisol,asaremany
other changes in fetalfunction and structure that
enable the lamb to survive after birth （Fowden
Phospholipids
1995).Aschematicrepresentationof theendocrine
Inactivated
Oestrogen
Aclivated
changes that areinvolvedintheinitiation ofparturi-
phospholipase
phospholipase
Progesterone A2
tion in the ewe and some other species is shown in
A2
Figure 6.3.Overall trends in reproductive and other
Arachidonic
hormones occurring in theperipheral circulation of
acid
theewearoundthetimeofparturition areshownin
Prostaglandin
Figure 6.4.
synthetase
Prostaglandin
endoperoxide
Cattle
Thecorpusluteum(CL)is thiemain sourceofpro-
gesterone throughout bovine pregnancy but, as
PGF
PGE
stated in Chapter 3,the placenta assumes a role
ofprogesteroneproductionbetween150and200
Fig.6.2The induction of PGEand PGFrelease(after *Liggins
days ofgestation.Soif the ovary containing the
1982).
CL or the CL itself is removed during this stage
156
Chapter
16]
Parturition and the care ofparturientanimals,includingthenewborn
Hypoxia
Placentally
Hypercapnia
Fetal hypothalamus
Hypertension
derived hormones
Hypotension
Blood glucose
Fetal pituitary
Fetal
maturation
ACTH
Relaxin
Adrenaline
Fetal adrenal
Stimulates
release?
Decrease in
placental
Adrenal corticosteroids
progesterone
Relaxation and soflening
Feto-placenlal oestrogens
of cervixpelvic
ligaments, perineum
Cotyledons/
myometrium
Luteolysis of the
corpus luteum of
Release of PGF2u
pregnancy
Decrease in serum
Lowers myometrial threshold to
progesterone
oxytocin or has a direct effect
Allows oxytocin driven
contractions to occur
Increased
myometrial
Myometrial contractions
Expulsion of fetus
excitability
Oxytocin
Posterior pituitary
Stimulates vagina
reflex
and cervix
Abdominal
straining
Fig.6.3Theendocrinechanges thatoccurbefore and during parturition in the sow,ewe and cow,and their effects
pregnancymay continue in some or allcases
not required to maintain pregnancy at all stages
(McDonald et al 1953,Lindell 1981).However,
of gestation, it has been shown that its regression
it hasbeenobserved that in cows that havebeen
plays an important role in the endocrine changes
ovariectomized,parturition is frequently abnor-
that are necessary for the initiation of parturition.
mal (McDonald et al 1953). Although the CL is
There is no evidence to suggest that the prepartum
157
Part
Pregnancy and parturition
Progesterone
ProstaglandinmetabolitePGFM
-Corticosteroid
-Totaloestrogens
10
Prolactin
30
600
(
日
/6u)
400
teroid
(
/6u)
20
(u/bu)
400
cortico
/6d)
oestrogens
and
200
idin
Prostaglanc
10
200
Total
2
-2
0
2
4
Days
Fig.6.4Trends inhormoneconcentraticns in theperipheral plasma of theewe around the time ofparturition.Day0 atparturition.
decline ofmaternal plasma progesterone levels
Overalltrendsin reproductive andotherhor-
isduetowithdrawalofamaternalluteotrophic
mones occurringin theperipheral circulationof the
support.Although other mechanisms, such as a
cowaround thetime ofparturition areshown in
directeffectofglucocorticoids,maybeinvolved,
Figure 6.5.
itismost likely tliat lutealregression isinitiated by
theactionofPGFYet,thereleaseofprostaglandins
Goat
intothematernal circulation,asmirroredbyitsmain
metabolite,shows agradualprepartumincreasedur
In this species,the CLsprovide theessential source
ingtherapid andfinalprepartumdeclineofplasma
ofprogesterone necessary for the maintenance of
progesterone and,unlike during the oestrous cycle,it
gestation,since ovariectomy or extirpation ofthe
does not show clear pulses (Konigsson et al 2001).
CLs will terminate pregnancy (lrving et al 1972).
The increasedrelease is aresult of the effect ofpla-
Placental17o-hydroxylase,which is stimulated by
cental oestrogens acting upon the maternal part
theriseinfetal cortisol（Flintetal1978),diverts the
of the placentomes (Figs. 6.1, 6.2). The endocrine
synthesis of progesterone by the CLs into oestro-
changes responsible for initiating parturition are
gen.Thechange in the oestrogen:progesteroneratio
probably very similar lo those described in the sheep
stimulates PGF synthesis as in the ewe (Figs. 6.1,
(Fig.6.3),on which much of theexperimentalwork
6.2),resulting in luteolysis with a further decline
has been done. In fact the first reports on a pos-
in progesterone.Progesterone disappears from the
sible involvement of thefetal hypophyseal-adrenal
circulation before parturition can occur.Yet, this
axis in theinitiation ofparturition camefrompatho-
sequence of events has been disputed by Ford et al
logicalobservationsincowswithahereditaryform
(1998),who found no clear evidence that prepar-
ofprolongedgestation.Fetusesfrom theseanimals
tum luteolysis in goats is associated with changes
showedaplasia ofthepituitary and adrenal hypopla-
in the basal concentrations of prostaglandins in
sia (Kendricketal 1957).
maiernalplasma.
158
Chapter
161
Parturition and the care of parturient animals, including the newborn
Progesterone
Corticosteroid
..Prolactin
ProstaglandinmetabolitePGFM
-Totaloestrogens
Calving
6
300
(w/6u)
8000
4000
pio.
(pg/ml)
(/bd)
200
(wbu)
CO1
tabolite
and
Prolactin
4000
2000
E
Prostaglandin
100
Total
25
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
Prepartum
Postpartum
Days
Fig. 6.5 Trends in hormone concentrations in the peripheral plasma of the cow around the time of parrurition.Day O at parturtion
Pig
different in individual piglets,even when fetuses
within one litter are compared (Randall 1y83). It is
In the pig progesterone from the CLs is necessary for
assumed that the rise in feial cortisol resulis in a rise
the maintenance of pregnancy throughout its entire
in the maternal blood oestradiol and PGF,metabo
duration.Fetal participation in the initiation of far-
lites, and a decrease in progesterone. Although the
rowing is indicated by the prolongation of pregnancy
prepartum decline of plasma progesterone coincides
following fetal decapitation and hypophysectomy. If
with the first increase of PGF,metabolites accord-
only onefetus survives towards term in alitter,this
ing to some auhiors(Kindahl et al 1982),others
fetus appears capable of initiating the farrowing pro-
found no such clear relationship (Silveret al 1979,
cess but in the presence of four or more decapitated
Randall et al 1986). It is unlikely that oestrogens are
litter mates a single intact fetus is incapable of doing
responsible for stimulating the release of PCF,, as
so（Stryker & Dziuk 1975）.Furthermore,when
occurs in the other species [First 1979), and exog-
fetal plasma cortisol is raisedprematurely in all, or
enous oestrogens will not induce farrowing. The
part, of a (reduced) litter, farrowing is not induced
hormonal changes in the maternal peripheral circu-
(Randall et al 1990). These observations indicate
lation are illustrated in Figure 6.6.
that themechianisms of fetal participation in theini-
tiation of farrowing is far from clear at ihe moment.
Horse
Parturition is preceded initially by increased levels
of cortisol in the fetal plasima, although the pat-
The mechanisns responsible for the initiation of
tern of fetal plasma cortisol concentrations is quite
parturition are not yet as well understood as those
159
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
18
...Progesterone
-Total oestrogens
16
Prostaglandin metabolite PGFM
Corticosteroid
600
/bu)
14
12
100
400
/6d)
(jw/bu)
Corticosteroid(
50
00
C
2
2
Days
at day 0.
oftheruminant species.However,it is likely thatthe
progestogen levels increase and reach a peak about
fetal foal is responsiblefor theinitial triggermecha-
48hoursbeforeparturition.Itisonlyvery close to
nism, since the fetal adrenal undergoes rapid hyper-
delivery(during thelast24-48 hours)that these lev-
trophy inmediately before parturition (Comline &
els show a steep decline. These changes in progesto-
Silver197l)andfetalplasmacortisolconcentrations
gen levels appear tobe under the control of thefetal
have been shown to increase nearly ten-fold during
HPA axis.Whenthefetal adrenal cortexgrows and
the last days before foaling (Card & Hillman 1993,
differentiates, thefetal adrenals start to secrete preg-
Cuddetal1995).Themain differencesfromtheewe
nenolone, which serves as a precursor for proges-
relate toa much wider range of gestational length
togen synthesis by the uteroplacental Lissues. This
(Davies Morel et al 2002), and the timing and mag-
explains why maternal plasma progestogens decline
nitude ofkey endocrine changes that occur in the
immediatelyuponintrauterinedeathofthefetus.
maternal circulation (see Fig.3.1).When the sec-
Whenthe adrenalcortexbecomesfurtherdifferenti-
ondary corpora lutea on the ovaries stop producing
atedandactivatedbytheprenatalriseoffetalACTHl,
progesterone, maternal progesterone levels reach
it switches from pregnenoloneto cortisol production
very lowlevels during thelast third part of pregnancy
and thisappears toberesponsibleforthefinalpre-
anditappearsthat during this stagemetabolitesof
cipitous dropinmaternal plasma progestogen levels
both progesterone and pregnenolone, collectively
(Fowden et al 20o8).Plasma oestrogen concentra-
namedprogestogens,are responsible for myome
tions decline during the last 100 days of gestation,
trialquiescence（Ousey2004,Fowdenet al2008).
rather thianincreasing asin other species,reaching
In fact during the last 20-30 days of gestation, total
relatively low levels atparturition,although this is
160
Chapter
161
Parturition and the care ofparturient animals, including the newborn
largelyareflectionofthedeclineinoestrone and the
indicatethatoxytocinisnotresponsiblefortheini
species-specific oestrogens equilin and equilenin,
tiation ofwhelping,becauselevelswerefoundtobe
sinceconcentrationsofoestradiol-17βremainfairly
elevatedonlyoncetlieexpulsivestagehadstarted
constant.However,during the final 24-48 hours
(Olssonetal2003).
before delivery,maternal oestradiol-17β concen-
Inthequeencat,progesteroneremains atbeiween
trationsdoubleagain(Barnes etal 1975).Maternal
20and50ng/ml for thefirsttwo-thirdsofgestation
prostaglandin levels are low duringthe major part
before starting to decline gradually towards term.
ofgestation,rise only slightly towards term and
Just beforeparturitionit declinesmorerapidly from
4-5ng/mltolevelslowerthan2ng/mlatthetimeof
et al 2000,Fowden et al 2008), probably because
parturition (Verhage et al 1976, Schmidt et al 1983).
synthesis of primary prostaglandins is stimulated,
Oestradiol concentrations reachpeaklevels about
whiletheirconversionintometabolitesisinhibited
oneweek before parturitionandhave declined
under the influence of theveryrapid changeof the
substantially on the day of parturition.
progestogen/oestrogenbalance.
The role ofrelaxin
Dog and cat
Evenless isknown about themechanismsthat are
Sources ofrelaxin
responsible for initiating and controlling parturi-
tionin either of these two species.There arenopub-
Relaxin,a polypeptidehormone,was shown tobe
lisheddata onfetalcortisol secretionduringlale
responsible for causingrelaxation of thepubic sym-
gestation.In the bitch,a prepartum rise of cortisol
physisofguineapigsby Hisaw in 1926.The most
hasbeendeteciedintheperipheralcirculationwith
potent sourcesof thishormone arethe CLs ofthe
peaks obtained 8-24hoursprepartum(Concannon
pregnant sow; however, it is now known to be pro-
etal1975)but this increaseisbelievedtoreflect the
duced bya number ofothertissues such thatit has a
stress associated with nestbuilding. physical activity
wide diversity of chemical structure and physiologi-
and the onset ofuterine contractions.Progesterone
caleffectsbetween species(Bathgateetal2006)
concentrationsstarttodeclinegraduallyfrom about
In the pig, as well as originating from the CLs of
the30thdayofgestationand thereisaprecipitous
the pregnant sow,it is also produced bypreovula-
fall between12and40hoursbeforethebirthof the
tory follicles.Plasma levels are low but physiological
firstpuppy(Concannonelal1975,Baan etal2008).
duringthefinalweeksofgestationandpeakshortly
This latterchange coincides with anincreasedrelease
before the onset of farrowing, at the time of the pre-
ofPGFsince,during the48hours beforewhelping
partum decline of progesterone (Sherwood et al
there isa risein themetabolitePGFM.As thelatter
1981,Taverne et al1982).In thehorse,dog andcat,
increasedfromameanof395pg/mlto2100pg/ml,
themainorsolesourceofthehormoneisthepla-
progesteronedecreasedfromameanof2.8pg/ml
centa.In themare,concentrationsstarttorisefrom
to0.7ng/ml （Concannon et al 1989).Although
about 80 days of gestation and peak during parturi-
it is temptingto speculate that thisprostaglandin
tion,although thereis considerablebreedvariation
releasecausesluteolysis,thereisalsoevidencethat
(Stewart etal1992).In thebitch,relaxin increases
other processes, such as invasion of macrophages
from about 4weeks ofgestation andremains ele-
and decreased luteal expression of steroid-producing
vated until term,whereas in the cat there is a sud
enzymes, are involved in completion of luteolysis
denrise from23days ofgestation with apeak at
when the influence of progesterone is declining.
36days and a dramaticdecline justbeforeparturi-
Maternal plasma oestrogens remain at a fairly con-
tion (Stewart & Stabenfeldt 1985),A relaxin gene
stant and very low level throughout pregnancy and
hasnot been identified in ruminanis and arelaxin
start to decline about 2days prepartum,reaching
peptide has not been isolated (Bathgate et al 2006).
non-pregnant values at the time of parturition (see
Yet,inthecow,theCLappears tobethemainsource
Fig.3.21).Prolactin increases asprogesterone con-
ofa relaxin-like hormone (insulin-like peptide
centrations decrease 1-2 days before whelping
(INSL)3);thus early studies reporting that relaxin
(Concannon etal1977,Baan et al2008);itisnotvaluesincrease justbefore calving（although still at
known if this hormone plays any role in parturition.
relativelylowconcentrations)havetobeinterpreted
Thefewpublished data onmaternal oxytocin levels
withcautionbecauseitisnotclearwhatsubstance
161
Part
121
Pregnancy and parturition
wasmeasured bytheassay.In theewe there are also
activity is low (Taverne et al 1979a).At this time,
conflicting data concerning the presence and secre-
relaxin concentrations increase significantly.Further-
tionofarelaxinhormoneand it appearspossible
more,insows thereisa relationshipbetweenrelaxin
that in sheepINSL3 substitutes forrelaxin(Bathgate
concentrationsand theduration of farrowing(Wathes
etal 2006).
etal1989).
1
Actions ofrelaxin
Fetal maturation
Crude extracts and purified forms of the hormone
have a wide range of actions on a variety of target
tissues including the pubic symphysis,pelvicliga-
Ashas already been described,thefetal endocrine
menis,cervix,myometrium and mammary gland
changes ihat occur in late pregnancy not only initi-
(Bathgate et al 2006).
ate parturition but also stimulate a variety of mat-
In the sow,relaxin stimulates the growth ofthe
urationalchanges thatenablethenewborn animal
vagina,cervix,uterus andmammary gland during
to survive(Silver 199o).In the absence ofthese
late pregnancy and causes softening of the cervix
changes, sometimes referred to as ‘preparation or
before parturition,as judged by the ability to pass a
readiness forbirth'(Liggins et al 1979,Rossdale&
seriesofrodsofdifferentdiametersinto thecervical
Silver1982),neonatal death may occurbecauseof
canal duringthelast3daysbeforefarrowing(Kertiles
malfunction of immature organs.Examples of some
&Anderson 1979）.The latter changes,which are
of the changes that occur are: pliysical, such as clo-
alsoinfluencedbytheoestrogen:progesteroneratio,
sureoftheductus arteriosus and foramen ovale;and
involve changes at a biochemical level by influenc-
functional, such as production of surfactant,the
ing the glycosaminoglycan:collagen ratio (O'Day-
development ofglucosehomeostaticmechanisms,
Bowman etal i991)and histological structure
changes in the structure of haemoglobin from the
(Winn etal 1993).
fetal tothe adult form
Despite the fact that there is noreliable assayfor
If premature induction with the exogenous hor-
relaxinin thecow,and thatthecow onlyproducesa
mones bypasses some of theendocrine changes that
relaxin-likeprotein,thereis circumstantialevidence
normally occur,thenewborn may beunprepared.
thatrelaxincan influencecervical relaxationat term.
Thishasbeendemonstratedwhengoatkidsthatwere
Studieshave shownthat,whenhighlypurifiedpor-
born followingtheinjection ofPGF,werecom-
cinerelaxinwasplaceddirectlyontheexternalosof
paredwith thosethat wereborn afterinduction with
thecervixat276-278 daysofgestation,cervicalrelax-
ACTH(Currie&Thorburn 1973）.Thelinkbetween
ationoccurred8-12hours later(Musahetal1986).
parturition and maturation of the fetus appears to
Similarresultshavebeenobtainedwhenparturition
berelatedto theadrenal cortex and theprepartum
hasbeen inducedwithdexaimethasone(Musahet al
surge of fetal cortisol (Liggins 1978, Silver 1992).
1987).The reports on the effect of porcine relaxin
During its intrauterinelife the fetus is in a ther-
on the cervix of the sheep are equivocal. Studies by
mally neutral environment,but at birth it has to
Rocheetal（i993)haveshown thatarelaxin-like
be abletomaintain itsownbodytemperature.The
mRNAcannotencodeafunctionalrelaxinmolecule,
mechanisms that enable this are the accumulation
which suggests that sheep maynot producerelaxin
ofbrown fatand glycogen in late gestation,and
and thus,inthis species,cervicalrelaxationmaynot
maturationofthethyroid gland.Thelatterprocess
be relaxin-dependent.
occurs as a result of the prepartum rise in fetal corti-
Relaxinalsoexerts aninfluence onmyometrial
sol,whichstimulates themonodeiodination of the
activity,with several studies reported in domes-
thyroid hormones,thus enhancing theirbiological
tic species,in particular the pig.In general,relaxin
activity (Liggins et al 1979,Fowden 1995).
reducesboththefrequency and amplitudeofuterine
The maintenance of glucose homeostasis imme-
contractions,particularlytheformer.Itappearsto act
diately after birth,when the newborn losesitspla-
in concert with progesterone, oestrogens, oxytocin
cental source of glucose,is dependent on adequate
and prostaglandins.Thus in the sow,although the
stores of liver glycogen.There is strong evidence
progesteroneconcentrationshavefallen significantly
thatinsheepthestimulusfortheaccumulationof
10-24 hours before farrowing, with the removal
glycogen stores in late gestation is the rise in fetal
of the progesterone block（see below),myometrial
cortisol (Jost et al 1966,review by Fowden 1995)
162
Chapter
161
Parturition and the care of parturient animals, including the newborn
The glycogen stores are just sufficient to provide
closetoan estimated timebasedon thetimeofmat
energy before sources of glucose become available
ing and ovulation, as well as physical changes in the
fromfood.Asimilarstimulustotheproduction of
mare, foals can be premature or dysmature at birth.
insulinbythepancreashas alsobeenattributedto
Thereforeit isrecommended thatthemareisexam-
theeffect ofelevated fetalcortisol,whichenables
inedforthepresenceofrelaxationof thesacrosciatic
thenewborn torespond quicklytomaintain glucose
ligamentsandthecervix,aswell astheioniccompo
homeostasis.
sition of mammary secretions (as signs of readiness
Thefetaladrenalmedullaalsoshows evidenceof
forbirth),before a treatment is initiated
maturational changes in that its ability to produce
A numberof different hormone preparations have
catecholamines, especially adrenaline (epineph-
been used.Early reports(Britton 1972,Purvis1972)
rine),is increased in response to asphyxia(Comline
describedthe successful inductionofover1500foal-
&Silver1971,Hooper1995).Thereisalsoevidence
ingswithan intramuscularinjection ofveryhigh
that adrenaline,togetherwithfetalACTH andcor-
doses of oxytocin,either with orwithout priming
tisol,stimulateslung maturation,and it promotes
with diethylstilbestrol dipropionate. lf the cervix
resorption of fetal fluids within the lung, thus
showed evidence of'ripening'i.e.was soft on palpa-
enablingnormalrespiratory function to cccur upon
tion and abletoallow the insertion ofoneor two
birth.
fingersin theexternal os,and thefoalwasinnormal
presentation,position and posture (see Ch. 8), oxy-
tocin was given at a dose of 1201ul to mares between
Premature induction ofparturition
360and 600kg live weight.Foaling occurred15-60
minutes later. If the cervix was ‘unripe', 30mg of
Although it is usually possible to predict approxi-
diethylstilbestrol dipropionate in oil wasgiven intra-
matelywhenparturitionwilloccurindomesticspe
muscularly,followedbyoxytocin12-24hourslater,
cies there areobvious advantages inbeingableto
provided that the cervix hadresponded.Both authors
predetermine when the event will occur.Many of the
recommend that a secondvaginal examination is
methodsthatareusedhaveoriginatedfromstudies
made10-15minutes afterthe oxytocin to determine
of the endocrine changes responsible for the initia-
thefoal'sposition andposture so that,ifit is abnor
tion of normal parturition.Since the first published
mal, correction can be made.Purvis (1972) also
reports ofpremature induction by Van Rensburg
recommended thattheallantochorion isruptured
(1967)in theeweand Adams(1969)in thecow,a
manuallyifithasnotrupturednaturallybythetime
large number of successful reports have been pub-
thatthefoaliswell advanced into thevagina.Purvis
lished in these two species as well as in the doe goat,
(1972)recordednodifficultywithplacentalretention,
achieved in the dog and cat.
Rossdale&Jeffcoat(1975).Arelationshipbetween
the dose of oxytocin and placenial separation has
been demonstrated （Hillman 1975),doses of less
Horse
than 6oiu resulting more often in retention.Close to
Theindicationsfortheprematureinductionoffoal
term,much lower dosesofoxytocin (less than10Iu)
ing are few,the main onebeing to ensure that it
appear effectivein inducing foaling(Pashen 1980,
occurs in thepresence of skilled assistance;then if
Chavatte-Palmer et al 2002). Induction of foaling
dystocia occurs it is possible quickly to correct the
with oxytocinisbasedon a direct stimulatingeffect
difficulty so as to ensure survival of the foal and
onthe myometrium,and indirectlyby stimulating
reduce the danger to the mare.There are also a few
uteroplacentalprostaglandinrelease(Pashen&Allen
occasions when,because of disease or illness in
1979).Depending on the treatment schedule,fetal
the mare, it may be advantageous for foaling to be
expulsion is accomplishedwithin1-6hours.Thereis
induced.Themainproblemswithprematureinduc-
evidencethatintracervical applicationofprostaglan-
tion ofparturitioninmares areinfactrelatednot
din E,to ripen the cervix prior to induction favours a
to the effectiveness of the agents used (see below),
shorter delivery (Rigby et al 1998).
buttotheestimationoftheoptimumtimeforthe
Intheexperience ofone oftheauthors,dysto-
birth of the fetus. given the wide range of the nornal
cia has sometimes occurred atinduced foalings.
gestation length. Even when induction takes place
because of the lateral position of the foal (see Ch.8)
163
Part
2
Pregnancy andparturition
due to incomplete rotation before the onset of the
after this date the yield is reduced by an average of
second stage of parturition.Furthermore, foal viabil--
6.4 lires per.day; he found that over 40% of cows
ity can be poor because of anoxia during expulsion,
were in this category.This indication for induction
due to premature placental separation. It is impor-
might,face farmers and their veterinarians with an
tant toknow theprecisegestational age,sinceinduc
ethical problem in cases where induction results
tion should not be attempted before 320 days; even
in the birtlh of an immature or premature calf that
then, because of the wide variation in the gestation
will not survive after birth.
length in the mare (as already stated above), foal
·Ensuring that cows calve at a predetermined time
viability is poor.
when skilled assistance is available so that prompt
Dexamethasone,a quick-release syntheticcorticos-
attention can be given. This should reduce calf
teroid, has been used successfully to induce foaling
mortality and injury to the cow.
inponies(First&Alm1977) and large'saddle-type
●Reducing the birth weight of the calf by shorten-
mares (Alm et al 1975). A dose rate of 100 mg eve1y
ingthelength ofgestation.Duringthelast weeks
day for 4 days resulted in parturition 6-7 days after
of gestation the growth rate of the calf is rapid; in
the start of treatment in the latter type,while the
some of the exoticbreeds,such as the Charolais,
ponies responded more rapidly. The regimen was
the live weight of the calf can increase by between
started at 321 days of gestation, with satisfactory
0.25 and 0.5 kg per day.Thus if the dam is imma-
foal survival and sbsequent growth rate.The incon-
ture, with a small pelvis, or pregnancy is pro-
venience of the repeated dosing and the delay, and
longed beyond 280 days, as occurs in some exotic
the unpredictability of completion of foaling, makes
breeds, the calf may be too large to traverse the
this method unattractive to clinicians.
birth canal. Premature induction can thus reduce
PGF and its analogue fluprostenol have also been
thelikelihoodofdystociaduetofetomatermal dis-
used to induce foaling (Ousey et al 1984, Ley et al
proportion (see Ch. 11). With this indication the
1989). A single dose of PGF, is not always effective;
stage at which calving is incduced must be a com-
quite often it is necessary to use repeated injections
promise between the birth of a calf that is small
of 1.5-2.5 mg every 12 hours. In some cases these
enaugh to be born unaided and yet is large enough
prostaglandins can cause discomfort and can result
to beviable and subsequently to have an adequate
in a high incidence of dystocia due to abnormali-
growth rate.This threshold weight will vary from
ties in the position of the foal (Allen,personal com-
breed to breed. In the pluriparous Aberdeen Angus
munication, 1980). Fluprostenol will successfully
induce foalingbetween322 and 367 days of gesia-
and Hereford cow ii is 40kg,for the pluriparous
tion when given as a single dose of 250μg to ponies
Friesian 42-45kg, for the 2-year-old Charolais
35 kg and for the 3-year-old Charolais 40-45kg
and 10ooμg to thoroughbredmares(Rossdaleet al
(Meniscier &Foulley 1979).
197G).The time from injection to the onset of
second-stage labour ranged from 33-183 minutes;
· In diseased or injured cows, where the termina-
the second stage lasted 5-33 minutes and the pla-
tion of pregnancy will alleviate the condition or
centa was shed by 112 minutes. The viability of the
where alive calf can be obtainedbefore slaughter,
premature induction may be used. Cows suffering
foals was generally good, although a number suffered
rib damage.
from hydrallantois will frequently respond.
A number of different hormones have been used
Cattle
successfully to induce calving so that a live calf is
born. Since induction before 95% of the breed's
The indications for the induction of calving are as
normal gestation length has passed will usually
follows:
result in thebirth of a small,weakly calfwith poor
·Advancing the time of calving to coincide with
the availability of suitable pasture for milk pro-
that the date of service orinseminationis accurately
duction. This is used in New Zealand and parts of
knawn.For the Holstein-Friesian breed,calves deli-
Ireland.In the latter country it is important that
vered before days 260-265 have a poor prognosis
the cows calve over a period of 3 months as close
for spontaneous survival.
to 23 March as possible(O'Farrell 1979). O'Farrell
Although ACTH has been used to induce calving.
has calculated that,for every day that a cow calves
since it exerts its effect by stimulating endogenous
164
Chapter
161
Parturition and thecareofparturientanimals,incuding thenewborn
corticosteroid producion, it is best replaced by the
corticosteroid or PGF,after 8 days if the cow has
direct administration of corticosteroids. A number
failed to calve, is used.After 275 days, PGF, Of
of potent synthetic ones are available. There are
short-or medium-acting corticosteroids are effective
three main categories; these are referred to as long-
on their own.
acting, medim-acting and short-acting, their classi-
However,there aresome disadvantages of prema-
fication being based upon the duration of the latent
ture induction of calving:
period (time interval from treatment to effect)
·It is not always effective
Thus, when given at a normal therapeutic dose rate,
·The birth weight of the calf is lower than it would
the long-, medium- and short-acting corticosteroids
havebeenaterm
have latent periods of 11-18, 5-11 and 1-6 days,
respectively (Parkinson 1993). It is important to
·There is also a high incidence of retained fetal
give large breeds of cows an adequale dose; in the
membranes, up to 53% when 'short-acling' prep-
case of betamethasone up to 35 mg is necessary in
arations are used (Wagner et al 197l),although
the Charolais. Corticosteroids are also immunosup-
i is less common following the use of slow
pressive and thus they should not be given without
releasepreparations(Welchetal 1973,O'Farrell
& Crowley 1974). Even inductions close to term
broad-spectrum antibiotics if infection is present;
the lungs and udder should be carefully examined
pregnancy may still result in their retention
beforehand.
·Milk yield is initially affected, with a delay in
PGE.,PGE,and PGF,and analogues of the latter
reaching peak lactation, although there appears to
have been used. In the first reported use of prosta-
be very little influence on the overall yield (Bailey
glandins (Zerobin et al 1973): a minority of calvings
et al 1973,Welch et al1977,O'Farrell 1979)
were described asbeing associatedwith‘explosive
·Subsequent fertility is fairly normal (Nakao 2001,
expulsions,a42% incidenceof dystocia due topoor
Mansell el al2006), although the calving to con-
cervical dilation was also reported by Hendricks
ception interval and the number of services per
et al(1977).However,boih PGF,and the analogues
conception are slightly increased in those cows
havebeen successfully usedfrom about 275days of
thatretain their fetalmembranes
gestation witha latentperiod of2-3 days[Kordts
·There is a reduction in the quality and quantity of
&Jochle 1975, Day 1977,Breeveld-Dwarkasing
colostral immunoglobulins, especially following
et al 2003a).
the use of slow-release corticosteroid preparations,
Good results have been obtained by using a com-
but it is unlikely that the calf will not acquire an
bination of corticosteroid and prostaglandin. Beal
adequate passive immunity.
et al (1976) injected PGF,if no effect had occurred
40 hours after treatment with dexamethasone.Day
(1978) obtained good results using a prostaglandin
Pig
analogue, cloprostenol, administered 8 or 12 days
after pretreatment with dexamethasone trimethyl-
On average, 5-7% of all pigleis are stillborn and it
acetate; all the cows calved witlhin 72 hours. In a similar
is estimated that 75% of stillbirths occur during par-
trial, involving 26 adult Friesian cows ranging in ges-
turition.The time interval between the birth of the
tation from 237-270 days 20mgof dexamethasone
first and lastpiglets is associatedwith the stillbirth
phenylpropionate was given and induced calving in
rate (Randall 1972, van Dijk et al 2005) so that pro-
13 cows on average 5.6 days later. Those that failed
longed farrowing results in an increase.Probably
10 respond received 500pg of cloprostenol after 10
80% of the stillbirths occur in the last third of the
days and all calved within 3 days; all liveborn calves
litter to be born.
It hasbeen shown that thetime interval between
induction (250-270 days of gestation, when the pla-
the birth of two live piglets is generally shorter than
centa might still contribute to progesterone produc-
the time interval that precedes the birth of a still-
tion), a long-acting corticosteroid is administered
borm piglet (van Dijk et al 2005). The death of the
followed by a short-acting corticosteroid or PGF2a
piglet may have been due to a delay in expulsion,
after 8 days if calving has not occurred;the latent
although thereisgood evidencethatdeadpigletsare
period is about 48 hours. After 270 days, a medium-
expelled more slowly. One of the causes of stillbirth
acting corticosteroid,with either a short-acting
is the premature rupture of the umbilicus; surveys
165
Part
2
Pregnancy and parturition
have shown that 94%of stillborn piglets had rup-
The basic procedure using prostaglandins is that
tured umbilical cords at birth, compared with 39%
either natural. PGF, or a synthetic analogue, such
when all piglets wereincluded(Randall 1972).
as cloprostenol,is injected intramuscularly on days
The stillbirth rate can be reduced by intensive
Ill-1l3 of gestation, and farrowing will occur on
care and attention during farrowing(Holyoake et al
average 28 hours later. Thus, if the timing of injec-
1995); however, the time of farrowing can be diffi-
tion is between 08.00 and 10.00 hours, the majority
cult to predict. For this reason, the induction of far-
of sows will farrow during normal working hours.
rowing of groups of sows at predetermined times has
Adjustments have to be made forherdvariations in
many attractions, because this can enable a skilled
average gestational length.In general, the earlier the
person to be in attendance to a group of sows dur-
timeofinduction thelowerthebirth weights;how-
ing normal working hours. Since there is also evi-
ever, if altempts are made to delay the time of induc-
dence that delayed or prolonged parturition can
tion in order toobtainlargebirthweightthiedegree
increase the stillbirth rate, hen methods that accel-
of synchronization is not as good.
erate the process. or at the very least prevent delays,
In an interesting study involving the use of dino-
have obvious attraciions.There are also a number
prost to induce farrowing on 229 occasions (Young
ofothiermanagement requirements thathave stimu-
&Hlarvey 1984), it was found that 95% of farrowings
lated the application of methods to plan andregu-
occurredwithin 48hours ofinjecting dinoprost,the
late the timing of farrowing:
majority (76%) within 24-36hours,which corre
sponded with normal working hours on the farm.
· Group farrowing facilitates multiple suckling and
Those sowsthat didnotfarrow within 48hours
allows cross-fostering to take place. Thus piglets
were deemed not to have responded to the injec-
from sows with large litters or agalactia have a
tion ofprostaglandin.Apartfrom very small litters
greater chance of surviving and being reared
(up to five piglets), litter size had no effect upon the
· Groups of sows and litters can be managed on an
response to prostaglandin; however, the duration of
‘allin,all outrinciple,thus enabling disinfection
farrowingwas directly related to litter size.
There is apparently no difference in the efficiency
·Group farrowing facilitates group weaning
of PGr, (dinoprost) or the analogue cloprostenol,
·Farrowing can take place on certain days of the
although it is generally recognized that side-effects
week and during normal working hours; as well as
reducing the stillbirthrate it can reduce the death
rate are greater following natural PGFa(Boland et al
rate due to overlaying of newborn piglets
1979, Einarsson et al 1981, Widowski et al 1900).
Improved expulsion ofthepiglets was observed
·It might increase the reproductive efficiency by
when cloprostenol was combined with estradiol
reducing the farrowing interval by a few days.
benzoate.Bonte et al (19s1) reported that the best
Synthetic corticosteroidshave been used successfully
expulsion occurred when 10mgof estradiol henzo-
to induce parturition in sows by injecting them on
ate wasgiven24 hoursbefore cloprostenol,although
days 101-104 witli a single daily dose,75-100mg:
there was some improvement when 1 mg of estra-
farrowing occurs on day 109. However, the procedure
diol benzoate was given 5-6 hours after clopros-
is expensive andpigletsborn before daylio have a
tenol.Kirkwood&Thacker(1995) treated sows with
very poor survival rate.Therefore theuse of synthetic
3mg estradiol on day 112followed by10mgPGF,
corticosteroids has no practical application.
on day 113 and found that 38% of sows farrowed
Since the first reports of successful induction of
before 8.00 hours on day 114 compared with 5% in
farrowing using PGF,(Diehl et al 1974, Roberison
the control group.Within the European Union the
etal1974)orasyntheticanalogue(Ash&Heap1973,
use of oestrogens is nowprohibited by law.
Willemseetal 1979) a largenumber ofreports have
The induction with prostaglandins is based on its
beenpublishedworldwide.ltisnowan acceptedpro-
luteolytic effect, with the peripheral plasma proges-
cedure in the pig industry. More recently, attempts
terone rapidly declining within 12 hours after injec-
have been made to improve its efficiency by com-
tions. Yet natural PGF, also causes a temporary
bining prostaglandins with other hormones to even
stimulationofthemyometriumandoxytocinrelease
further reduce the interval between treatment and
(Ellendorffetal 1979), and this even results in a tran
onset of expulsion of piglets.
sient lhypoxiaofthepiglets inutero（Randall 1990)
166
Chapter
161
Parturition and thie care of partuirient animals, induding the newborn
Oxytocin has also been used routinely in combina-
hours after application(Silver 1988).Theintramus-
tion with PGF,,as part of induction protocols, the
cular injection of the progesterone receptor antag-
onist RU 486,both on day 144 and 145 days of
hours after prostaglandin. This usually resulted in
pregnancy, significantly advanced the birth of viable
a significant reduction in the interval to farrowing
lambs(Gazaletal1993).Thieselatter two lreatments
although theresponsemay berelated to the litter
still awaitfurther testing under field conditions.
repeated injections of oxytocin (Zarro et al 1990)
Goat
It is important that dose rates of oxytocin of about
10Ill should be used since higher dose rates will
Parturition has been successfully induced with
cause myometrial spasm and may even delayfarrow-
ACTH, corticosteroids and PGFa or its analogues;
ing. ln a sludy where 20iu of oxytocin was given at
however, lactation sometimes occurs prematurely
24 hours after prostaglandin administration, a high
(Curie&Thorburn 1977,MauleWalker1983).
proportion of manual interventions was nceded for
thiose sowsthat hadthebestsynchrony of the onset
Dogand cat
of delivery (Dial et al 1987).
Because of side effects and the need for repeated
treatment, PGF,is not an attractive option for the
Sheep
induction of parturition at term.The steroid enzyme
Parturition can be induced in the ewebymeans of
inhibitor epostane,the prolactin inhibitors caber
corticosteroids or by drugs that will either inhibit
goline and bromocriptine and progesterone recep-
the synthesis of progesterone (sucli as epostane) or
tor blocking agents have been used successfully for
block progesterone at the receptor level.The indica-
the induction of abortion. Recent studies (Fieni et al
2001, Baan et al 2006) demonstrated that proges-
tions forinduction are limited,since dystocia due to
fetomaternal disproportion is not as common as in
terone blockers such as mifepristone and aglepris-
tone can also be used for the induction of whelping.
cows (see Ch. 8). However, a system that can guar-
anteethatlambingwill occuronlyduring thehours
without any negative effects on the progress of delivery,
of daylight when skilled assistance is available might
birthweights andpup survival rates.
reduce any problems due to dystocia and increase
lamb survival rates. However, it is not possible to
Accelerating parturition
shorten gestation length by more than 7-10 days
without increasing lamb mortality
As with othier species, an accurately known gesta-
Oxytocin,administered as a bolus injection,has
tional age is important.When corticosteroids such
longbeen used to treat sows that appeared tobe suf-
as dexamethasone, flumetasone and betametha-
fering from uterine inertia,as shown by prolonged
sone are given by a single intramuscular injection
farrowing times.In such cases, this treatment should
within5 days of term,normal parturition occurs in
2-3 days (Bosc 1972, Bosc et al 1977,Penning &
detect ifa piglet within the pelvic canal or a piglet
Gibh 1977）. Cahill et al (1976),using similar meth-
in faulty disposition cranial to thepelvicinlet is the
ods, had a higher-than-normal incidence of dystocia
primary cause of the prolonged farrowing. Routine
with poorer lamb survival. Unfortunately, attempts
use of oxytocin 1-2lu used repeatedly in delayed
to concentrate lambing during the hours of daylight
farrowing was effective in accelerating the process.
by premature induction with corticosteroids have
Doses in excess of 10Iu induce uterine spasm and
not been very successful (Bosc 1972). Induction of
are contraindicated (Zerobin 198l,Taverne 1982).
lambing in groups of ewes that have been synchro-
Depot or slow-release oxytocin preparations are not
nized with progestogens (see Ch. 1) can ensure that
effective.
ewes lamb over a relatively shortperiodof time in a
Studies by Pejsak & Tereszczuk (1981), in which
singlebatch.When the 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydro-
10IUof oxytocinwas given to836primiparous and
genase inhibitor epostane was given (orally, intra-
pluriparous gilts and sows by the intramuscular or
venously or intramuscularly) beiween days 136 and
 intranasal route as a routine procedure (in the absence
142,birth ofviablelambsoccurred between 33-36
of prolonged farrowing i.e. during apparently nornal
167
Part
121
Pregnancy and parturition
parturitions) demonstrated some favourable results.
such substance,clenbuterol,has been used success-
In theirregimen,oxytocin was givenimmediately after
fully in cows, sbws and ewes (Ballarini et al 1980,
thebirth ofthefirstpiglet,and was repeatedif there
CollinsetaT1980,Jotsch et al 1981).In cows,pro-
was a delay of more than 1 hour before the birth of
vided thatthecervixisnotfully dilated andsecond
thenext piglet.1f noresponsewasobservedin10-20
stagehasnot commenced,an injection of0.3mg
minutes,a vaginal examination was performed.All
ofclenbuterolhydrochloride(10ml)followedbya
theoxytocin-treatedsowsfarrowedwithin10hours
secondinjectionof0.21mg(7ml)4hours laterwill
whilesomeinthecontrolgroupexceededthisdura-
inhibit calving for 8 hours after the second injection.
tion.However,more recent studies (Mota-Rojas et al
Aswellasbeingused asamanagementtoolitcanbe
2002,Alonso-Spilsbury elal2004),using injections
effective in ensuringimproved relaxation ofthe vulva
of20-50Iu of oxytocin (depending on maternal
andperineum inheifers.When the drugwas given
body weight)after thebirth of the first piglet,clearly
tocows inlabour,itinhibitedmyometrialactivity
demonstratedthatsuch treatmentincreasesstillbirth
only briefly (less than 3hours).withoutadversely
rate,despitea significant shortening of the delivery
affectingfetal outcome(Jonkeret al1991).
phase.
In sows,it causesrelaxation ofthemyometrium
Apart from oxytocin,a widerangeof other drugs
and hence interrupts expulsion of the piglets.
hasbeen tested inthepast tocontrol thetiming and
After several hoursthere isareturnofspontane
speed ofdeliveryinpiglets(reviewbyGuthrie1995)
ousmyometrial contractions without any adverse
butveryfewofthesetreatmentsbecameimple-
effectsupon theviabilityofpiglets.Zerobin （1981)
mented.A beta-blocking agent, carazolol, has
obtainedgoodresponseswithadoserateof150μg.
beenused to shorlen the duration of farrowing
He alsoreported that theuseofoxytocinwill reverse
with encouraging results.The rationale behind its
theeffect of the clenbuterol.
use is that during pregnancy,because beta recep-
tors in the uterus become dominant,the stress
resulting in adrenaline (epinephrine) release will
Course ofparturition:physiology
causerelaxationoftheuterus.Ifthesereceptors are
blocked with carazolol,then in stressed animals
The essential components of the birth process are
(especially gilts) the adrenaline will have little or
no effect upon the myometrium, the uterus will
the expulsiveforces,thefetus(es)together with their
retain its tone and parturition will not be delayed
associated fetal membranes and fluids,and the soft
(Taverne 1982). In a double-blind trial involving
and bony parts of thebirth canal.Normal birt will
result when theseforces are sufficient to expel anor-
at the beginning of labour, there was a significant
mal,correctly disposed fetus(see Ch.8) and fetal
reductionin the duration of farrowing（p<0.05),
membranesthrough a dilated cervix into abirth
areduction in the stillbirth rate and intheinci-
canal ofadequatedimensions.
The expulsive forces consist of the contractions of
dence ofobstetrical complications,especially in
themyometrium and the abdominal musculature;
gilts (Bostedt &Rudolf 1983).
thierelativeimportanceofthese twocomponents
varies from species to species.During pregnancy the
Delaying parturition
fetus occupies as small a space as possible; in order
to dothisit flexesitslimbs andneck and,particu
larly in the monotocous species, assumes a position
Beta-adrenergic agents
so that its dorsum is adjacent to thegreatest curva-
As alreadymentioned above,delayofparturitionhas
ture of the uterus. In order to negotiate the birth
been accomplished in sheep,goats and pigs (butnot
canalthefetusmust becorrectlydisposedsothat
inmares)bypharmacological inhibitionofprosta-
its body conformation is as'streamlined’as possible
glandin synthesis.In pigs this delay was based on
tomatchtheshapeanddirectionofthebirthcanal,
the postponement of prepartum luteolysis (Taverne
this being particularly important in monotocous
etal1982)
species (see Ch. 8).Finally, the birth canal must
β-adrenergic agents,which stimulate theβ,recep-
allow the passage of the correctly disposed fetus.
torsofuterinemusclecellscan abolish uterinecon-
Changes occur in thematernal siructures that allow
tractions and delayparturitionfor a shorttime.One
this to occur.Thecervix must dilate,the bony pelvis
168
Chapter
161
Parturitionandthecareofparturientanimals,includingthenewborn
and its related ligaments must relax, and the vagina,
is necessary for the stretch-induced hypertrophy but,
vulva and perineum must soften. For a very recent
during thie final days of gestation when progester
and extensive review on the comparative physiology
onelevels decline and/or the progesterone effects
ofparturition,with special reference to the control
subside, there will be a discordance between fetal
of myometrial and cervical functioning, the reader is
growthi and uterine size,resulting in increased wall
referred to Gibb et al (2006).
tension and formation of gap junctions between
smooth muscle cells(Gibb et al 2006).As well as
Myometrial contractions
the physical changes in the myometrium,there are
also changes in the electrophysiology of the simooth
The hormones that bring about some of these
muscle. lt has been demonstrated that in many
changes have already been discussed. The merha-
nisms involved in themyometrial contractions have
resting rnembrane potential. With the prepartum
not. The myometrium is formed from two main
rise in oestrogens and the removal of the progester-
types of muscle protein, myosin and actin.The con-
one block, there is discharge of action potentials and
tractions of the myofibrils occur because of the for-
the initiation ofmyometrial contractions.Therest-
mation of covalent cross-linked bondsbetween tie
ing meimbrane potential ofthe oestrogen-dominated
actin and myosin filaments,Contractions are initi-
myometrial cell is also close to the threshold level
ated when the ATPase of myosin light chain (MLC),
for the spontaneous firing of action potentials.
which is one of the nyosin components, is phospho-
Thus,if themyometrium is stretched,there is slight
rylated by the action of MLC kinase (MLCK). This
depolarization and discharge of action potentials.
enzyme, MLCK, is activated by a calcium-binding
In rats mechanical streich induces the expression
protein - calmodulin.Myomerial relaxation occurs
of several contraction-associated proteins, such as
becauseof dephiosphiorylation of MLC by the action
connexin-43 (involved in gap junction formation)
of MLC phosphatase or cAMP-dependent protein
and oxytocin receptors,and these effects could be
kinase, which inhibits MLCK and hence phosphory-
aniagonized by progesterone. These findings may
lation of MLC. It is important to consider the strue-
have clinical implications for the progression of
tural arrangement of the smooth muscle bundles. In
the expulsive stage, especially in polytocous species
domestic species with a bicornuate uterus the myo-
when embryonic or fetal mortality has resulted in
metrium comprises two layers. In the outer layer
more or less empty,i.enon-distended sections of a
he bundles are arranged parallel to the long axis of
uterine horn.
the uterus so that when these contract the uterus is
shortened cephalocaudally. The myometrium is con-
Effects of progesterone and oestrogens on
tinuous with the cervix,which is fairly well secured
myometrial activity
within the pelvic cavity; thus when the longitudinal
bundles contract, the uterine horns will be pulled
Progesterone dominance during pregnancy ensuures
caudally.When the uterus contains a full-term fetus,
that the myometrium remains relatively quiescent,
the ability of the uterus to shorten is reduced and,as
although thereissome evidence insome species that
a result, the contractions may cause some dilatation
relaxin and PGl, may also play a role (see below).
ofthe cervix.The inner layer of the myometrium is
Oestrogens have the reverse effect. Although the
formed by bundles of fibres arranged concentrically
mechanisms involved are not fully understood, it
around thelongitudinal axis;thus thesecontractions
has been suggested that oestrogens might exert their
will constrict the uterine lumen (Porter 1975).
effect by:(1) increasing contractile protein synthesis;
During pregnancy, as a result of the stimulus of
(2) increasing the number of agonist receptors for
both progesterone and oestrogens on protein syn-
oxytocin and prostaglandins; (3) increasing cal-
thesis and the localized influence of distention by
modulin synthesis; (4) increasing MLCK activity; and
the developing conceptus, there is hypertrophy of
(5) increasing the number of gap junctions, which
the myometrium. In early pregnancy, there is also
are low-resistance pathways for the transmission
some evidence of hyperplasia. As a result of this,
of electrical and molecular information between
the lengthof the myofibrilsisincreased tenfold and
smooth musclecells.Oestrogens,in this way.increase
the width twofold. Since the myometrial mass is
the effectiveness of the myometrium as a con-
increased,its work capacityisincreased.Progesterone
tractileunit.Progesterone has the opposite effects.
169
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
It:(1)reduces the number of gap junctions;（2)
only increase shortly before the start of the expul-
reduces the number of agonist receptors; (3) inhib-
sive stage,remain elevated,but with considerable
its the synthesis of prostaglandins and the release of
pulsatile fuctuatons,during delivery of the piglets
oxytocin; and (4) increases calcium binding.
and decline thereafter.Inbitches thereleasepattern
still needs further investigation,because pulseswere
Role of prostaglandins and oxytocin
detectedinconjunctionwith,butalsointheabsence
of, the birth of a pup (Klarenbeek et al 2007). So at
Prostaglandins play a critical role in parturition,
least in some of the species,oxytocinplays only a
not only in the initiation of the process but in the
minorrole in the initiation ofuterinecontractions.
controlofnyometrial contractions.These actions
The main release of this hormone occurs as a
arefacilitatedbecause themolecular structure of
result of the stimulation of sensory receptors in
prostaglandins enables them to move freely through
the anterior vagina and cervix （Ferguson's reflex)
extracellular fluids and lipid cell membranes.In gen-
Thereiscertainlyagoodcorrelationbetweenelec
eral PFG and PGE are responsible for stinulating
tromyographicactivityandoxytocinreleaseinthe
uterine contractions (although this may depend,at
sow(Ellendorf et al 1979),which is suggestive of a
leastinsomespecies,onthelocalizationwithinthe
localpositive-feedbackmechanism operatinginthe
pregnant uterus) while PGI, inhibits uterine contrac-
uterus of this species.
tions (Omini et al 1979). Availability of these pros-
Oxytocinreceptors increase duringlategestation
taglandins within theuterine tissues depends on the
and with the onset of parturition; this is depen-
relative expressions of enzymes involved in their
dent mainly on the decline in progesterone and
synthesis andmetabolism,and theseare under the
increase in oestrogens (pig:Lundin-Schiller et al
control ofa widerange of different steroidspeptide
1996,sheep:Wathes et al 1996,catile:Fuchs et al
hormones and cytokines.In general, the expression
1992).Little is known in domestic species about
ofenzymes catalysingthe synthesisofPGF in uter-
their distribution in the circular and longitudinal
ine tissues is upregulated during parturition while
muscle layers.Oxytocin stimulates uferine contrac-
that of enzymes involved in prostaglandin inactiva-
tions in two ways: firstly. by increasing prostaglan-
tion is downregulated.Prostaglandins' actions are
dinrelease,with which there is a synergistic effect;
mediated through specificreceptors andas acon-
secondly,by increasing Ca²+release from the endo-
sequence they influencethenumberofgap junc-
plasmic reticulum,which increases MLCK phos-
tions and also the intracellularmobilization of Ca²
phorylation (Mackenzie et al 1990). An integrated
of smooth cells;PGFand PGEenhance,and PGI
viewofoxytocin and itsparticipation intheregula
inhibits, these changes.
tion of pregnancy and parturition is given by Burbachi
The pattern of oxytocin release during late preg-
etal2006.
nancy and parturition has been studied in the ewe
(Fitzpatrick 1961, Glatz et al 1981),goat (Chard etal
1970,Hydbring et al 1999),mare(Allen et al 1973,
Stages oflabour
Vivrette et al 2000), cow(Schams & Prokopp 1979,
Hlydbringetal1999),sow(Forslingetal1979a,b;Gilbert
From a physiological point of view,parturition has
etal1994)andbitch（Olssonetal2003,Klarenbeek
been subdivided in four phases (Gibb et al 2006):
et al 2007).It is interesting that in all these species
the oxytocin levels during late pregnancy and the
·Phase 0, comprising some 95% of gestation, with
earlystagesofparturitionremainfairlylow.Inthe
themyometriummoreorlessquiesceniandwith
the cervix hard and unyielding
values at the time when the fetal head emerges
·Phase 1,the activation phase,duringwhich there
from thevulva andwhen the fetal membranes are
is:rapid softening of the cervix and the myo-
expelled.In themare the first significant increase
metrium prepares for contractions by increased
ofoxytocin in samples taken from the intercaver-
expression of CAPs as a result of the removal of
nalsinus was detectedbetween 18and72hours
inhibitory factors (such as progesterone, relaxin);
before delivery of the foal,clearly after anincrease
an increase ofuterotrophic factors (such as pros-
had already taken place in the plasma dihydro-15-
taglandins, oestrogens);increased stretchability
keto PFGlevels (Vivrette et al 2000). In sows, they
oftheuterinewall.Thus during thisphase all the
170
Chapter
161
 Parturition and the care of parturient animals, including the newborn
final endocrine events occur by which the fetal
The cervix of the cow dilates,with the external os
initiating signals are translated into functional
openingbeforetheinternalos(Abusineina1963);the
changes in the cervix and myometrium
sane has also been reported in the ewe (Fitzpatrick
Phase 2,the stimulation phase,involves the first
1977).‘The time taken for cervical dilatation varies.
and second stages of labour (see below)and is
In the sow, using sequential vaginal exploration, it
was found that it takes between 1 hour and 2 days,
characterized by increasingmyometrial contractil-
with 50% taking 6-12 hours (Schmidt 1937). The
ity(bysteepincreasesof prostaglandin and oxyto-
cin release), dilatation of the cervix and expulsion
dilatation of the external os has recently been mea-
of the fetus(es)
sured in vivo during prostaglandin-induced calvings
(Breeveld-Dwarkasing et al 2002, 2003a). On aver-
Phase 3,the afterbirth stage, expulsion of he
fetal membranes in those species where they are
age it started 28.5 hours after prostaglandin injec-
tion,at a rate of 2.6cm per hour.The mean interval
expelled one or more hours afterthe fetus,and the
between onset of dilatation and expulsion of the
start ofuterine and cervical involution.
calf was about 9 hours.The mechanism responsible
More traditionally, and from a more practical point
for dilatation is still not fully understood. For many
ofview,theprocess ofparturition has been divided
years it was assumed tobe a passive process brought
into three separate stages referred to as'the stages of
about by the passage of the fetus and the fluid-filled
labour, While it is convenient to consider the pro-
fetal membranes through the ripened cervix. It has
also been suggested that it is mainly an active pro-
these stages do nat start and end abruptly but pass
cess caused bythe contraction of the longitudinal
gradually from one to the other.
musclebundles.We recently demonstrated that the
outer smooth muscle layer of the cervix displays
Firststage oflabour
at (induced) calving, usually in conjunction with
The changes that occur during this phase of partu-
myometrial EMG activity (van Engelen et al 2007)
rition are not visible cxternally but are important
However,it has been found that in some ewes anly
because they prepare the birth canal and the fetus
weakmyometrialcontractionsprecede dilatation
for expulsion. A number of important changes
(Hindson et al 1968), and in some women the cer-
occur. Firstly, the structure of the cervix changes so
vix can dilatein the absence of uterine contractions
thatit can dilate; secondly, there is the onset of myo-
metrial contractions;and finally, the fetus assumes
that, in ewes, even when the cervix and uterus were
the disposition for expulsion,which involves rota-
isolated surgically, cervical softening still occurred.
tion abour its longitudinal axis and extension of the
Thus the biochemical changes previously described
extremities.
are possibly moreimportant than the contributions
The changes in the structure of the cervix has been
from the smooth muscle of the cervix or myome-
studied and reviewed (Fitzpatrick 1977;Fitzpatrick&
trium. These changes are probably not just due to
Dobson 1979, Dobson 1988, Breeveld-Dwarkasing
the degradation of collagen but rather a remodelling
et al 2003b). They involve a loosening of the
of thecervical matrixwith newcollagen and proteo-
ground substance of its structure due to changes in
glycan synthesis (Challis & Lye 1994）.It is likely that
the composition of collagen components.There is
in normalparturition it is a combination of active
also increased incorporation of water, which per-
andpassive mechanisms.
mits the collagen fibres to separate from each other,
In the cow, there is initially wide dilatation of the
particularly under the extension forces, and pos-
cxternal os,whose perimeter is palpable as a frill at
sibly also allowsready access of previously inactive
the cranial end of the vagina.Thecone-shaped cervix
proteases to susceptible sites for the breakdown of
then undergoes a simultaneous shortening before ihe
the collagen molecules.These biochemical changes
internal os dilates,and when thishas occurred the
are mediated by a complex interaction between
vagina and uterus form a continuous canal that
cytokines, prostaglandins, peptide and steroid hor-
becomes tightly engaged by thie distended allanto
mones,showing many characteristics of an inflam-
chorion.In women, this process has been visualized
matory process (see reviews by Kelly 2002, Keelan
by ultrasonographic imaging but this still has not
et al 2003).
been done in domestic animals.
171
Part
21
Pregnancy andparturition
The first stage of labour is also characterized by the
increased in frequency and amplitude and became
onset of regular myometrial contractions, which fre-.
more regular 12-72 hours before the onset of the
quently produce signs of discomfort and mild colic;
second stage(Zerobin& Sp0rri 1972,Ngiam 1977).
the severity of the response varying from species to
Contraction frequencies of 8-24 per hour and
species and individual to individual. However, in
durations of 0.5-3.5 minutes, at amplitudes up to
most cases there is restlessness with elevated pulse
60mmHg, have been recorded from about 24 hours
and respiratory rates; the body temperature usu-
prepartum. A change in the pattern of the contrac-
ally (but not consistenily) falls a degree or so. In
tions was observed byZerobin & Sporri（1972)at
the sheep and goat during late gestation,uterine
the time that millk appeared in thie teats.The same
contractions, either measured by intrauterine pres-
authors, using pressure recordings, and Taverne et al
sure changes or by EMG activity, occur once every
(1979b), using myoelectrical techniques, identified
30-60minutes;they areoflow amplitudebutof
thepresence ofcervicotubular and tubulocervical
5-10 minutes' duration.'lo discriminate them from
contractions.The latter authors observed that, once
the typical labour-like contractions, they have also
one of the horns was empty, cervicotubular con-
been labelled 'contractures. This pattern continues
tractions decreased or disappeared,yet tubulocervi-
until some 48-24 hours before parturition; thereaf-
cal contractions were present in the opposite horn.
ter their frequency and amplitudeincrease and their
Since it has beenknownfor some time that uter-
duration decreases. It is onlyin the last 12 hours, and
ine volume is important in regulating myometrial
in some ewes in the last 2 liours, that learly coor-
activity by altering myoelectrical activity (Csapo et al
dinated contractions occur at a regular frequency
1963), it has been postulated that the cervicotubu-
lar contractions prevent the premature displacement
substantialamplitude(20-25mmHg)（Fitzpatrick
ofpiglets,thus ensuring orderly expulsion from the
&Dobson 1979).Ward (1968) found that there is
horns(Taverne et al 1979b)
a significant increase in myometrial activity during
In late pregnant bitches,contractures of the myo-
the last 4 hours before the expulsion of thelamb.
metrium have been recorded using elecrromyogra-
In the cow, contractures last on average some 12
phy (van der Weyden et al 1989). During the last 7
minutes during late gestation and predominantly
days before delivery, there was a progressive increase
occur when the animals are recumbent (Taverne et al
of more short-lasting EMG bursts and this correlated
2002).They aregradually transformed to a more
with agradual decline oftheplasmaprogesterone
regular coordinated peristaltictype,which started (in
levels. A significant increase of total EMG activity
induced calvings) some 16 hours after prostaglandin
and burst frequency occurred between 24 and 13
injection (Breeveld-Dwarkasing et al 2003a). The
hours before delivery, coinciding with a sudden fall
frequency of intrauterine pressure waves increases
in body temperature and plasma progesterone,
Thecontractions of the uterine musculaturecause
hour just before expulsion (Gillette &Holm 1963,
other changes in the uterus, and probably also in the
Burton et al1987). Onefeature identified in thecow
fetus.In theplacenta,the attachments to the endo-
(Gillette&Holm1963,Taverne et al 1979c),which
metrium become less intimate and the superficial
will alsobe discussed below in the sow, was the pres-
cells undergo fatty degeneration, while, n those spe-
ence ofcervicotubular and tubulocervical contrac-
cies with a deciduateplacenta,separationof themar-
tions.The function of the former type in the cow is
gins, with haenmorrhage, is beginning.Yet, placental
not known.
attachment normally stays intact during parturition,
The myometrial contractions in the sow are more
and is only disrupted at expulsion (dog and cat)
complex,which is not surprising since each preg-
or after expulsion of the fetuses (pig, horse, rumi
nant uterine horn may reach a length of1.5-2m
nants).The increased resistance to blood circulation
at the end of gestation.In sows, contractures have
in the maternal side of the placenta during contrac-
been found during precgnancy using EMG record-
tions causes a corresponding reduction ofblood
ings, and they switch to a more regular and coor-
gaseous exchange in the placenta, and this may be
dinatedpatternbetween 6and9 hoursbefore the
reflected by temporary changes in fetal Po, and fetal
birth of the first piglet (Taverne et al 1979a). Using
heart rate (Jonker et al 1996). On the maternal side,
pressure measurements, this transition was found to
this impediment to circulation may aid diversion of
occur somewhat earlier: intrauterine pressure waves
blood to the mammary glands.
172
Chapter
161
Parturition and the care of parturient animals, including the newborn
As regards the fetus in first-stage labour, itbecomes
of rest, and intrauterine pressure was increased to
more active and disposes itself in a manner that will
30-40 mmHg with each contraction (Fizpatrick &
allow it to negotiate the birth canal (see Ch. 8).Thus,
Dobson 1979).
in the foal and puppy, there is a progressive rota-
In many species the superimposition of abdomi-
tion from the ventral to the dorsal position,while
nal contractions upon myometrial contractions has
the forelimbs, head and neck become extended. In
been demonstrated; this is shiown in an intrauterine
the case of the calf and lamb extension only is neces-
pressure recording obtained from a sow (Fig. 6.7].
sary to change the feius fromits gestationalposture
I1 should be remembered that these abdominal
to that for parturition.The nature of themechanism
contractions, which cause straining, are not related
whereby theforelimbsbecome straightened in front
directly to the release ofoxytocin and shouldnot
of the body is unknown. In the bovine species this
be confused with Ferguson's reflex. The coordina-
is a unique attitude that isnever repeated afterbirth.
tion between the two is due to the fact that the myo-
In his studies of the first stage of labour, Abusineina
metrial contractions force the fetusinto the pelvic
(1963) noticed that the flexed knees of the calf first
inlet,which activates thepelvicreflex and stimulates
occupied the dilating cervix; 30 minutes later thedig-
straining: this is a similar response to the one that
its wereinthe cervix.The author suggests that at this
stirnulates defaecation.The strainingforces the fetus
time the fetus is practising righting reflexes and that
against the cervix and anterior vagina,thus initiating
it extends the carpal joints in its efforts to'stand up
Ferguson's reflex, so that the oxytocin that is released
in utero It is likely also that these spontaneous fetal
causes further contractions of the myometrium.
movements occur inresponse to increased uterine
The allantochorionic sac ruptures,as a conse-
pressure caused by the myometrial contractions of
quence of its backward movement being restricted
the first stage.If this view is correct, then the mother.
by its placental attachments, and a gush of urine-like
through the medium of an indifferent myometrial
fluid escapes from the vulva.The distended arnnion,
function, could be partly responsible for fetal dys-
together with parts of the fetus, is forced into the
tocia due 1o postural errors (see Chs 11, 15). With
pelvic inlet, thus stimulating the pelvic reflex, which
further reference to the importance of myometrial
intduces powerful contractions of the abdominal
function,it is significant that,when birth is rema
muscle. Similar substantial straining occurs later
ture,cervical dilatationis often incomplete and fetal
when first the fetal shoulders and later the fetal hips
postural defects are then common;retention of the
engage the pelvis. These distensions of the mater-
afterbirth is also likely. All these clinical effects may
nal birth canal cause great increases in the release
be partly due to relative uterine inertia, which may
of oxytocin from the posterior pituitary and this, in
result from a disordered sequence of prepariurient
turm,accentuates the myometrial contractions; thus
endocrineevenis.
there is a coordination of uterine and abdominal
expulsive efforts. As the intermittent straining con-
finues, the amnion traverses the vagina and appears
Second stage oflabour
In the monotocous species,this refers to the expul-
ing, fetal linbs appear contained within the‘water-
sion of the fetus; however,in polytocous species the
bag': in the case of the monotocous species one limb
felal membranes are sometimes voided together
slightly precedes the other. The amnion is progres-
with fetuses, and hence this stage cannot be sepa-
sively expelled and may, or may not, become rup-
rated from the third stage.
tured by a fetal foot,with escape of some ofthe
The sign of the onset of second stage is the appear-
lubricant amnioticfluid.Thefetal head next occu-
ance of abdominal contractions.In the cow it has
pies the vulva, and at this time the contractions of
been shown that 8-10ofthese are superimposed
theuterine and abdominalmusclesreach a climax
upon the onset of each myometrial contraction,
ofexpulsive effort, maximum effort coinciding wich
thebirthofthefetal occiput.When the head is born,
so that one contraction is almost immediately fol-
the mother may rest for a while but soon a further
lowed by another (Gillette&Holn 1963,Zerobin
bout of straining causes the fetal thorax to pass
&Sporri 1972).Similar observations were made
through the vulva.Usually,birth of the hips quickly
in the ewe, where the frequency of contractions
follows and the hindlimbs may be expelled at
increasedto40perhour,withonlyveryshortperiods
the same time.In many cases in the monotocous
173
Part
Pregnancy and parturition
100mm
Hg
1min
Fig.6.7Pressure changes atparturition in the sow.Upper trace isfromaballoon-tipped catheterplaced in the peritoneal cavity
Lower trare isfrom an intrauterine balloon-tippedcatheter
species,however,nofurtherexpulsiveeffort occurs
became uncovered,breathing commenced before
after the birth of the hips,the hindlimbs remaining
delivery was completed. On the other hand some-
inthevaginauntiltheyarefreedeitherbymove-
times expulsion apparently occursso quickly(espe
mentof theyoungoneorbythemotherrisingfrom
cially in pigs) that the newborn lies completely
theground.
immobilebehindthesowandwillstarttobreathe
Attempts havebeenmadetoquantify theimpor-
many seconds later.
tance of thetwocomponents involvedin theexpul-
When the mother gives birth in lateral recum-
sion of thefetus.In theewethecombinedeffect
bency, the offspring is often born with an intact
of the myometrial and abdominal contractions is
umbilical cord,andsomeminutesmay elapsebefore
about two-and-a-halftimestheeffectoftheuterus
thecord is rupturedbymovement of theyoungani-
onits 0wn(Hindson et al1965,1968,Ward1968).
mal or mother.This is especially true at foaling.ltis
Similar observations have beenmade inthe cow
important to allow this to happen naturally,for arti-
（Gillette&Holm 1963）,although since the myo-
ficialandprematureupture,orligationofhecord
metrium is involved alone during the fist stage of
may deprive the newborn of a large volume of blood
labour it probably contributes to about 90%of the
thatwouldnormallypasstoitfrom theplacenta.
total work done in the expulsion ofthe calf.The
Inpiglets,theumbilical cord maybecome stretched
abdominaleffort isofhighintensityatcertaincriti-
Or may even rupture during delivery (seebelow). In
cal stages of delivery.
ruminants,rupture occurs close to the umbilicus,at
Ifthefetusisbornin theamnion,orifthepartially
whichpointtheumbilicalarteriesand theveinhave
ruptured amnion covers the face of the offspring,
aweakspotwherethereisan abundanceofcircu
fetal movement quickly causes it to be ruptured or
lar smooth muscle in their walls.After rupture,the
drawn away;respirations,often accompanied by a
arteriesandurachusretract towards,orinto,thefetal
cry,then begin.There seems tobevery little risk of
abdomen,whichpreventshaemorrhage.Infoals,the
a healthy fetus being suffocated by an enveloping
cord alsorupturesatapreformed'weakspot'close
amnion.The stimulus to breathing is apparently theto the umbilicus.
impact of air at the nostrils and/or fetal hypercap-
In physiological birth, the surface of the fetus's
nia,for occasionally during the expulsive phase ofskin does not come in direct contact with thegenital
equine and bovinebirths when the protrudingfacetract,for(except inpiglets)the surrounding amnion
174
Chapter
161
Parturition and thecare ofparturientanimals,includingthenewborn
actsasawell-lubricatedsheath throughwhichthe
such asleukocytemigration and increasedactivity
fetus haspassed.
(Gunnik1984)andareductioninthenumberof
The second stage of labour is completewhen all
binucleatecells in thetrophectoderm(Williams
fetuses have been delivered; it lasts from an aver-
et al 1987).However,these changesmay occur as a
ageof17 minutes in the maretoan average of
result of the maturational changesrather than caus-
4hoursinthe sow(seebelow).Itsduration and the
ing them.A weakening of the acellular layer of adhe-
degree of effort associatedwith it areusually greater
sive proteins,theso-called‘glue line'that has been
inprimigravidaethan inmultigravidae.
demonstrated in the cowbeiween the cotyledon-
In the mare,cow,doegoaland ewe(whenmono-
ary and caruncular epithelium, is probably impor-
tocous) the fetus is usually delivered in anterior pre-
tant in ensuringplacental separation(Bjorkman&
sentation,dorsal position and extended posture
Sollen 1960),but this area still deserves more inten-
(seeCh.8),although a small proportion ofnormal
siveresearch at the molecular level.
deliveries may occurinposteriorpresentation,dor-
The effect of the contractions is to open up the
salpositionand extendedposture.Inthepolytocous
endometrialcrypts,whichinthecaseofthosespe-
bitch,cat and sowupto40-45%offetusesmay be
cies with cotyledons resemble the opening of the
delivered in posterior presentation,and thus pos-
bladesofafan.Thefetalvilli shrink,mainlybecause
terior presentation represents a normal physiologi-
of the sudden loss of turgidity related to the escape
cal phenomenon in these species.During passage of
ofbloodfrom thefetalsideoftheplacentawhen
the fetus from theuterusto the exterior,thefetus
the umbilicalcord ruptures.Exsanguination ofthe
follows an arched route.During the straining move-
placenta is also aided by the squeezing effect of
mentsofthedam theheight ofthepelviccavityis
myometrial contractions. These actions, together
enlarged,especiallyby the dorsal excursion ofthe
withsomeoftheearlydegenerativeormaturational
sacrum.This facilitatesfinalfetal expulsion.
changesthatareseenin thecarunclesofthe ewe and
cow, cause separation of the fetal membrane.As a
result,the apex of the allantochorionic sac becomes
Third stage of labour
inverted and as the sac is‘rolled' down the cornua
After birth of the young,regular abdominal con-
the fetal villi are drawn out of the crypts. When a
tractions largely cease,but myometrial contrac-
large portion of the afterbirth becomes detached and
tions persist. In general, they decrease somewhat
inverteditforms amasswithinthematernalpelvis.
inamplitudeburbecomemorefrequentandregu-
whichstimulatesreflexcontractionsoftheabdomi-
lar.Thesecontractionsareimportantfordehiscence
nalmuscles;this strainingcompletestheexpulsion
andexpulsionofthefetalmembranes.Notonlydo
of the allantochorionic sac,which is seen to have
the waves of contractions passing from uterine tube
its smooth,shiningallantoic surface outermost.In
tocervixpersist（Taverneetal1979c)butinboth
the dog and cat,the dehiscence and expulsion of the
thecowandsowthereisthereappearanceofcon-
placentas are interspersed with the fetal births;but
tractions in the reverse direction(Zerobin &Sporri
onlytheexpulsionofthelastafterbirthsimulatesthe
1972,Ngiam1977);theformerauthorsnotedtheir
third stage ofthemonotocous species.Inthe sow,
returninthecowwithin10minutesoftheexpulsion
mostofthe(fetal)placentasremain attachedtothe
of thecalf.Taverneetal (1979b)reporledin the sow
endometrium during expulsion of the piglets;only
the presence of regular contractions of a frequency
occasionally arefetalmembranesexpelledin asso-
of15-27 per hour, which predominantly progressed
ciation with,or in between,the expulsion of pigleis.
in a peristaltic fashion over the entirelength of the
The third stage lasts from an average of 1 hour in the
uteruis.
mare(Steven 1982) to G-8hours in the cow(van
During the last days of gestation,maturational
Wervenetal1992).Withtheexceptionofthemare,
changes occur in the placenta; these are likely to be
domestic animals normally eat the afterbirths if they
relatedtothechangesintheendocrineenvironment
have access to them.
that trigger parturition(see p.157).Collagenizationof
Thenatureof thethird-stageuterinecontractions
the placentome and flatleningof thematernal crypt
can easily be appreciated with the exercise of a lit-
epitheliumin thecowhasbeenidentified(Grunert
tlepatience,bydirectpalpation ofthecow'suterus
1984,Woickeetal1986）.In the samespecies,other
transrectally.Atintervalsofafew minutes,profound
significant cellular changes have been observed,
wavesofcontractions aregenerated,duringwhich
175
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
thetextureoftheuterusistransformedfrom a flac-
ihecow.Amaremayevenfoalwith easesoon after
cidstateintooneofintensetone.
agynaecologicalexaminationhasbeenmadewhen
With the exception of the sow, the females of
the cervix seented relaxedbut not at all dilated.
domestic species indulge in intensive licking of the
If the presentation is seen to benormal, i.e.wo
newbom offspring.Within an hour of birth,it is
feetandmuzzleatthevulva,thenihemareisalmost
normal for the young of all species to be suckling
certain to deliver the foal; an exception is ‘dog
and it is known that the stimulus of suckling causes
sittingposition'where,with forelimbs and head
releaseofoxytocin,whichpromotestheletdown'of
showing. the presentation looks normal (seeCh.16).
milk as well as an augmentation of myometrial con-
As soon as faulty presentation,position orposture
tractions.This hasbeen clearly demonstrated in the
is recognized (see Ch. 8), or if no progress occurs
sow,where sucklingresultedin greatersynchrony
within 10 minutes of the onset of straining,a veteri-
of the contractions and an increase in the number
nary examination should be called for (see p.299).
of tubocervical contractions (Ngiam 1977). Hence
In these ideal circumstances,the obstetrician will
suckling exerts a favourable influence on expulsion
havelittlemorethananhourinwhichtoarriveand
of the afterbirth. In the mare, suckling is not sig-
deliver a live foal-often an impossibility because
nificantlyrelated to oxytocinrelease(Vivrette etal
s/hecannotbelocatedorcannotcover thedistance
2000).Although there are no reports in thelitera-
intime.The earlydehiscence of the allantochorion
turesofphysiologicalmeasurementsofpostpartum
in equinedystociamakes sillbirththerule,rather
uterine contractility in mares,itis most likelythat
than the exception.However,even if the foalis dead
theresumption ofsubstantialcontractionsofthe
on arrival, the veterinarian's prompt attention will
uterinemusculatureinihethird stagecauseabdom-
makeforamuchmorefavourableprognosisforthe
inalpain,and itisquitecommonfor expulsion of
mare.
themembranes tobe preceded by mild symptoms
Assoonas acowshowscompleterelaxation ofthie
ofcolic.
posteriorborderof thesacrosciaticligamentsand a
sudden enlargement of the udder she should be put
in a clean, well-bedded box andkeptunder frequent
Care of parturient animals
observation.If after 12 hours of restlessness there
is no straininga veterinary examination should be
Mares approachingterm shouldbeput ina con-
madeto excludeprimary uterine inertia,failure of
venient paddock duringthe day and brought in at
thecervix to dilate and/or uterine torsion(see Ch.
night.As soon as the udder and teats become dis-
10).Ifa cow enters what appears to be a normal sec-
tended,or waxing occurs,themare should be put
ond stage and there is no progress after an hour's
inafoalingboxatnightandkept undercontinuous
straining,she should be examined to ascertain the
but unobtrusiveobservation.Themajorityofmares
cause of theobstructivebirth
foal between 18.00 hours and midnight, so that by
Heavily pregnant ewes should be kept in a conve-
daybreakinnaturalconditions thefoal has suckled
nient paddock or in a lambingyard or pen whose
andcangallop away.In thisrespect,itisnoticeable
location canbe frequently changed during thelamb-
that, during the week before foaling, myometrial
ingseason
EMG activity showed a progressive, reversible rise at
Sows should be well washed and introduced to a
night(McGlothlin et al 2004）. It is still uncertain
farrowing crate several days before the expected far-
towhatextentfoalingmaybedelayedasaresult
rowing.On industrial pig farms,where pregnancies
of the mare experiencing some unioward environ-
are synchronized in groups because of the weaning
mental influence.There is experimental evidence
management,this will take place according to an
showing that endogenous opioids suppress oxyio-
all-in,all-outsystem.Themajority ofsows farrow
cin release in pregnant mares, although this inhibi-
during the evening and at night,when there is less
tion tended to decrease towards foaling (Aurich et al
disturbance in the farrowing barn. There can be sub-
1996).Where a continuous vigil iskept byrelays of
stantial pigler mortality due to overlyingby the sow;
students,who,being curious,may berather bt-
infact,more than half thepiglet deathsuptowean
sive,themare seems as likely tofoal by day as dur-
ing occur within 48 hours of farrowing.By using a
ing the nightThe cervix does notapparently require
PGFanaloguetocontrol thetimeoffarrowingand
the same degree of preparatory changes as occur in
byapplyingaveryintensiveprotocolforsupervision
176
Chapter
6
Parturitionandthecareofpartuurientanimals,includingthenewbon
of the farrowings, Holyoake et al (1995) were able
to substantiallyreduce the umber of stillbirths and
increase the number of piglets weaned.
It is clear that the mother, by reacting to environ-
mental influences, can exert some control over the
time of parturition. For example, most mares and,
to a smaller extent, sows procduce their offspring at
night in1 quiet, undisturbed surroundings. Goats and
      e  
quently during the day (Lickliter 1984, Fitzgerald &
Jacobson 1992). However, constant obtrusive inter-
ference or farm management measures can override
the natural tendency for parturition to occur during
more quiet times.For example, in five beagle bitches
it was observed that electroinyographic activity of
the uterus during late gestation was influenced sig-
nificantly by external stimuli (van der Weyden et
al 1989).Parturientbitches that are transferred for
whelping to a strange environment may suffer fron
nervous voluntary inhibition of labour. The mater-
nal stress occasioned by the adverse surroundings is
considered to inhibit lhe release of oxytocin and/or
the resultant adrenaline (epinephrine) secretion stim-
Fig. 6.8 Mammary hypertrophy. tumefaction of the teats and
ulates the beta receptors of the myometrium,caus-
waxing in a thoroughbred mare 4 hours before the birth of
ing relaxation. The former mechanism has been very
the fcal.
elegantly demonstrated in pigs (Lawrence et al 1992).
Studies of 1151 calvings of beef cattle in Canada
(Fig. 6.8). The best indication that the first stage
(Yarneyetal1979)andof522parturitionsinFriesian
cows in Britain (Edwards 1979) showed that the dis-
has begun is the onset of patchy sweating behind
the elbows and about the flanks. Altlhough it occurs
tribution of calvings was fairly uniform throughout
the 24-hour period but that the disturbances caused
in the majority of mares, it is by no means invari-
able.ltcommences aboui 4 hoursbefore thebirth
by farm staff at feeding and millking times exerted
of the foal and increases as the stage progresses.
significant inhibiting effects,particularly in milking
cows of third and later parities. When late pregnant
Initially the mare yawns, there are no obvious indi-
cations of pain and food is generally taken readily.
dairy cows were offered silage in the evening, after
Respirations are normal and the pulse is about 60.
a period of restricted access,a significant reduction
(This increase in pulse rate is not significant of the
in the incidence of night-timecalvings was observed
onset of labour, for it develops during the terminal
(Gleeson et al 2007).
There was also evidence from the beef cattle study
stages of pregnancy.) There is evidence that body
and from data on lambing tines collected by George
temperature may become slightly subnormal during
the first stage (36.5-37° C).
[19G9) that there is a genetic effect on the time of par-
turition; thus, ofthe several beef breeds studied,55.9-
As the stage advances, the mare becomes restless
59% of cows with a Hereford grandparent calved
and tends to wander aimlessly around the loose-
during the day (between 07.00 and 19.00 hours), and
box. The tail is frequently raised or held to one side.
There may be swishing of the tail or slapping of it
underuniform husbandrymoreMerino eweslambed
against the anus and kicking at the abdomen. As the
at night and more Dorset Horn ewes during the day.
end of the stage approaches the mare becomes very
Horse
restless. This is indicated by crouching, straddling of
the hindlimbs, going down on the knees or sternum
The imminence of labour can be recognized by the
and rising again, glancing at the flank. The stage ter-
degree of manmary hypertrophy, waxing of the teats
ininates with rupture of the allantochorionic mem-
and possibly the escape ofmilk from the glands
brane and the escape ofurine-like allantoicfluid
177
Part
2
Pregnancy and parturition
from the vulva. Iis quantity is not copious. It will be
The duration of the second stage in the mare is
noticedthatthereisnoreferencetovisiblestraining
about 17minutes;it may be as short as 10minutes.
during thisperiod in themare.
ThelongestThiaveobservedwithinnormalitywas70
The onset of the second stage occurs abruptly. It
minutes,and in thiscaseitwasseen that thegreater
ischaracterizedbytheappearanceoftheamnion
part of theplacenta came away with the fetus.It is
orthe commencementofforcible straining.There
probablethat thisisnear thelimit of thetime avail-
isneververymuch delaybetweenthem,andthey
ableifparturition is toremain normal,for in the
often coincide.Very soon after straining begins,the
mare separation of the placenta tends to proceed
mare goes down. She passes on to her side with
rapidly once the second stage begins and if delivery
limbs extended,and generally remains in this posi
occupiestoolonga timeitislikely thefetuswill suc-
tionuntil thefoal is born.Thepresence of thetrans-
cumb from thiscause.
parent, bluish-white water-bag (amnion) at the
In the majority of mares the membranes are
vulva is quickly followed by the appearance in it of
expelled quiclly after the birth of the foal,gener-
a digit.Straining efforts recur at fairly regular inter-
allywithin3hours;infact,theymayfall awayin
vals;each bout comprises three or fourpowerful
about 30 minutes.Theaverage duration of the third
expulsive efforts followed by a period of rest, gen-
stage is about 1hour(Steven 1982).Occasionally,
erallyofabout3minutes.Oneforelimbprecedes
theotherbya distanceofabout7-8cmandthis
hours elapse before the membranes fall away,yet
position ismaintaineduntil thehead isborn.The
the animal suffers no ill-effect.Straining is nota fea-
pointis a significant one,for it indicates that one
ture of the third stage,the afterbirth being expelled
elbowpassesthroughthebonypelvicinletbefore
by the myometrial contractions.The recognition of
the other and in this way nature has provided for
theexact timeatwhich a casebecomespathological
thefoal topresenttheminimumobstructionai the
and interference is necessary is difficult (see Ch.26).
pelvicinlet.Duringits delivery,the head is generally
Thedefinition ofwhen fetal membranes areconsid-
in the oblique position;it may even be transverse
ered toberetained in thehorseisnot consistent in
-the cheek lying on the limbs -but this is prob-
the published literature (Sevinga et al 2004).As has
ablyduetorotation of thecervicaljointswithin the
alreadybeenpointed out,themembranes arepassed
pelvisandshouldnotbetakenasevidencethatthe
with theallantoicsurface(smooth and shiny)ofthe
presentation was oblique. The second stage is illus-
allantochorion outermost.This statement holds for
trated in Figure 6.9.
those cases in which expulsion occurs early after
Thegreatest andlongesteffort is associatedwith
parturition,but it has been noticed that,in those
birth of the head;the chest presents less difficulty
in which there is delay,the fetalplacental surface
and following this thehips slipout easily.Although
（roughened and red） is outermost,indicating that
equinedeliveryiscomparativelyrapiditconstitutes
separation was completebefore expulsionbegan.
a tremendouseffort andafterexpulsion ofthefoal
themaremayremain lying on hersideexhausted for
Cattle
anythingupto30minutes
Theumbilical cord is intact whenthefoalisbon.
The immediate approach of labour has beenrecog-
It subsequently ruptures,5-8cm beneath the belly,
nized by slaclkeningof thepelvicligaments and the
atapoint where thereisasphincter ofsmooth cells
changeofthemammary secretion from a relatively
lying beneath the amniotic covering,as the result of
transparent,honey-like secretion to an opaque cel-
movementbyeither themare or thefoal.Usually
lular secretion-colostrum.About 54 hours before
also the foal is born within the amnion,the mem-
birthofthecalf,Ewbank(1963)noticeda fallinthe
branebeingrupturedby themovementsof thefore-
cow's body temperature of0.6°C.Heobserved that
parts of the fetus. Respiratory movements may be
a cowshowingsignsofimminent labourwouldbe
seenwithin theintact amnion.Thelowerportions
unlikely to calve during the succeeding 12 hours if
ofthefoal'shindlimbs oftenremain withinthe
its temperaturewas39°Cor more.Parturition will
mare'svaginaforsomeminutesaftertherest of the
usuallybeginwithin12hoursoftheappreciation
foal is born. Their final emergence is due to move-
ofcompleterelaxation of theposteriorborders of
mentofthefoalrather than totheexpulsiveefforts
the sacrosciaticligaments.Changes invaginal tem-
of themare.
peratures have been used to predictparturition in
178
Chapter
61
Parturition and the care ofparturient animals,includingthenewborn
Fig.6.9The second stage of labourin themare.Note therelativepositionsof theforelimbs and head.The foal isbornin the
amnionbutbreaks cutof thesacwithout difficulty.In thefinal photographmuchof the allantochorion hasbeenpassed but the
umbilicalcordisstillintact
179
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
Fig.6.9 continued.
180
Chapter
161
Parturition and thecare ofparturientanimals,includingthe newborm
beef cows with single and twin pregnancies (Aoki
Expulsion of the fetal membranes usually takes
etal2005).
place about6hourslater;occasionallyitmaybe
The first stage of labour can easily be recognized
delayedto12hoursbutwhen24hourselapseand
by direct palpation of thecervix.Thereis great vari-
the membranes are still in the uterus it is probable
ation in the intensity of the symptoms of thefirst
that the causeispathological retention.Unlesspre
stage;infact,many subjects,particularlymuligravi
vented from doingso,it iscustomaryforthecow
dae,shownone.Others,usuallyhifers,may show
toeat thefetalmembranes.Itwill alsobenoticed
signsofabdominalpainforperiodsupto24hours
duringthefirst and secondstagesthat there is a ten
before thecervix is completely dilated.Thefirst stage
dency to lick up vulval discharges.
usuallylasis about 6hours.Another feature ofthe
cow is that occasionalstrainingmay occur during
Sheep
thefirst stage.Food is only‘picled at';rumination is
irregular;theremaybelowing'orkickingatthebelly.
Intheewethecourseofparturitionisvery similar
The animal isobviouslyrestless;shemay standwith
to that described forthecow,except that the inci-
her back arched and tail raised;she may go down
denceoftwinningandeventripletsishighinthose
and rise again frequently.The line of demarcation
ewes that havebeen flushed before themating time
between the first and second stages is not clear-cut,
and in breeds with high fecundity.Wallace(1949)
asinthemare.Bodytemperatureisgenerallynor-
found that72% ofewes complete second-stage
malbutthepulserateisoftenincreasedtobetween
labourin1hour and thatthemajorityofewespass
80 and90. In 40%of normal calvings observed by
theafterbirthwithin2or3hoursoftheexpulsion
myself theintactallantochorion reached the vulva as
of the lamb. 95%of lambs were presented anteri-
afirst water-bag'
orly.Spontaneousbirthmay occurdespiteretention
The second stage is less intensebut of longer dura-
ofa forelimb.In their observationsofovinepartu-
tion than in the mare. Straining is less frequent
rition,Hindson&Schofield（1969）noted that,in
and the animal often remains standingat first(Fig.
twin births where one fetus occupied each horn,
6.10).During the passage of the head through the
onehorn developedcontractilitybefore the other.
vulva,however,the cow generally goes down and
This observation supports the authors' contention
remains recumbent until thecalf isborn.Shemay
that dystocia in cattle and sheep due to simultane-
lieonhersidebutmoreoften adoptssternalrecum-
ouspresentationof twinsismorelikelywhenboth
fetuses occupy the same horn,Unpublished data
the timeof its onset, the second stagemay occupy
on the duration of the intervals between the birth
from30minuteslo4hours,theaverageduration
oftwinlambs（Texel,Friesian and crossbredewes)
beingabout 70 minutes.Thesecondstage is lon-
showthat55%ofsecondlarnbswerebornwithin30
ger in heifers than cows, and male calves take lon-
minutesafter thefirstone,increasingto8o%within
ger to be born.In twin births,Owens et al (1984)
1 hour.Factors affecting this interval have not been
noted that intense strainingfor thebirth of the sec-
systematicallyinvestigated.
ondcalfbegan10minutesafterthedeliveryofthe
firstcalf.During the second stage,temperature may
Pig
rise to39.5or40°C,but this is bynomeans con-
stant and is probably dependent on the degree of
Between 60% and 75% of sows farrow at night
effort required.The pulse rate may increase to 100
（Bichardet al 1976,Kovenic&Avakumovic1978).
or more. About 20% of calves are born almost com-
Thefetalmembranesof adjacentpiglets areusually
pletely enclosed in the amnion.
fused (see Ch. 2) and, because individual or aggre-
Placental separation occurs more slowly in the
gatedafterbirthsmaybeexpelled duringthephase
cow than in the mare, and thus the stage of expul-
offetalexpulsionaswell as after thebirthofthelast
sion may occupy considerably longer without jeop-
fetus,it is unrealistic to speak of separate second
ardizing the life of the young one. The process of
and third stages of labour in porcine species. Good
expulsionis similar to that described for themare.
accountsofnormalfarrowinghavebeengivenby
Theumbilicalcordisshorterinthecalfthaninthe
Jones (1966)and by Randall (1972).
foal,and itsrupture generally occurs as the calffalls
Sows in late pregnancy are quiet,resting and fre-
fromthevulva.
quently sleeping in lateralrecumbency,butwithin
181
Part
Pregnancy andparturition
Fig.6.10The second stage of labour in the cow.Note the relative positions of the fetal head and forelimbs.The allantoic and
amnioticsacscanbeclearlydistinguishedin(C).
182
Chapter
161
Parturition and thecare of parturient animals,including the newborn
24hoursbeforethebirthofthiefirstpigletamiarked
horns.As had previously been observed by Perry
restlessness develops,accompanied by bed-making
[1954),therewere occasional instances ofa piglet
activity(if they have access to suitable materials).
apparently‘overtaking’its neighbour in the uterus.
Endogenous PFCappears to be involved early in
In18of95pigletstheobservedpresentationatbirth
anendocrinepathwayhatinvolvesthebrain and
differed from that previously detected at laparotomy
is responsible for most of the prepartum behav-
but it was not determined whether these changes
ioural components (Gilbert 2001). The intensely
of polarity occurred in the uterus during gestation
active period is followed by recumbency andrest.
or within the uterine body during delivery. Both
The onset of the parturient pattern of myometrial
explanationswould seemvalid,although wepostu-
activity occursbetween9and 6hoursbeforethefirst
late that the polarity change is most likely to occur
piglet is born (Taverne et al 1979a). There are sev-
because a piglet passes down from one horn into the
eral alternating periods of rest and restlessness and
base of the other and is then expelled into the uter-
then,in the hour preceding thebirth of thefirst pig
inebodyandthentheoutside.Observingthebirth
let,thesow settles quietly intolateral recumbency.
of1078pigletsin103littersRandall(1972)recorded
Conspicuous mammary growth is a feature of late
55.4% anterior and 44.6% posterior presentations.
gestation;1-2 days before farrowing the individ-
Inboth presentations thefetus was usually in dor-
ualglands are cearly demarcated,turgid,tenseand
sal position with the presenting limbs flexed along-
warm, and milk can be expressed from the prom-
sidethefetalbody;thusthefetal snoutor tailwas
inent teats during the final 12-24 hours.There is
thefirstpart toprotrude.Themeaninterval between
progressiveswellingofthevulvallabiafromabout
consecutive births was 16 minutes and the mean
4days beforeparturition,and themucosa becomes
duration ofthe expulsive stagewas2hours36min-
reddened.Prepartum temperature variations
of
utes.Analysingdatafromsome2l1littersofseveral
between37.5°and38°C,but with no constant tem-
breeds,vanDijkel al (2005) found thatbreed,lit-
tersize andgestation length significantlyaffected
Elmoreetal(1979)recordeda1Crise at 12-15
the duration of the expulsive stage.A curvilinear
hours before the birth of the first piglet.
relationship between birth interval and rank(rela-
Parturient sows usually remain in lateralrecum-
tive position in the birth order) of the piglets was
found; pigletbirth intervals increased with increasing
the birth of the first or second piglet,or change
birthweight, and both stillborn and posteriorly pre
from onesideto theother,orfromlateral toventral
sentedpigletswere deliveredafter significantlylon-
recumbency.After theprepartum quiet period there
ger birth intervals than liveborn and anteriorly
is intermittent straining accompanied by paddling
presented piglets. Between 60% and 70% of piglets
leg movements.The birth of the first pig (and sub-
were born with intact umbilical cords;in the case
sequent ones) is heralded by the passing of a small
of the early-born fetuses theelasticity ofthecord
quantity of fetal fluid and by marked tail-switching.
allowedthenewbornpiglettoreachthemiddleof
The greatest parturient effort is expended over the
the sow's abdomen without the cord breaking.The
first piglet, succeeding fetuses being expelled with
later-born pigletsweremorelikelytobe expelled
surprisingease andsometimeswithprojeciileforce.
withbroken cords(Randall 1972).Newbornpigleis
Theallantochorion and amnionusuallyruptureas
areusuallyremarkablyactiveandmayreachateat
the conceptustraverses thebirthcanalbutoccasion-
within30minutesafterexpulsionandattemptto
allypiglets are born within the amnion and,not
suck,althoughthislargelydependsontheirviability
uncommonly,a fetus becomes surrounded by the
and the floor of the farrowing crate.
membranes ofanother fetus.Only small amounts
The porcine fetal membranes tend to be expelled
offetalfluid arevoided
astwo orthreemassesofjoinedallantochorions,
The expulsivephase ofparturition isillustrated
with theplacentalstalksoftheumbilicalcordsindi-
insequencein Figure6.ll.Bymeansoflaparo-
catingthenumberofseparateconceptusesineach
tomy and transuterine marking of theuterineloca-
mass; single afterbirths may also be voided.One
tion of fetuses of the miniature pig between S0 and
ormore ofthe coalescedmasses are commonly
105daysofgestationandthenobservingtheirbirth
expelledbeforeall thefetuses areborn,bu thelarg
sequence,Taverne etal (1977) found that the off-
estmassisusuallyexpelledabout 4 hours afterthe
springweredeliveredrandomlyfrombothuterine
lastpiglet.When all thepigletshavebeenexpelled,
183
Pait
Pregnancy and parturition
seenin(E).
184
Chapter
161
Partuirition and the care of parturient animals, incduding the newbom
the sow usually stands iip and micturates profusely.
within the 24 hours beforethe onset of labourbut
She thenlies down again,sometimesvery clumsily-
repeated measureinents are needed to detect a tem-
with consequent risk of crushing the surrounding
porary lower value.
piglets - and the fearure of the next phase is that the
There is nothing characteristic about the first stage
sow lies quietly for a long time and allows the pig-
but it is generally noticed that ebitcis restless, indif
lets to suck.
ferent to food and inclined to pant,It is most obvious
 A notable economic featuire of porcine parturition
in primigravidae and occupies about 12 hours.
is the frequency of stillbirths. They occur in about
Electromyographic (EMG) pattern during late
30% of apparently normal farrowings and the over-
pregnancy comprises episodes of imyoelectrical activ-
all stillbirth percentage in unassisted deliveries is
ity (EMEAs) lasting 3-10 minutes and recurring at
3-6% (Randall & Penny 1970, Leenhouwers et al
alowfrequency (maximum 2.5/h).Duringthelast
1999). Because piglets are nearly always found alive
7 days before whelping and especially during the
when premeditated hysterectomies or hysterotomies
last 48 hours, more short bursts (<3 min) appeared
are performed just before the onset of parturition, it
between the EMEAs; this was closely correlated with
is concluded that stillbirths occur during farrowing.
the decline in progesterone concentrations. The total
Early-bom piglets are more likely to survive than
duration of EMG and theburst frequency increased
either themiddle-born ones or thelate-born ones
dramatically as the progesterone conceniration and
from the tips of the uterine horns (Dziuk& Harmon
body temperature fell 12-24 hours before whelp
1969,Sprecher et al 1974,Leman et al 1979). The
ing(van der Weydenet al 1989).Bitches apparently
stillbirth rate is also influenced by litter size,being
are aware of the uterine contractions at this stage,
greatest in litters of four or less or in those of 14
because they frequently stand or change their posi-
or more, and by the polarity of the expelled fetus
tionwhile remainingrecumbentwhen contractions
(Sovjanski et al 1972,van Dijk et al 2005).Piglets
occur.The onset of the second stage is indicated by
at the ovarian endsof the uterine horns have to tra-
abdominal straining but at first this may be difficult
verse the cntire length of the respective horn and in
fo recognize because of the positional changes of the
thecase ofsmall littersthey mmay have to negotiate
bitch. In the majority of cases, the animal remains
a previously unoccupied and non-dilated length of
in her bed in sternal recumbency, although sone-
horn.Pigletsborn posteriorly are nearly four times
times she may stand and move about during strain-
as likely tobeborn dead as thosepresented anteri-
ing efforts.The allantochorionic membrane of the
orly:but also piglets born alive inposterior presen-
first fetus appearsat thevulva and,following a series
tation or expelled duringthefinal third of thelitter
of expulsive efforts, attains the size of a golf-ball.It is
show significantly worse acid-base balance values in
generallyrupturedby thebitch,wholicksvigorously
blood samplestakenfrom the cord atbirth(vanDijk
at lier vulva. As with other species, delivery of the
head coincides with the greatest effort; in the major-
of theintervalsbetween successivebirths ofup to20
ity of instances,once this is born the remainder of
minutes or more also predisposes to stillbirth.
the feus follows easily.Expulsion of the firsi fetus,
High progesterone and/or low oestrogen levels,
as judged by the duration of abdominal straining.
produced experimentally in the prepariurieni sow's
may occupy up to an hour, but seldom longer if the
blood,can delay farrowing and increase the still-
process is normal. lt is often quicker, a matter of a
birth rate from 10% to 97% (Wilson et al 1979).It
quarter of an hour or so. Althougli some 40% of all
isnot known ifsuch hormonal derangements also
puppies are born in posterior presentation, repeated
occurnaturally.
measurements of acid-base balance in jugular blood
samples afterbirth showed that pups born in poste-
rior presentation experienced a more severe meta-
Dog
bolic acidosis [van derWeyden et al 1989).
The imminence of parturition has been indicated
The umbilical cord is intact at the birth of the
by the animal preparing her bed and becoming resi-
puppy, and occasionally they can be seen attached
less.In primigravidaetheonsetof lactation miore
totheir cord when the mother rises immediately
or less coincides with parturition but in multigravi-
after expulsion.The cord is either quickly torn or the
dae milk may be expressed from the teats for several
bitch bites it when eating the placenta.Normally
days prior lo its onset. In most bitches, there is a
the bitch rests for a tine after the birth of her first
transient fall in body temperature ofat least 1.2°C
puppy. She lies licking it and soon it begins to move
185
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
andtriestosucklewhenitislivelyenough toreach
questionarises overwhatis themaximumtime it
anipple.Shepaysfrequent attention to her vulva
may occupy,especiallywhen thenumber offetuses
and licks up any discharges.The placenta is gener-
is very high （10-14）.Naaktgeboren etal(2002)
ally voided in 10-15minutes (or even together with
reportedupto13hoursforthelargestbreedswith
the pup) and is prompuly eaten by the bitch.
the largest litters.It is very improbable that pup-
Straining recommences after a variable delay.This
pies gorn afier this time,even without assistance,
will be alive, although the birt ofa live pup lias
frequently beas long as 1-2hours.I have seen it
beenreportedevenafteranintervalof34hours
occupy7hours in a bitchpregnant with twoferuses
(Romagnolietal2004).
only.Theeffortrequiredandtimeoccupiedforthe
A feature ofparturitionin thebitchis thatmuch
deliveryofthesecondfetus is usuallylessthan for
of the uterine discharge is dark green in colour.This
the first, but this is mainly dependent on the pre-
is due to the breakdown of themarginal haematoma
sentation,position and weight of the pup.The pat-
('green border') and to the escapeof the blood pig-
tern of expulsion of the fetuses is most irregular;
mentbiliverdin or uteroverdine.
one bitch may have her first puppy and then rest
for several hours,then delivertwo or three more in
Cat
quick succession and then rest again before expel-
During the last week of pregnancy, the queen will
regular intervals throughout theperiod.Mean inter-
seek out a suitable nesting area for kittening.Most
vals between the birth of two successive puppies
cats aresecretive about this andwill select aquiet,
rangedberween30and60minutesinmostbreeds
undisturbed spot, while some socialized pet cats
(Naaktgeboren etal2002).Inan exceptionalcase,a
show less interest in selecting a suitable nesting
bitch may deliver thewholeofher litter in an hour
position and become more demanding of human
or so.Parturient bitches are very sensitive to envi
contact
ronmental disturbances and stress may easily cause
Mammary
development becomes noticeablein
a delay of the expulsion stage, probably by elevat-
the last week of pregnancy, and this may be particu-
ingmaternal catecholamines and decreasing oxyto-
larly prominent in maiden queens.Unlike in bitches
cin levels.Plasma oxytocin levels are elevated during
rectal temperature does not fall before the onset of
the expulsion stage(Olsson et al 2003),and there
parturition.
aretemporaryelevations,althoughnotexclusively,
During the first stage of parturition the queen may
around the time of expulsion of a pup(Klarenbeek
become restless,frequently visiting the site selected
et al 2007). In bitches with primary uterine iner-
forkitteningwhile other queenshide away quietly in
tia plasma oxytocin levels were found to be sig-
the chosen nesting area,occasionally lying down and
nificantly lower than in normal whelping controls
strainingunproductively.Frequent licking of the vul-
(Bergstrom et al 2006).Unlike the sow (see later),
val area and panting are other signs that parturition
there is a significant tendency for the puppies to
has started.The second stage begins wit straining
beexpelledfromalternatehorns(van derWeijden
withthe queen usually in lateral orventralrecum-
etal 1981）.In addition,reversal ofthepresentation
bency or in a defaecating position.Duration of expul-
or'leapfrogging' of puppies is very uncommon.
sion ofthekittens varies considerably.Unpublished
Thepattern of expulsion of thefetal membranes is
data from myself show that it took on average 22 min-
variable.Sometimesthey areexpelledindividually,
utes(range 1-l83 minutes) for kittens in anterior
immediately after each pup.Alternatively,a puppy
presentation (52.6%), while those in posterior presen-
may be expelledwith the membranes ofitspredeces-
soraround its neck,indicatingthatthis pup has passed
minutes).Subsequent littens are usually born afier a
its predecessor's placental girdle while still attached
shorterperiod ofabdominal straining.The mean inter-
totheuterinewall.Exceptionally,there is a delay of
val between the birth of two kittens averaged 40 min-
upto24hoursbeforeallof thefetalmembranesare
utes(n=42),with a range of 7-105minutes.Normal
expelled and parturition isfinally completed.
parturitions are usually completed within a few hours.
The total time occupied by the second stage will
However,inothercases,hepatternof fetalexpulsion
depend chiefly on the number of fetuses, but as a
maybe much more variable and,on sone occasions,
general rulewhen thelitter iswithin the usual lim-
part of thelittermaybebornonedayand theremain-
its(four lo eight)it occupies some 4-8hours.The
der 24 hours or more laterIf thequeenis alarmed,this
186
Chapter
161
Parturition and the care of parturient animals,including the newborn
may disrupt the pattern ofbirths and shemaymove
There are probably a number of factors that are
thekitens already born to a new nesting area before
responsible for the initiation of spontaneous respi-
resumingparturition.Theplacentastogetherwiththe
ration.Duringthe birth process,Po,and blood pH
rest of the fetal membranes are usually expelled slill
are falling and Pco,is rising because of the start of
attached to the fetuses,or separately shorly after-
placental separation and occlusionof theumbilicus,
wards.Themothervigorouslylicks thenewbornkit-
thus restricting gaseous exchange. These changes
ten and quickly eats themembranes,thereby severing
have been shownin the lamb tostimulatechemore-
the umbilical cord.It may take some 30-40 minutes
ceplors in the carotid sinus (Chernicket al 1969).
after birth for the litens to reach a nipple and start
Tactile and thermal stimuli are also important,for
sucking.
ithasbeenshown that if thefaceofthefetallamb
is cooled there is stimulation of respiratory move-
ments (Dawes 1968), while the licking and nuzzling
Care of the newborn
of the dam probably provides some stimulus.
The first respiratory movement is usually a deep,
The sudden change at birth from the constant, con-
forceful inspiration,which is necessary to force air
trolled,cosseted environment of the uterus to the
intothelungs.lthasbeendemonstratedinthefetal
variableandfrequently stressful free-living environ-
lamb that a pressure of 18cm of water is necessary
ment deinands great adaptability from the newborn.
toforce air into the lungs at thefirst inflation; once
In domestic species,however,provided that patur
ihishas occurred only a small pressureisneeded to
tion is normal,most survive this transition without
cause full inflation thereafter(Reynolds & Strang
assistance.It should also beremembered thai during
1966). Pulmonary surfactant, produced by type 2
thelatterpartofgestation thefetus is already under-
pneumocytes duringthematuration ofthefetus at
going a number of maturational changes,probably
theendofgestatinassistsintheinitial lungexpan-
stimulated bythehormonalchangesthatoccurin
sion and alveolarstabilization.Althoughtheinitial
the initiation of parturition,in preparation for the
work donein the first breath is greater in mature
free-living state.However, there is often a high mor-
than in immature fetal lungs, for the second and
tality ratemoreoftenassociated with dystocia;in
subsequent breaths it is much less;ihis is because
cattle,forexample,ithasbeen estimatedthat64%of
the alveoli remain partially inflated after exhalation.
calf losses occur within96 hours of birth(Patterson
As a result of lung inflation, the pulmonary vascu
etal1987),and thoseborn followingdystocia are
lar bed opens up followed by a sudden increase in
2.4 times morelikely todevelop infectious dis-
pulmonary blood flow.Such changes in the vascular
easeswithin thefirst45daysoflifethan thoseborn
dynamics result in the rapid closure of the ductus
as a result of a normal birth (Toombs et al 1994).
arteriosusandforamenovalefollowedbytheductus
Atbirth,andforavariableperiodoftimeafterwards,
venosus several hours later;theconsequenceof these
anumberofimportanteventsmustoccuranditis
changes are that instead of gaseous exchange occur-
the responsibility of the person involved in supervis-
ring via the placenta, it now occurs via the lungs
ing or assisting at theparturition to assistthe new-
(Grove-White 20oo).Survival ofthe newborn is
born so that thelikelihood ofsurvival isenhanced.
dependent on therapid onset ofnormal, spontane-
ous respiration.ln anormal calf,respiration usually
commences affer 30 seconds of birth, being irregu-
Onset of spontaneous respiration
lar at first before settling down to 45-60breaths per
During fetallife episodesofmuscularmovements
minute(Grove-White2000).
similartothoseofrespirationhavebeenobserved
Once birth is complete,it is important first to
inanumber ofspecies;whether these aretrulythe
ensure that the upper respiratory tract is cleared of
precursors of thecontinuousrespiratory movements
luid,mucus and attached fetalmembrane.This can
of the newborn is debatable. However, if parturi-
be done with the aid of fingers or,preferably,with
tion occurs normally then spontaneousrespiratory
a simplesuction device.Elevation of therear of the
movements will occur within 6O seconds ofexpul-
calf,particularlyby suspensionfrom thehindlimbs,
sion;if there is a delay then respiratory movements
results in theescapeof copious quantities offluid.
can sometimes occur before the offspring has been
Some of this comes from the stomach and it may
completely expelled.
notnecessarilybebeneficial sinceithasbeenshown
187
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
that one-third of this fluid can be absorbed from
Table 6.1 Equipment for resuscitation of foals(from
the lungs of the newborn via the lymphatic system
McGladdery2001)
（Hlumphreys et al 1967）.In addition, pressure on
the diaphragm by the abdominal viscera can itself
Endotracheal tubes7-12mm diameter
interfere with normal respiratory movements. Brisk
Oxygencylinder andregulator
rubbing of the chest with straw or towels frequently
Resuscitator bag
provides the necessary tactile stimulus to stimu-
Doxapram
late respiration,while a portable oxygen cylinder
andresuiscitatorareusefulpiecesofequipment to
Adrenaline(epinephrine)
have available. They comprise a small portable cyl-
Sociumbicarbonate4.2%
inder ofoxygen,a reducingvalvearebreathing bag
Dextrose saline5%
andeitherafacemaskoran intranasalorendotra-
Valium
cheal tube; thelatter is preferable since,unless the
Dexamethasone phosphate
oesophagusisoccludedby pinching,the abomasum
willalsobeinflated.ifspontaneousrespirationdoes
Lidocaine
not commence then it is necessary to provide posi-
Intravenous catheters
tive pressure ventilation.This should be donewith
Drip sets
the calf in sternal recumbency;theperson involved
Enteral feeding tubes
blowsintothetubeand compressesarebreathing
Needles,syringes,bloodcollection tubes
bagattachedtoan oxygensource oraresuscita-
tor such as the Richie. Respiratory stimulants such
Glucose meter
as coramine and adrenaline (epinephrine) are not
particularly useful;however,a mixture of solutions
ofcrotetamideandcorpropamideplacedon the
4.0±2.2minutes,whereasfollowingtraction itwas
tonguecanstimulaterespiratoryactivityinsome
9.0±3.3 minutes;a time longer than 15 minutes
cases. Over-enthusiastic compression of the chest
wasfound tohaveahighpredictivevaluefordeath
cansometimescauseinjury to theribs and thetho-
ofthecalf(Schuijt&Taverne1994).Thepresenceof
racicorgans.Equipment suitableforresuscitation of
goodmuscletoneandapedalreflexareindicators
foals,which should be availablewherever there are
ofawell-oxygenatedcalfwith fairly normal acid-
parturient mares, islisted inTable 6.1.
base status.The presence of scleral and conjunctival
In most cases,if resuscitation does not result
haemorrhagesisindicativeofhypoxiaand acido-
in spontaneousrespirationin2or3minutesitis
sis and carries a poor prognosis;similar lesions are
unlikelythatthenewbornwillsurvive,even though
present extensively at necropsy in calves that die at
there is a good strongpulse and heart beat.
birth(Grove-White2000)
A calfrequiringresuscitationislikelytobesuffer-
ingfromboth ametabolic(lowplasmabicarbon-
Acidosis
ate concentration)and a respiratory (high Pco)
The fetus at the time ofa normal birth will usu-
acidosis. The Pco, will he reduced with improved
ally have a mild metabolic and respiratory acido-
alveolar gas exchange and tissue perfusion;however,
sis;in thecase oftheformer,this is correctedwithin
themetabolicacidosismaybetreatedwithsodium
afewhours,whereas the latter may last up to48
bicarbonate(Grove-White 200o). The origin of the
hours (Szcenci 1985). Dystocia is likely to cause a
metabolicacidosis isdueprimarilytotheproduc
severe respiratory andmetabolicacidosis.Severe
tion oflactic acid by tissues.When sodium bicar
acidosis will have an adverse effect on both respi-
bonate isused toneutralize the acidCOand HO
ratory and cardiacfunction and,in the case of the
are produced;the former will exacerbate anyrespi-
calf,will reducevigour andthesuckreflex,resulting
ratory acidosis. Thus it is important that the calf is
inreduced colostrum intake and impaired passive
breathing normally so that it can expire this addi-
immunity (Grove-White 2000). One of the sim-
tional CO,
plestmethods ofassessingthedegreeofacidosis is
Preferably,
treatmentofametabolicacido-
todetermine the time tothecalfassuming sternal
sis should be carried out after its degree has been
recumbency.Following a normal calving this was
assessed followingblood gas analysis or theuse of
188
Chapter
[61
Parturition and the care of parturient animals,including the newborn
the Harleco apparatus.However,under field condi-
thepigthecoatprovides littleprotection.Heat loss
tionsthis is seldompossible,inwhichcaseihedose
is greatest in smallerindividuals because they have a
ratecanbecomputed.Grove-White(200o)recom-
greater surface area per unit of body weight.
mends that,for anewborncalfwhosehistory and
Thermoregulationinthenewborncanbeimproved
clinical signs suggest that it is acidotic, sodium
ina numberofways:
bicarbonate at a dose rate of 1-2immol/kg as a bolus
·Ensure that thereis adequate food intake
intravenous injectionof50-100ml（35gin400ml
Arrangeforbirth tooccur in atleasta thermally
oflukewarmwater)canbeusedquitesafely
neutralenvironmentandinthosespecieswhere
thermoregulation is delayed this environment
Injuries atparturition
should be maintained. The newborn puppy
should beplaced in an environmental tempera
Manipulative obsteiricalprocedures,particularly
traction(see Ch.12),can result in injury o the new
tureof30-33°Cforthefirst24hours,which can
be reduced to26-30°Cby 3 days.Puppies born at
born. In a study involving the postmortem exami-
a norinal room teinperature of18-22Ccan suf-
nationof327calves that died duringtheperinatal
ferafall inrectal temperature of5°C
period(within 48hours of birth),13.2%had frac-
Reduce heat loss by ensuring that the coat is ade-
turedribs,4.3%diaphragmatic tears and2.8%frac-
tureofthe spinein thethoracolumbarregion(Mee
quatelyand quicklydried.Apropernestarea
1993).
shouldbeprovidedwithgoodinsulationandsup-
plementary heating in polytocous species, which
will also encourage the huddling together of the
Thermoregulation
litter, thus reducing the overall surface area. In
In the period immediately following birth,the new-
the caseof lambs,simple plasticjackets can be an
effective way of reducing heat loss.
bornhiastoadjusttoanenvironmentthetemper-
ature ofwhichmay fluctuatewidely and isalso
usuallybelowthat ofthe uterus.
Umbilicus
Following birth,thebody temperature of thenew-
bornfalls quicklyfrom that ofthe dam before it
At birth the umbilicus usually ruptures passively
eventuallyrecovers;the degreeofdecline and speed
or,in some species,such as the dog,the dambits
ofrecoveryvaryfrom speciesto speciesandwith
through the structure;there arefew indications for
the environmental temperature.In thefoaland calf,
ligationPremature severance,especiallyin theoal
the fall is transient;in the lamb recovery occurs
should beprevented,sinceit has been shown that
within a few hours; the piglet tales up to 24 hours
in thefoalthepulsecanpersistforup to9minutes
or even longer incold conditions;whileinihe kitten
afterexpulsion,therebyensuringan adequateblood
andpuppy theperiodbeforethetemperaturerecovers
volume(Rossdale1967).
to approximately that of birth is 7-9 days.
Provided that birth occurs ina clean environment
In the newborn,thermoregulation is controlled
with adequatehygiene it should not benecessary to
in two ways.First, the metabolic rate is increased
handle the umbilicus.However,if there is an out-
break of'navel ill' itmay benecessary to introduce
tothree times the fetalrate soon afterbirth.The
increasedrate is dependent upon adequate substrate
some prophylactic measures.The navel should be
and, since glycogen and adipose issue reserves are
carefully leansedwith an antiseptic solution,dried
and treated with an antibiotic spray or dressing.
lowinthenewborn,itisveryimportant thatimme-
diate and adequate foodis available.However,the
metabolicratecan increase only to a certain level,
Nutritional deficienciesand
knownas summitmetabolism;if this isinsufficient
infectious agents
tomaintain body temperature thenhypothermia
occurs(Alexander 1970).The second method of
Ina studyinvolvingtheperinataldeathof22calves
thermoregulation is to reduceheat loss.The new
born after an unassisted calving,there was some
born haslittlesubcutaneous fat and hence insula-
evidencethat deficiencies of selenium,iodine and
tion is poor.The body surface iswet and thus heat
other trace elementswere involved (Mee 1991).
is lost due to evaporation,whilein species such as
Whenthereisahighneonatalmortalityrateinthe
189
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
absenceofdystocia,thepossibilityofsuchdeficien-
Bosc MJDelouisC,TerquiM1977In:Managementf
cies shouldbeinvestigated,aswellasthepossibility
reproductioninsheepandgoats.UniversityofWisconsin,
of the presence of infectious agentssince thesemay
Madison,WLp89
BostediH.Rudolf PR1983Theriogenology20:191
causenotonlypregnancy failurebut also stillbirth
Breeveld-DwarkasingVNA,StruijkPC,EijskootFetal 2002
and weakly offspring (see Chs 23, 25-28).
Theriogenology 57:1989
BreeveldDwarkasingVNA,ruijkPC,lotgeringFKl
Protection from an excitable or
2003a BiolReprod 68:536
Breeveld-DwarkasingVNA,deBoer-BrouwerM,leKoppele
vicious dam
JMetal2003bBiolReprod69:1600
Britton W1972 In:Proceedings of the 18th Annual
Occasionallythedamwillattackorsavagethienew
Convention ofthe American Association of Equine
born, in which case it may be necessary to provide
Practitioners,p 116
somephysicalprotectionandresort to theuseof
Brooks AN,Challis JRG 1988 J Endocrinol 119:389
tranquillizer drug.
Burbach JPI1,Young LI,Russell jA 2006In:Neill JD(ed)
Knobil andNeills physiology of reproduction,3dd.
ElsevierAcademic Press,London,vol 2,ch58
References
Burton Ml,Dziuk HE,Faluinig ML,Zemjanis R 1987Am]
VetRes48:37
CahillLP,KneeBW,LawsonRAS1976Theriogenology5:289
Abusineina MEA 19G3Thesis,University of London
Card CE,HillmanRB1993 In:McKinnonAO,Voss]L [ed)
AdamsWM1969|AmVetMedAssoc154:261
Equinereproduction.Lea &FebigerPhiladelphia
Alexander G1970 In:Phillipson AT (ed)Physiology of
digestion andmetabolism in the ruminant.Oriel,
Challis JRG,Lye S]1994 In:Knobil E,NeillID (ed) The
Newcastle, p 1199
physiologyofreproduction,2nd edn.Raven Press,New
AllenWE.ChardT,ForslingML1973Endocrinol57:175
York,p1018
Alm CC,Sullivan IIFirst NL19751Reprod Fertil 23:637
Chantaraprateep P,Lohachit C,Poomsuwan P,Kunavongkri
Alonso-Spilsbury M,Mota-RojasD,Martinez-Burnes etal
A1986AustVet]63:254
2004Anim Reprod Sci 84:157
ChardT,Boyd NRH,ForslingMLetal1970JEndocrinol
Antolovich GA,McMillen1O.Perry RA1988In:Jones CI
48:223
(ed) Research in perinatal medicine.Perinatal Press,
Chavatle-Palmer P,Arnaud C,Duvaux-Ponter Cetal 2002
New Yotk,p243
Theriogenology58:837
Aoki M,Kimura K,Suzuki O2005Anim Reprod Sci 86:1
ChemickV,Faridy EE,Pagtakhan RD 1969 ProcAmer Soc
Ash RW,Fleap RB1973IAgr Sci 81:383
Exp Biol Med28:439
Aurich JE,Besognet B,Daels PF 1996 Theriogenology 46:387
CollinsKardebeck H,SommerH1980BerlMinch
Baan M,TaverneMAM,Kooistra HS et al 2006
Tierarztl Wschr 93:310
Theriogenology 63:1958
ComlineRS,Silver M1971 ) Physiol (Lond)216:659
BaanM,TaverneMAM,deGieretal2008Theriogenology
Concannon PW,Hansel W,VisekWj1975Biol Reprod13:112
69:399
ConcannonPW,PowersME,HolderW,HanselW1977Biol
Bailey LFLennan HW,McLean DM etal1973Aust Vet J49:
Reprod16:517
567
Concannon PW,McCann JPTempleM 1989|Reprod Fertil
Ballarini G,Belluzi G,Brisighella Cetal19S0Tierarztl
Suppl39:3
Umschau35:504
CsapoAI 1977 In:Knight 1, O'ConnorM (ed）The fetus and
Barnes RI,NathanielszPW,RossdalePD etal1975JReprod
birth.CibaFoundationSymposium 47.Elsevier/North
Fertil Suppl 23:617
Holland,Amsterdam,p159
BathgateRAD,HsuehAIW,Sherwood OD2006In:NeillID
CsapoAI,Takeda H,WoodC1963AmIObstet Gynecol
(ed)Knobil andNeill's physiology of reproduction,3rd
85:813
ed.Elsevier Academic Press,London,vol 1, p 679
Cudd TA,LeBlanc M,Silver Metal 1995 Endocrinol
Beal WE,Graves NW,Dunn TG,Kaltenbach CC 1976JAnim
144:271
Sci42:1564
CurrieWB,Thorburn GD 1973Prostaglandins4:201
BergstrmA,FranssonB,LagerstedtAS.OlssonK2006]
CurrieWB,Thorburn GD 1977In:Knight,O'Connor M
Small Anim Pract 47:456
(ed) Thefetus andbirth.Ciba Foundation Symposium 47.
Bichard M,StorkMC,RikatsonS,PeseAHR 1976ProcBrSoc
Elsevier/North Holland.Amsterdam.p49
Anim Prod,March
Davies Morel MCG,Nevcombe IR,olland SI 2002Anim
Bjorkman N,Sollen P 1960 Acta Vet Scand 1:347
Reprod Sci 74:175
Boland MP,Craig1.KelleherDL1979IrishVetJ33:45
Dawes GS1968Fetal andneonatal physiology.YearBook,
Bonte P,Coryn M,VandeplasscheM1981 In:Proceedings of
Chicago
theInternational PigVeterinary Society Congress
Day AM1977NZVet J25:136
BoscM]1972JReprodFertil28:347
190
Chapter
161
Parturition and the care of parturient animals, including the newborn
Day AM1978NZVet 127:22
Hann VKM,Lu F Bassett N 1992Endocrinology 131:3100
Devaskar UP,DevaskarS,Voina Set al 1981 Nature
Hendricks DM,Dawlings NC,Ellicott ARetal 1977 I Anim
290:404
Sci 44:438
Dial CD,Almond CW,Hilley HD etal 1987Am IVet Res
Hillman RB1975IReprod Fertil Suppl 23:641
48:966
Hindson JC,SchofieldBM1969JReprod Feril 18:355
Diehl IR,Godke RA,Killian DB,Day BN 1974 J Anim Sci
Hindson 1C,Schofield B,Turmer CB 1965] Physiol 195:19
38:1229
Hindson JC,Schaficld BM,Turmer CB19681 Physiol (Lond)
Dobson H 1988 Oxford RevReprod Biol 10:491
195:19
Dziuk Pl. Harmon BG 1969 Am J Vet Sci 30:419
Holyoake PK,Dial GD,TriggT,KingVL 1995 」Anim Sci
Edwards SA 1979 | Agr Sci Camh 93:359
73:3543
Einarsson S,Fischier M, Karlberg K 1981 Nord Vet Med
Hooper SB1995 Reprod Fertil Dev 7:527
33:354
Huniphreys PW,Normand ICSReynolds EOR,Strang B
Ellendorff F, laverne M,Elsaesser F et al 1979 Anim Reprod
1967 / Physiol (1ond) 193:1
Sci2:323
Hydbring E,Madej A,MacDonald Eet al 1999 I Endocrinol
ElmoreRG,MartinCE,Riley JLLitledyleT19791AmVet
160:75
Med Assoc 174:620
Irving C, lones DE, Knifton A 1972 Res Vet Sci 13:301
Ewbank R 19G3Vet Rec75:367
Iones IET 1966 Br Vet I 122 47: 420
Fieni F,Marnet PG,Martal ct al 2001 J Reprod Fertil Suppl
Ionker FHI,van derWeijden GC,Taverne MAM 19y1 Vet Rec
57:237
129:423
First NL 1979 I Anim Sci 48: 1407
Jonker FH, van Geijn HP, ChanWW et al 1996 Am IVet Res
First NL,Alm CC 1977 I Anim Sci44: 1072
57:1373
Fitzpatrick Rj 1961 Oxytocin.Proceedings of an International
lost A,Dupouy JPMonchamp A1966 CRHebd Seances
Synposium. Pergamon, Oxford
Acad Sei Paris D 262: 147
Fizpatrick R| 1977 Ann Rech Vet 8:438
Jotsch O, Flach D, Finger KH 1981 Tierarzil Umschau 36: 118
Fiizpatrick R, Dobson H 1979 Anim Reprod Sci 2: 209
Keelan JA,Blumenstein M,Helliwell RIA etal 2003Placenta
Fitzgerald 1A,Jacobson MQ1992 Proc1CAR,The Hague
24:Suppl A,Trophoblast Research 17: S33
4:2051
KellyRW 2002 J Reprod 1mmunol 57:217
Flint APF Kingston E), Robinson Js, Thorburn GD 1978]
Kendrick JW,Kennedy PC, Stormont C 1957 Cornell Vet 47:1601
Endocrinol 78:367
Kertiles LP, Anderson LL 1979 Biol Reprod 21: 57
Ford MM,Young IR,Caddy D), Thorburn GD 1998 Biol
KindahlH,AlonsoR,CortN,EinarssnS1982ZVetMed
Reprod 58: 1065
29:504
ForslingML,MacDonald AA,Ellendoiff F 1979a Anim
Kirlwood RN,Thacker PA 1995Anim Sci 60:481
Reprod Sci 2:3
KlarenbeekA,OkkensAC,MolJAetal 2007Theriogenology
Forsling ML,Taverne MAM,Parvizi N et al 1979bJ
68:1169
Endocrinol 82:61
Konigsson K, Kask K. Gusiafsson H et al 2001 Acta Vet Scand
Fowden Al.1995 Reprod Fertil Dev 7: 351
42:151
Fowden AL,ForheadAl, Ousey JC2008 Exp Clin Endocrinol,
Kordts E,Jochle W1975Theriogenology 3:171
116:392
Kovenicl,AvakumovicDI 1978 In:Proceedings of the5th
Fuchs A-R,Helmer H,Behrens O et al 1992 Biol Reprod
47:937
KumarasamyV,Mitchell MD,Bloomfield FH et al 2005Am
Gazal OS,Li Y,Schwabe C,Anderson LL 1993 J Reprod Fertil
Physiol Regul Integr Cotnp Physiol 288:R67
97:233
Lawrence AB,Petherick JC,McLean Ket al 1992 Physiol
George JM 1969 1Agr Sei Camb 73:295
Behav52:917
Gibb W,Leye St,Challis IRG 2006 Parturition.In:Neill 1D
Ledger WL,Websier M,Harrison CPetal 1985Am 1 Obstet
(ed) Knobil and Neill's physiology of reproduction,
Gynecol 151:397
3rd ed.Elsevier Academic Press,London,vol 2.ch55
Lecnhouwers JI,van der LendeT,Knol EF I999Livestock
Gilbert CL 2001 Reprod Suppl 58:263
Prod Sci 57: 243
Gilbert CL,Go0de IA,McGrath TI 1994 1 Physiol 475:129
Leman AD, Hurtgen JP Hilley HD 1979 I Anim Sci49: 221
GilletteDD,Holm L1963Am J 1hysiol204:115
Ley WB. Hoffman JL Crisman MV et al 1989 J Equine Vet Sci
GlatzTHI,Weitzman RE,Eliot R] et al 1981 Endocrinology
566
108:1328
Lickliter RE 1984 Appl Anin Behav Sci 13: 335
Gleeson DE, O'Brien B,Mee JF 2007 Irish Vet I 60: 667
Liggins GC 1976 Seminars Perin 2: 261
Glickman JA,Challis JRG 1980 Endocrinology 106:1371
Liggins CC 1982 In:Austin CR, Short RV (ed) Reproduction
Grove-WhiteDH20001nPraclice22:17
in mammals 2. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
Grunert E 1984 In: Proceedings of the 10th International
p126-141
Conference on Animal Reproduction and Artificial
Liggins GC, Kitterman JA, Forster CS 1979 Anim Reprod Sci
Insemination 9:17
2:193
Gunnik JW1984Vet Q6:49
Lindell GO 1981 ThesisSwedish University ofAgricultural
Guthrie HD 1995 I Reprod Fertil Suppl 3: 229
Sciences, LUlppsala
191
Part
21
Pregnancy andparturition
Lundin-Schiller S,Kreider DL,RorieRWetal 1996Biol
RacVE.SmallC,SconCAetal2006Am I Obstet Gynecol
Reprod55:575
195:528
McDonald LE,McNutt SH,NicholsLE 1953Am JVet Res
Randall GCB1 Ve1 Rec 84:178
14:539
Randall GCB1983Bio Reprod29:1077
MeGladdery A2001 In Pract 74
Randall GCB1990 Vet Rec126:61
McGlothlin JO,Lester GD,Hansen PIet al 2004
Randall GCB,Penny RHC 1970 BrVetI126:593
Reproduction 127:57
Randall GCB,TaverneMAM,Challis JRGet al 1986Anim
MackenzieLW,WordRA,CaseyML,Stull T1990Am
Reprod Sci 11:283
Physiol258:92
Randall GCB,KendallZ,TsangBK,TaverneMAM 1990
Mansell PD,CameronAR,Taylor DP,Malmo]2006Aust Vet
Anim Reprod Sci 23:109
184:312
Reynolds EOR.StrangLB 1966 BrMed Bull22:79
Maule WalkerFM1983ResVetSci34:280
Rigby S,Love C,Carpenter K etal 1998Theriogenology50:
MeeIF1991IrishVet|44:80
897
MeeIF1993Vet Rec133:555
Roberison FIA.King GI,Elliot JI 1974 Can  CompMed
Meniscier EFoulley JL1979In:HoffmanB,MasonIC,
42:32
Schmidt I (ed) Calving problems and earlyviabiliy of the
Roche PI,Crawford Ri,Tregear GW1993Mol Cell
calfMartinus Nijhoff,The Hague,p 30
Endocrinol 91:21
Mota-Rojas D,Martinez-Burnes J,Trujillo-Ortega ME etal
Romagnoli S,de Souza FRotaA,Vannozi12004ISmall
2002Am JVet Res 63:1571
Anin Pract 45:249
MurrayRD,NutterWT,WilmanS,HarkerDB1982VetRec
RossdalePD1967BrVet|123:470
111:363
Rossdale PD,Jeffcoat LB 1975Vet Rec97:371
MusahAI,SchwabeC,Willham RL,Anderson LL 1986
RossdalePD,SilverM1982|ReprodFertilSuppl32:507
Endocrinology 118:1476
RossdalePD,JeffcoatLB,Allen WR1976VetRec99:26
MusahAl,Schwabe CWillham Rl,AndersonLL1987 Biol
Schams D,Prokopp S 1979 Anim Reprod Sci 2: 267
Reprod37:797
Schmidt R 1937CitedbyTaverneMAM1979Thesis,
Naaktgeboren C,Taverne MA,van derWeijden GC2002 De
University of Lltrecht
gehoortebij dehond[Parturition in the dog].Strengholt's
Schmidt PM,Chakraborty PK,WildtDE1983 Biol Reprod
Publishers,Naarden,Netherlands
28:657
NakaoT2001ArchAnim Breeding 44:145
Schuij G,Taverne MAM1994Vet Rec135:111
Ngiam TT 1977SingaporeVet J 1:13
SevingaM,Barkema HWSuyhn 1,Hesselink JW2004
O'Day-Bowman MB,Winn Rl,Dzuik Plel al 199]
Theriogenology 61:851
Endocrinology1291967
SherwoodOD,NaraBS,WelkFAetal 19si Biol Reprod
OFarrellKJ 1979 In:Hoffman B,Mason IC,SchmidtJ(ed）
25:65
Calvingproblems and early viability of the calf.Martinus
SilverM1988IReprod Feril 82:457
NijhoffThe Hague35
Silver M1990 Exp Physiol 75:285
O'FarrellKJ,Crowley JP 1974Vet Rec 94:364
SilverM1992Anim Reprod Sci28:441
OlssonK,BergstromA,Kindahl H,LagerstedtAS2003Acta
Silver M,Barnes Rl,Comline R5 et al 1979 Anim Reprod Sei
Physiol Scand 179:281
2:305
OminiVFolcoGC,PasargillianR,FanoM,Berti F1979
Sovjansli B,MilosovljevicS,MiljkovicVetal1972ActaVet
Prostaglandins 17:113
Belgrade 22:77
Ousey JC2004 Reprod Domest Anim39:222
SprecherDj,LemanAD,DzuikP etal 1974 AmVet Med
Ousey IC,Dudan F,Rossdale PD 1984Equine Vet| 16:264
Assoc165:698
Owens JL,EdeyTN,Bindon BM,PiperLN1984Appl Anim
StevenDH1982JReprod Fertil Suppl 31:579
Biol Sci 13:32
StewariDR,StabenfeldtGH1985Biol Reprod32:848
Parkinson T1 1993 In Pract:135
StewartDR,AddiegoLA,PascoeDReLal 1992Biol Reprod
Pashen RL 1980 EquineVet12:85
46:648
Pashen RL.Allen WR 1979Anim Reprod Sci 2:271
Stryker JLDziuk P|1975|AnimSci40:282
Patterson D,Bellows R,Burfening P1987heriogenology
Szcenci O 1985Acta Vet Hung 33:205
28:557
Taverne MAM 1982 In:ColeDJA,Foxcroft CR(ed) Contol
Pejsak S,Tereszczuk S1981 In:Proceedings of the
of pigreproduction.Butterworths,London,p419
Intermational PigVeterinarySocietyCongress
TaverneMAM,vanderWeyden GC,FontijnePetal1977Am
PenningPD,Gibb MJ1977Vet Rec100:491
VetRes38:1761
Perry JS1954VetRec66:706
TaverneMAM,NaaktgeborenC,Elsaesser Fet al 1979a Biol
Porter DG 1975 In:Finn CA (ed） The uterus.Elek,London,
Reprod21:1125
p133
TavermeMAM,Naaktgeboren C,van derWeyden GC1979b
Purvis AD 1972In:Proceedings of the18thAnnual
Anim Reprod Sci 2:117
Convention of the American Associationof Equine
TaverneMAM,van derWeijdenGC,FontijneP 1979cCurr
Practitioners,p 113
TopVetMed AnimSci4:297
192
Chapter
6]
Parturition and the care ofparturient animals,including the newbom
TaverneMAM,BeversM,Bradshaw IMCet al 1982 JReprod
Wathes DC, Smith HFLeung ST 1996J Reprod Fertil 106:23
Fertil65:85
Welch RAS,Newling P,Anderson D 1973 NZ Vet J 21: 103
TaverneMAM,BreeveldDwarkasingVNA,vanDissel
Welch RAS,Crawford JE,Duganzich DM 1977NZ Vet]
Emiliani FMF et al 2002DomesticAnimal Endocrinclogy
25:111
23:329
WhitleWL,HollowayAC,LyeS]etal2000 Endocrinology
Toombs RE,Wikse SE,Kasari TR 1994 Vet Clin North Am
141:3783
Food Anim Pract 10: 137
Widowski TM,Curtis SE,Dzuik PI et al 1990 Biol Repred 43:
Van der Weijden GC,Taverne MAM,OkkensAC,Fontijn P
290
1981ISmall Anim Pract 22:503
WillemseAH.TaverneMAMRoppe LJA,AdamsWM1979
Van der Weyden GC,TaverneMAM,Dieleman S] et al 1989 ]
Vet Q1:145
Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:211
Williarms WFMargolisMJ,Manspeaker JE et al 1987
Van DijkAJ,Van Rens BTTM,Van der LendeT,TaverneMAM
Theriogenology 28: 213
2005Theriogenology 64:1573
Wilson ME,Edgerton LA,Cromwell CL,StahlyTS 1979
Van DijkAl,Van der LendeT,TavermeMAM 2006
Anim Sci49(suppl 1):24
Theriogenology 66:1824
Winn RI O'Day-Bowman MB,Sherwood OD 1993
Van Engelen E, Taverne MAM.Everts ME et al 2007
Endocrinology 133: 121
Theriogenology 67: 1158
WoickeJ.Schoon HA,HeuwieserWet al 1986|Vet Med A
Van Rensburg SJ 1967J Endocrinol 38:83
33:660
Van Werven T, Schuleken YH, Lloyd  et al 1992
Wood CE 1999 J Reprod Fertil Suppl 54: 115
Theriogenology 37: 1191
YarneyTA.Rahnefield GW,Kon G 1979 Rep Can Soc Anim
Verhage HIG, Beamer NB, Breer RM 1976 Biol Reprod
Sci Alberta,836
14:570
Young IM,Harvey MJA 1984Vet Rec 115:539
VivretteSLKinfdahl HMunroC]etal2000Rerod Feril
Zarro E,Mandarino P, Kennen DL 1990 Rev Suinicolt 31: 97
119:347
Zerobin K 1981 In:Proceedings of the International Pig
WagnerWC,Willham RL,EvansLl 1971 ProcAmSocAnim
Veterinary Society Congress
Sci 33:1164
Zerobin K. Sporri H 1972 Adv Vet Sci Comp Sci 16:303
Wallace 1.R 1949 Proc 9th Ann Conf NZ Soc Anim Prod 85
Zerobin K JochleW,Steingruber CH 1973 Prostaglandins
Ward WR 1968PhD Thesis, University of Liverpool
4:891
Wathes DC,King GI,Porter DG,Wathes CM I989 J Reprod
Fertil s7:383
193
17
Chapter
David Noakes
The puerperium
Thepuerperium is that period after thecompletion
Cattle
of parturition,including the third stageof labour,
when the genital system isreturning to itsnormal
non-pregnant state. In the polyoestrous species (the
Although the stimulus for the changes that occur dur-
cow,mare and sow)it is important that thepuer-
ingthepuerperiumisprimarilyduetotheremoval
perium should be normal,since i is thepractice
of the fetus,hormones such as oxytocin and prosta
under most systems of husbandry to breed from
glandin PG)F,are also probably involved. In the
individualsofthesespecies fairlysoonaftertheyhave
caseof thelatter,however,thereis an increase after
given birth.Thus any extension of the puerperium
theend ofparturition,in which peakvalues occur
mayhave a detrimentaleffect on thereproductive
3 days post-partum and do not return to basal lev-
performance of the individual animal concerned.
els until 15 days post-partum (Edquist et al 1978,
The genital system does not completely return
1980).The puerperium has been studied in detail by
to the original pregravid state since, particularly
Rasbech（1950),Gier&Marion（1968)andMorrow
after the first gestation, certain changes are not
etal (1969).
completely reversible. Most notable is the size of
the cervix and uterus,neither ofwhich ever return
Involution
to their pre-pregnant dimensions.
There arefour main areasof activity:
Thereductioninthesizeofthegenital tract iscalled
·The tubular genital tract, especially the uterus
involution:it occurs inadecreasinglogarithmic
is shrinking and atrophying as a result of tissue
scale,the greatesi change occurring during the first
loss,thus reversing the hypertrophy that occurs in
few daysaftercalving.Uterinecontractionscontinue
response to the stimulus of pregnancy.Myometrial
for several days,although decreasing in regular-
contractions,which continue forseveral days after
ity, frequency, amplitude and duration.The atro-
parurition, aid this process and help in the void-
phy of themyofibrils is shown by their reduction in
ing of fluids and tissue debris; this is normally
sizefrom750-400μmonthefirstdaytolessthan
referredto asinvolution
200umover thenextfewdays.
Gier&Marion（1968) found that the diameter
·The structure of the endometrium and deeper lay-
ofthepreviouslygravidhornwashalvedby5days
ers of the uterine wall is restored
and its length halved by 15 days.The results of their
·Thereisaresumption ofnormalovarianfunctionin
studyaresummarized inFigure7.1and showthat,
polyoestrousspecies andareturm tocyclical activity
after the initial rapidphaseofinvolution,thesubse
·Bacterial contamination of theuterinelumen is
quent changes proceed more slowly. Similar results
eliminated,
have been obtainedusing sequentialtransrectal
194
Chapter
71
The puerperium
There issome dispute about when uterineinvolu-
lion is complete;the differences are probabiy only
subjective. In six studies reported in dairy caitle
ihe time taken for complete involution ranged from
26.0-52.0 days, while in three studies in beef cattle
300
it was 37.7-56.0 days. The changes after 20-25 days
are generally almost imperceptible.
The cervix constricts rapidly post-partum; within
右
:1
10-12 hours of a normal calving it becomes almost
1006
impossible to inserta hand through it into theuterus
and by 96 hours it will admit just two fingers. The
cervix also undergoes atrophy and shrinkage due to
5
1015202530 35 40 45
the eliinination of fluid and the reduction in col-
Day post-partum
lagen and smooth muscle.Gier& Marion (1968)
Fig. 7.1 Gross changes in the uterus of the cow during the
found that the mean external diameter was 15cm
puerperium.(Data from Gier & Marion 1958).
at 2 days posi-partum, 9-11 cm at 10 days,7-8cm at
30 days and 5-6cm at 60 days.A useful guide that
ultrasonography (Fig.7.2).Others (Morrow et al
involution is occurring normally is to compare the
1969)recorded a reduction intherate ofinvolution
diameter of the previously gravid horn with that of
between 4 and 9 days posi-partum, with a period of
the cervix, since at about 25 days post-partum the
accelerated changefrom days 10-14 and a gradual
latter starts to exceed theformer.
decrease thereafter;however this may have been an
Prostaglandins may have a role in controlling
artefact.Associated with this phase of rapid involl1-
uterine involution, although the postpartum rise in
tion is uterine discharge. The whole of the uterus is
the metabolite of PGF, (PGFM) may be a reflection
of the process of involution rather than the cause.
Eley et al (1981) have shown a posilive correlation
The speed of involution of the non-gravid horn is
beiween PGFM concenirations in the peripheral
more variable than that of the previously gravid
circulation and the diameter of theuterinehorn.
horn, which depends upon its degree of involve-
Using exogenous PGF, twice daily for 10 days start-
ment in placentation.
ing from 3 days post-partum, uterine involution has
been acceleratedby 6-13 days;however,thenumber
of animals was small and the frequency and dura-
tion of the treatment regimen were very atypical of
-Previouslygravid
Previously non-gravid
the normal situation(Kindahl etal 1982).Since the
increase in the uterine mass during pregnancy is due
to a combination of increases in both collagen and
smooth muscle, then involution must be associ-
品
ated withareduction of these tissues.This hasbeen
10
shown very clearly in the study of Kaidiet al (1991)
in relation to collagen degradation,but in relation
to the loss of smooth musclethe resultswere equiv-
ocal (Tian & Noakes 1991a).The studies of the lat-
ter authors also showed that exogenoushormones
such as oestrogens, PGF,, and long-acting oxytocin
analogues do notinfluence the rate of involution
10
20
30
40
(Tian & Noakes 1991b).
Day post-partum
Fig. 7.2 Changes in the diameters of the previously gravid
Restoration of the endometrium
and non-gravid horns of postpartum cows as determined by
B-mode real-time transrectal ultrasonography.(Courtesy of
Although placentation in the cow is considered to
Professor l.M.Sheldcn.)
beof anon-deciduous type it is well recognized that
195
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
duringthefirst 7-10 days after calving there isusu-
After the shedding of the allantochorion,the
allya noticeablelossoffluidand tissue debris.This·caruncleis abqut7O mmlong.35mmwideand
is sometimesreferred toby theherdsperson as the
25mm thick.The endometrial crypts frequently
'second cleansing’or'secundus.Inhumangynaecol-
contain remnanis of the chorionic villi,which
ogy thepostpartum vaginal dischargeis referred to
weredetachedfromtherestoftheallantocho-
aslochia.Thepresence of such a discharge in cows
rion at the time of placental separation.Within
isnormal,although sometimes individuals will
thefirst 48 hours post-partum,there is evidence
mistakeitforan abnormaldischargeduetouterine
ofearlynecroticchangesintheseptalmassofthe
infection andrequesttreatment.
caruncle;the caruncular blood vessels become
The lochial discharge is usually yellowish brown
rapidly constrictedand are nearly occluded.At
orreddishbrown incolour;thevolumevoidedvar-
5days the necrosis has proceeded rapidly,so
iesgreatlyfrom individual toindividual.Pluriparae
hatthestratumcompactumisnowcoveredbya
canvoiduptoatotalof2000ml,althoughitismore
leukocyte-laden necrotic layer. Some of this
usually about 1o00ml.In primiparae it is rarely
necroticmaterial startsto slough andcontributes
imorethan5o0mlandinsomeanimalsitisocca-
tothelochia.Small bloodvessels,mainlyarteri-
sionally nil, owing to the complete absorption of
oles,then protrude from thesurfaceof thecarun-
the lochia.The greatest flow of lochia occurs dur-
cle, from which there is oozing of blood,causing
ing thefirst 2-3 days: by 8 days it is reduced,and by
a red coloration of the lochia. By 10 days,most
14-18dayspost-partum it hasvirtuallydisappeared.
of thenecroticcarunculartissuehassloughedand
At about9daysitisfrequentlybloodstained,while
undergone some degree ofliquefaction and by
beforeitceasesitbecomeslighter incolour and
15 days post-partum sloughing is complete,leav-
almost‘lymph-like.Normal lochialdischargedoes
ing only stubs of blood vessels protruding from
not have an unpleasant odour.
the exposed stratum compactum.This eventually
Thelochia arederivedfrom theremains offetal
becomes smoothby19days,as a resultof thedis-
fluids, blood from the ruptured umbilical vessels
appearance of the vessels.A systemic response is
and shreds of fetal membranes,but mainly from
observed,probably due to thetissue damage and
the sloughed surfacesoftheuterine caruncles.The
inflammation associated with the degenerative
slough occurs following degenerative changes and
changes describedabove,asshown by ariseinthe
necrosis of the superficiallayers,first described by
peripheral circulation of acute phase proteins pro-
Rasbech (1950).The changes that occur are illus-
duced by the hepatocytes. These increase rapidly
trated diagrammatically inFigure7.3.
after calving,reaching a peak at 1-3 days before
declining to basal levels by 2-4 weeks (Alsemgeest
Seplalmass(early
et al 1993, Sheldon et al 2001). Acute phase pro-
ofseptumis)
teins limit tissue damage and promote tissuie
repair（Baumann&Gauldie1994）.
Stratum compactum
Regeneration of the epithelium of the endo-
-70mm
metriumoccursimmediatelyafterparturitionin
48 HOURS POST-PARTUM
those areas that were not seriously damaged and
iscompletein theintercaruncular areasby8days.
Necrotic septalmass
nowsloughed
Completere-epithelializationofthecaruncle,which
Vascularstubs
islargelyderived fromcentripetalgrowthofcells
from the surrounding uterine glands, is complete
from 25 days onwards, although the stage at which
5DAYSPOST-PARTUM
10-15DAYSPOST-PARTUM
completehealingoccurs isvariable.
Smooth surfaceot
While these changes are taking place the caruncles
are becoming smaller (Fig. 7.3), so that at 40-60
=
days they consist ofsmall protrusions 4-8mm in
15-20mm
10-15mm
19DAYS POST-PARTUM
25+DAYSPOST-PARTUM
diameter and4-6mmhigh.Carunclesofpluriparae
differfrom those of nulliparaeinthat they arelarger
Fig.7.3 The changes that occurin the caruncles of the cow
and havemelaninpigmentation and a morevascu
during the puerperium.(Data from Gier&Marion 1968).
larbase.
196
Chapter
[7]
The puerperium
Return of cyclical activity (ovarian
LH
rebound)
Ovulalion
Except during the last month, anovulatory follicular
O
waves occur periodically during pregnancy, with the
?
emergence of follicles up to a maximum of 6 mm in
diameter. However, because of the prolonged period
of inhibition during pregnancy, due to the continu-
FSH
ous negative-feedback effect of high steroid concen-
trations in late pregnancy (particularly progesterone
secreted by the corpus luteum and placenta),the
Fig.7.4 The changes ir F5Hl,LH (see inset), oestradol (E,)and
pituitary is refractory post-partum, as demonstrated
partum.(After Roche2006.)
by a lack of response, immediately post-calving, to
the administration of gonadotrophin-releasing hor-
mone (GnRH) (Lamming et al 1979). Between days
(Adams 1999).IGF-1 stiniulates follicular gran-
7 and 14 post-partum (over a 3-5-day period),there
ulosa cell aromataseactivity and thus cestradiol
is an increase in follicle-stimulating hormone (FSiI)
synthesis, thus potentiating the positive feedback
concentrations, associated with the emergence of
effect of cestradiol on the preovulatory LHl surge.
thefirst postparium follicular wave.Using transrec-
After ovulation,there is a luteal phase,which may
tal ultrasonography from 6-8 days post-partum, the
be of normal length with a return to oestrus after
first follicular wave can be detected with the first
18-24 days, or it may be much shorier, less than
dominant follicle >9mm in diameter being identi-
14 days; the latter occurred in 25% of dairy and
fied at around 10 days (Savio et al 1990): this tends
in 78% of beef cattle (Adams 1999). These short
to occur earlier in dairy than in beef cows. The conse-
luteal phasesprobably arise because ofpremature
quence of this is that the oestradiol and inhibin pro-
release of PGF arising from the increased oestra-
duced by the follicles suppresses FSH secretion; thus
diol produced from the formation of ihe postovu-
the growing follicles are faced with a decline in FSli.
latory dominant follicle on days 5-8 ofthe cycle
One follicle, usually the largest of the cohort, devel-
(Roche 2006).These shori luteal phases are more
ops increased numbers of luteinizing hormone (LH)
prevalent the earlier the return of normal ovarian
receptors and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1-
activity, i.e. 100% at 0-5 days, 60% at 10-15 days
binding protein proteases, which allow the mainte-
and 10% at 25-30 days post-partum (Terqui et al
nance of high levels of bioactive IGF-1 by degrading
1982).
IGF-binding proteins (Roche 2006). Tlis remain-
Many of the ovulations of the first dominant fol-
ing large follicle continues to grow because of the
licle are not associated with behavioural signs of
local paracrine changes within the follicle,despite
oestrus (so called 'silent heats or suboestrus; see
the reduction in systemicFSHI secretion,which pre-
Ch.22) (Moller 1970,King et al 1976,Kyle et al
ventsother follicleswithin thecohort from develop-
1992).This is because the central nervous system
ing.Thefate ofthis follicle(the dominant follicle)is
requires prior exposure to progesterone to elicit
now dependent on ihe LHI-pulse frequency, since it
behavioural signs; a similar phenomenon occurs in
is mainly LH-responsive (Fig. 7.4). Thus, according
ewes at the beginning of the breeding season (see
toRoche(2006),one of the following will occur: it
Ch.1). Llsing continuous time-lapse video record-
ovulates in 30-S0% of cows; it becomes atretic in
ing of herds, 50%, 94% and 100% of cows were
15-60% of cows;it becomes cysticin 1-5%ofcows
identified in oestrus al the first, second and third
(see Ch.22).
postpartum ovulations (King et al 1976);however,
Whether or not ovulation occurs is dependent
with daily observations the frequencies of detected
on the following: the size of the dominant folli-
oestrus were only 16%, 43% and 57%,respectively.
cle:the LHpulse frequency;the concentration of
Sequential milk progesterone assays have enabled
IGF-1. Follicles less than 1cm rarely ovulate, and
the onset of cyclical activity tobe determined by the
the LH pulse frequency required is about one per
presence ofelevated progesterone concentrations. In
hour. Thus the first ovulation occurs on average at
asurveyof533 dairy cows in four herds(Bulman&
21 days in dairy catle and 31 days in beef catle
Wood 1980), nearly half (47.8%) of the cows had
197
Part
21
Pregnancy and parturition
resumednormalcyclicalovarianactivitywithin20
pregnancy rates (see Ch. 24; Bridges et al 2000,
days of calving and by 40 days this had increased
Sheldon et al 20oo).As will be discussed below, the
10 92.4%. In this study only 4.9% appeared to have
postpartumuiterusin mostcows(>9o%)iscontami-
adelayed returm tocyclicalactivity,ie.had not
nated with a wide range of bacteria; there is good
returned by 50 days post-partum, and 5.1% of the
evidencethat thebacterial load has aninfluence on
cows subsequently ceased normalcyclicalactivity
folliculpgenesis.Sheldon etal（2002)found that
havinginitiallyreturned.A small number,1.9%,
when bacterial growth scoreswere high on day7
had prolonged luteal activity, presumably due to a
and2lpost-partum,fewerfirstorsecond dominant
persistent corpus luteum or luteal cyst (see Ch.22)
follicles were selected in theipsilateral than in the
These ovarian abnormalities depressed fertility,as
contralateral ovary,respectively.Furthermore,the
measured by the calving to conception interval,
diameterofthefirstdominantfolliclewassmaller
whichwas98daysforthosewithadelayedstart to
slower growing and had reduced oestradiol secretion
ovarian activity,102 daysforthosewithpersistent
in cowswith ahighbacterial score onday 7post
lutealfunctionand124daysforthosecowswhere
partum.Sincenoeffectwasseen onFSHsecretion or
there was cessation ofcyclical activity, compared
follicularwaveemergence,itislikelythatthisefft
with 85days fornormalcows(see Ch.22）.Cows
is mediated locally.However,bacterial endotoxins
with either shorter or longer luteal phases than nor-
andintermediarycytokineshavebeenshowntoexert
mal,resulting inshorter or longer cycles and atypi-
an influence at both the hypothalamic and anterior
cal progesterone patterns before the first service,
pituitary level(Peters&Lamming1990;Williams
have longer calving to conception intervals,more
etal 2001).
services per conception and lower first-service preg-
Adrenocorticotrophichormone(ACTH)(Liptrap
nancy rates (Lamming&Darwash 199s) The inci-
&McNally1976)andcorticosteroid administration
denceofprolongedcycleshasincreasedfrom3%in
(da Rosa & Wagner 19s1) suppress the secretion of
themid1980s to11-22% in the late 1990s and early
LHl.Stimulation ofthe teatandmilk removal cause a
2000s(Roche2006)
riseinglucocorticoids(Wagner&Oxenreider 1972,
The uterus also exerts an influence on ovarian
Schams 1976). Suckling, which is known to delay
function,since it has been known for some time
the return of cyclical ovarian activity,may exert its
that themajorityof ovulationspost-partum occurin
effectbymodifyingthetonicreleaseofGnRHand
the ovarycontralateraltothepreviouslygravidhorn
LH by the release of opioid peptides. The role of
(Gier&Marion1968)theeffectbeinglessthelater
prolactinis equivocal for,although bromocriptine
ovulationoccurs.IthasalsobeenshownthatPGFM
treatment during lactation had little ornoeffect on
usually returns to normallevels beforethefirst
LH release in cows, there appears to be a recipro
postpartum ovulation （Thatcher 1986). Similarly.
cal relationship between the hypothalamic control
the ovariouterine axis exerts an inhibitory effect
of LH release and prolactin release. Opioid antago-
onpituitary Ll-Isecretion during the earlypostpar-
nists increase LH and decrease prolactin secretion;
tumperiod;experimentalhysterectomyresultsina
the effectsofthe agonists are thereverse.Themam-
rapid increase in plasma gonadotrophin concentra-
mary gland has also been shown to have an endo-
tions (Schallenberger et al 1982).There is substan-
crinerole（Peters&Lamming1990).
tial evidence of an interaction between the uterus
and ovaries post-partum, as shown by the observa-
Eliminationofbacterial
tion that the ovaryontheside adjacenttotheprevi-
contamination
ouslygravid horn(theipsilateral ovary)isless active
compared with the contralateral ovary(Nation et al
At calving,and immediately post-partum,thevulva
1999).The majority of first dominant follicles(70-
isrelaxed and the cervix is dilated, thus allowing
82%),and thus ovulations,occur in the ovary con-
bacteria to gain entry into the vagina and thereafter
tralateral to thepreviously gravid horn(Nation et
the uterus.Awide rangeofbacteria may be isolated
al 1999),with the effect persisting for 20-30 days
from theuterinelumen;Elliottet al (1968) identi-
post-partum. The conserquence of the difference
fied33different species,thosemostfrequently iso-
in folliculogenesisbetween the two ovaries is that
lated beingArcanobacterium (formerly Actinonyces)
larger follicles on theipsilateralovary are associated
pyogenes,
Escherichia
coli,
streptococci
pue
with better fertility, which is associated
with
staphylococci(Johannsetal1967,Elliottetal1968,
shorter calving-conception intervals and improved
Griffin et al 1974).In these earlier studies,there is
198
Chapter
7
The puerperium
littlereferencetothepresenceof anaerobicbacteria,
post-partum.In all studies,there is a decrease with
eitherbecause anaerobicculturewasnotperforined
tine in the percentage ofuteri from which bacte-
orbecause themethods ofcultureand isolation
ria are isolated.This is exemplified in the study of
were not strict enough.Recent studies(Noakes et al
Ellioteual（1968),inwhich93%ofuteriexam-
1991,Sheldonetal2002,Sheldon&Dobson2004,
inedwithin15 daysof calvingwere contaminated,
Foldi etal 2006)have identified thefrequent pres-
comparedwith78%between16 and30days,50%
ence of Gram-negative anaerobes,which play an
between31and45daysandonly9%between
importantroleinthepathogenesisofmetritis/endo
46and 60 days.Other studies (Griffin etal 1974.
metritis because oftheir synergism with other spe-
Sheldonet al2002),have showna similarveryhigh
cies ofbacteria [Ruderet al 198l, Olson etal 1984).
bacterialcontaminationtate during the first 20-30
Table 7.1 shows the three categories of bacteria iso-
days post-partum, with a subsequent decline so that,
latedfrom theuterus ofpostpartumcows,and their
innormal,healthycows,theuterusshouldbesterile
pathogenicity in relation to uterine disease. The
by6-8weekspost-partuim.
commonestisolatesin this studywere:Escherichia
Blood,cell debris and sloughed caruncular tis
colistreptococciArcanobacteri pyogenes,Bacillus
sueprovideanidealmediumforbacterialgrowth;
licheniformis,Prevotella(formerlyBacteroides)species
however,in mostcasesthebacteria donot colo
andFusobacterium necrophorum(Sheldon etal2002).
nize the uterus to produce a metritis/endometri-
Griffin etal (1974) stressed that theflora fluctuates
tis (see Ch.22).Themain mechanism involved in
as a result of spontaneous conitamination,clear-
the elimination of the bacteria is phagocytosis by
ance andrecontamination duringthefirst 7weeks
migrating leukocytes,the bacteria being ingested
pathogenicity
Bacterial category
1
2
3
Arcanobacterium pyogenes
Acinetobacterspp.
Aerococcusviridans
Prevotelia spp.
Bacilluslicheniformis
Clostridium butyricum
Escherichia coli
Enterococcusfaecalis
Clostridium perfringens
Fusobacteriumnecrophorum
Haemophilus somnus
Corynebacterium spp.
Fusobacteriumnucieatum
Mannheimia haemolytica
Enterobacter aerogenes
Pasteureila multocida
Klebsiellapneumoniae
Peptostreptococcus spp.
Providencia rettgeri
Staphylococcus aureus(coagulase-positive)
Providencia stuarti
Streptococcus uberis
Proteus spp.
Propionibacterium granulosa
Staphylococcus spp.(coagulase-negative)
α-haemolyticstreptococci
Streptococcusacidominimus
Coliforms
Aspergillus spp.
Fungi
Bacteroidesspp.
Aeromonas spp.
Categories:1,recognized uterine pathogens associated with uterine endometrial lesions; 2,poteniial pathogens frequently isolated from tha
bovineuterinelumenand casesofendcmetritisbutnotcommonlyassociatedwithuterinelesions;3,opportunistcontaminants transientlyisolated
from the uterine lumen andnot associated with endometritis.
Data from 5hcldonet al 2002
199
Part
121
Pregnancy and parturition
andthenkilledintracellularlybyenzymes,reactive
that theuterus can also influence the ovary(see
oxygen species,nitric oxide, proteases and phos-
aboveandBridgese1al2000,Sheldonetal2000)
pholipids released by the cytoplasmic granules
as well as Llre ovary influencing the uterus.
(Sheldon 2004）.In addition, the phagocytes also
releaseproinflamimatorycytokines,such astumour
Restorationoftheendometrium
necrosisfactor aandinterleukins,which stimulate
the acute phase protein response.Persistence of
Retained fetal membranes andmetritis inhibit heal-
uterinecontractions（forupto4days),sloughingof
ing,while ovarian rebound to cyclical activity may
caruncular tissue and uterine secretions all assist
have an influence.
in thephysical expulsion ofthebacteria.In addi
tion,theearlyreturntocyclicalactivityisprobably
Returnofcyclicalactivity(ovarianrebound)
important,since the oestrogen-dominated uterus
Factors thatmay cause delayinclude:
is more resistant to infection.However,there is
evidence that in some casesearlyreturn tooestrus
Periparturient abnormalies.A number of authors
may be disadvantageous (Olson et al 1984;and
have shown thata wholerange ofperiparturient
see Ch.22)in that, if the bacteria are not elim-
problemsdelayovarianrebound.
inated at the first oestrus,then the cow enters
Mill yield.Thereismuch contradictory evidence on
the first luteal phase where progesterone is the
the influence ofcurrentmilkyield;some authors
dominant hormone.
havedemonstrated aneffeci of thelactationpre-
ceding calving.ltis frequently difficult todifferen-
Factors influencing thepuerperium
tiatetheinfluence ofnutritionandmilkyield.
Nrition. In both beef suckler and dairy cows,
Uterineinvolution
inadequatefeeding,especially of energy, during
Many of themethodsused tomeasure therateof
thedryperiodand after calvinginhibits ovarian
involution have been largely subjective and thus
rebound.This will usually be shown as poor body
inaccurate;however,with the adventof transrec-
condition score.Ovulationof the dominant folli
tal ultrasound imaging.accurate measurements of
clewilloccurafter3.2±0.2or10.6±1.2,follicular
uterine and cervicaldimensions are now possible
waves in beef cows in good or poor body condi-
tion score,respectively(Crowe,personal commu-
(Okanu&Tomizuka1987,Tian&Noakes1991a,
nication,20oo).The effect ofnutrition on ovarian
2002).Some of thefactors are:
function is likely tobe mediated by insulin,IGFs
and leptin (see pp. 8-10).
·Age.Most observers have found that involution is
·Breed. There is a longer delay in beef compared
morerapidinprimiparae thanpluriparae.
withdairycowsaswellasevidenceofabreedeffect
Season ofyear.Equivocal,but if thereis any influ
ence,involution is probablymost rapid in spring
within thetwo groups;especiallyintheformer.
and summer.
Parity. Most observers have recorded a delay in
primiparae compared with pluriparae-up to the
·Suckling us milking.Results are contradictory; it
fourth lactation.Conflicting opinions haveprob
may be abreed influence on the effect of time to
ably arisen because of the problems of separating
return ofcyclicalovarian activity.
theinfluences ofnutritional status,milkyieldand
·Climate. There is evidence that heat stress can
weightloss.
accelerate and inhibitthespeedofinvolution
Season of the year.Thereis good evidence thatpho
Periparurient abnornalities.Dystocia,retained pla
toperiod has an effect. This has been shown by
centa,hypocalcaemia,ketosis,twin calves and
experimentally subjeclingheifers to continuous
metritisdelayinvolution.Periparturientproblems
darlness,which inhibited the return of cyclical
cause an overall delayin the completion of this
activity（Terquietal 1982）.Peters&Riley（1982)
processof5-S days（Buch etal1955,Tennant &
showed that suckler cows that calved between
Peddicord 1968,Maizon et al2004).
February and April were acyclic significantly lon-
Delayedretun tocyclicalovarianactivity.Botha
ger than those that calved between August and
cause and an effect, since there is good evidence
December.By stimulatingtheeffectsof short day
200
Chapter
171
The puerperium
length using exogenous melatonin, it has been
it is longer. Lochial discharge is relatively slight in
possible to delay the return to oestrus and ovula-
tion in postpartum beef cows (Sharpe et al 1986).
foaling, although in a few cases it can persist for up
Clinate.Cows in tropical climates showa delay
to a week. The uterine horns shrink rapidly,reach-
compared with those in temperate zones.
ing their pregravid size by day 32, although the pre-
Suckling intensity and milling frequency.The greater
viously non-gravid horn,which is initially smaller,
shrinks at a slower rate.The cervix remains slightly
the frequency of milling and the intensity of suick-
dilated until after thefirst oestrus.
ling(number ofcalves),as well as calfpresence,the
Ovarian rebound is rapid, the foal heat occurring
longer the period of acyclicity. This can be reversed
5-12 days post-partum.Evidence of follicular activ-
in beef suckler cows by restricting the access of the
calf to suckle from 30 days post-partum
ity can be determined as early as the second day.
Although conception rates at this first oestrus are
lower than at other times, a large number of mares
Elimination of bacterial contamination
are fertile, which proves that the endometrium
Failure to do this will result in the development of
is capable of sustaining a pregnancy. Andrews &
McKenzie (1941) fouind that the endometrium was
metritis and endonnetritis(see Ch.22).Factors that
fully restored by 13-25 days post-partum.
delay this are:
There is nothing comparable with the degenera
Magniude of bacterial contamination:a massive
tion and sloughing of the endometrium that occurs
bacterial flora may overwhelm natural defence
mechanisns
in ruminants. On the day of foaling, the microcarun
cles (see Ch. 2) of ihe endometriun are unchanged,
Nature ofbacterial flora:many obligate Gram-
thestratum spongiosumcompactum is oedematous,
negative anaerobes, such as Fusobacteriumr necro-
with a small number of distended glands. However,
phorum and Prevotella spp, exhibit synergy with
by day 1post-partum,there are obvious signs of
Gran-positive aerobic contaminants
degenerative changes in the microcaruncles and
Delayed uterine invotutioit
endometrialglands andby2-5 days theepithelium
of the microcaruncles shows evidence of cytoplas-
Impaired uterine defencemechanisms
mic vacuolization,karyorrhexis and an inflamma
Retainedfetalmenbranes
tory reactian with neutrophils and phagocytic cells.
Calving trauma to the niterts
On day 7 post-partum, the endometrium is similar
Return of cyclical ouarian nctivity: there is contradic-
to that of a marejust before oesirus,with the whole
tory evidence since,witan early reurn to oesirus,
regenerative process complete by 9-10 days,when
there is an early oestrogen peak, which should
the histological structure is typical of that of a mare
assistin the elimination of thebacteria.However,
in oestrus (Gomez-Cuetara et al 1995). The mater-
if the level of contamination is such that a signifi-
nal crypts disappear as a result of lysis and shrink
cant bacterial flora persists after the first oestrus,
age of the epithelial cells of the endometrium, with
the subsequent luteal phasemay allow the bacte-
condensation of their contents and collapse of the
ria to proliferate (Olson ei al 1984).
lumen of the crypt. Cygax et al (1979) reported that
the endometrium is usually quite normal, apart
from some pleomorphism of the luminal epithe-
Horse
lium, at 14 days but in some mares inflammatory
The puerperium is shorter in the mare than in the
toruminants,the uterus returns to its normal non-
cow, with rapid involumion and relatively good con-
pregnant state very quickly, thus being able to sus-
ception rates at the first postpartum oestrus.For the
tain and support pregnancy following early mating
readerwho wishes to study the subject in greater detail
post-partum.
than outlined below thereare twoexcellentpapers
Asin the cow,bacterial contamination oftheuterus
(Andrews & McKenzie 1941, Gygax et al 1979).
from the environment is a frequent occurrence,the
In pony mares it is usually possible to identify the
species most frequently isolated beingB-haemolytic
outlineoftheuterinebodyand hornsbyrectalpalpa-
streptococci and coliforms.These organisms are usu-
tionatabout 12 hours post-partum;in thoroughbreds
ally eliminated at the foal heat; if not, although they
201
Part
2
Pregnancy and parturition
may increase during the subsequent dioestrus,they
and veins, thus reducing their lumens; the fetal villi
usually disappear at the second postpartum oestrus.
areunaffected(yanWyketal1972)
Retained fetal membranes delay involution,while
Afterdehiscence and separation oftheplacenta
exercise is saidtohasten it.Theprocess is morerapid
there is further hyaline degeneration of caruncular
in primiparaethan in pluriparae.
tissue, which results in constriction of the bloud
vessels at the base of the maternal crypts. There is
Sheep and goat
necrosisof thesurfacelayerof thecarunclesothat at
about 4 days post-partum themost superficial layers
areundergoing autolysisandliquefaction,which are
The puerperium in both these species isvery similar
responsible for the dark recldish brown or black col-
to that in thecow,being typical ofruminantsingen-
eral.Themaindifferenceisthiat,sincetheyareboth
days post-partum,ecrosisof thewhole superficial
seasonal breeders,parturitionisfollowedbyaperiod
part ofthecarunclehas occurredwith,inmost cases,
ofanoestrus.Thereislittleinformation availablefor
separation of thebrown necrotic plaque so that it is
the doe,so that the changes that are described relate
lying free in theuterinelumen.The carunclesnow
only totheewe,althoughitisunlikelythat thereare
have a clean, glistening surface,and the process of
major differences.
regeneration is completed by the re-epithelialization
of the caruncles by about 28 days.Similar timing of
Involution
events has been reported by Gray et al (2003), how-
ever,theyalsofound thatthetissueremodellingalso
There is rapid shrinkage and contraction ofthe
occurred in the intercaruncular regions, as well as
uterus,particularly during the 3rd to 10th days post-
in the more obvious caruncles.As in the cow,there
parium,as determined bymeasurements ofuterine
is also a rise in acute phase proteins in the periph-
weight and length, diameter of uterine body and
eral circulation, which may well reflect a systemic
previouslygravid horn.Accordingtothesemeasure-
responseofthehepatocytestothedegenerative and
ments,involution is completeby 20-25 days (Uren
inflammatory changes in the carunclesor thepres-
1935,Hunter etal1968,Fo0te&Call 1969).Using
enceofbacterial contamination(Regassa&Noakes
sequential radiography andradio-opaque mark-
1999).They increase rapidly after lambing,before
ers,uterineinvolutionhasbeen shown tobecom-
declining2-3weels later.
pleteby about 28 days in suclling ewes,although
The quantity of lochia voided is variable. Initially
an unexplained increase inuterinedimensions has
itarisesfromblood,fetal fluidsandplacental debris
been reported at 42 days （Tian & Noakes 1991b.
but as the puerperium proceeds the liquefied,
Regassa & Noakes 1999). Involution is largely due to
sloughed caruncular tissue is the main source.
collagen breakdown,since,although tissue collagen
concentrationsremainfairlyconstantwith advane
Returnofcyclicalactivity(ovarian
ingpregnancy,thereis a seven-to eightfold increase
rebound)
in uterinemass;thereductioninsizecan onlybe a
reversal of this process.
Although in temperate climates ewes normally
become anoestrus after lambing there are numerous
reports ofovarian activity occurring within a few days
Restorationofthe endometrium
t02weeks post-partum;Grayet al(2003) found that
As in the cow, there are profound changes in the
oestrogenconcentrationsin theperipheralserun
structure of the caruncles with degeneration of the
were high at thetime of parturition,declinedrap
surface,necrosis, sloughing and subsequent regen-
idly lo day4 posi-partum bu then peaked at day 6.
eration of the superficial layers of the endometrium.
Thus follicular growth is common but ovulation is
There is evidence,determined by the slaughter of
unusual andwhenit does occur it isusually associ-
animals 3 days before the expected date of lambing,
ated with a silent heat,Failure of follicularmatura
of prepartum hyaline degenerative changes.This
tionandovulationisprobablydueioinadequate
occurs in the connective tissue at the base of,and
release of LHas a result of a deficiency in GnRH
adjacentto,theendometrial crypts and also involves
synthesis and secretion.Asa result,basal LH levels
both directly and indirecily the walls of the arteries
and the pulsefrequency of episodic LH secretion are
202
Chapter
171
Thepuerperium
inadequatetostimulatenormalovarianfunction
flattened and show signs of degenerative changes;
(Wrightetal1981).It ispossible that the time of
however, there are also signs of active cell division,
theyearwhen the ewes lamb has a profound effect,
which is subsequently responsible for regeneration
withthosethatlambearlyandwithinthenormal
ofthe epithelium.This latter process iscomplete by
breeding season beingmore lilkely to have normal
21 days and is capable of sustaining pregnancy.
ovarian rebound.Hlafez(1952) has suggested that
it is most likely to occurin those breeds that have a
Return of cyclical activity(ovarian
longer tlian average breeding season.
rebound)
Suckling and subsequent weaning have a profound
Eliminationofbacterial
effect upon ovarian rebound and indirectly on other
contamination
puerperal changesin thegenital tract.In most cases
Although itmight have been expected that there
therewillbenoreturn to oestrusandovulation
wouldbeasimilarpatternofbacterialcontamina-
until thepigletsareremoved.In thestudybyPalmer
tiontothatpreviouslydescribedforthecowand
etal(1965)therewasnoevidenceofovulationdur-
mare,Iwas unable to isolatebacteria from uterine
ing suckling periods of up to 62 days.In general, the
swabs obtained from 10 ewes 1-14 days post-partum
later thetime ofweaningthe shorter thetime inter
at surgical hysterotomy.Morerecently,usingsequen-
val to the first oestrus;for exainple,if the litter is
tial transcervical swabbingof13 ewes during the
weaned at 2, 13,24 and 35 days post-partum the
firstweekpost-partum,bacteria wereisolatedfrom
mean times to first oestrus were 10.1,8.2,7.1and
four ewes;thus in the other nine ewes the uterus was
6.8 days respectively (Svajgr et al 1974）. The time
sterile（Regassa&Noakes 1999).
tothefirstovulationcanalsobeshortenedbythe
temporary removal of thewhole litter forvarying
Pig
periods during the day(partial weaning) or the per-
manent removal of part of the litter(split weaning)
(Briti et al 1985).
There are anumber of studies that describethe
Thereisrapidregression ofthecorpora lutea of
changesthal takeplace during thepuerperium of
pregnancy,with signs of cellular degeneration by
the sow(Palmer etal1965, Graves etal 1967,Svajgr
3days post-partum,so that by day 7they consist
etal1974).It isimportant that thechanges should
mainly of connective tissue.There is considerable
occurrapidly,with a return to a normalpregravid
follicular activity during suckling,withfollicles
state,sothatpregnancycanbeestablished asquickly
sometimesreachinga diameterof 6-7mm.This
as possible after weaning.
is sometimes associated withbehaviouraloestrus
shortly after farrowing butin no cases is there ovula-
tion:thefolliclesbecome atretic
Involution
Inastudyof theendocrinechangesofthepostpar-
Apart from the rapid initial uterine weight loss,
tum sow,Edwards &Foxcrof（1983) showed that,
which occurs in thefirst 5days post-partum,invo-
irrespectiveofwhetherweaningoccurredat3or5
lution isfairlyuniform andiscompleteby28days.
weeks,thegreat majorityofsows showedapreovu
After day6,mostofthelossofweight is dueto
latoryLH surgewithin7daysofweaning.Atthetime
changesin themyometrium,notablyareduction in
ofweaning therewas a transient rise in basal LlI of
cell numbers,cell size and amounts of connective
about2days'durationbuit,unlikethecow,therewas
tissue.The decreaseinthe thickness of the endome-
noconsistentchangein theepisodicreleaseof LH.
trium andmyometriumiscompletedby28days.
Prolactin concentrations are high during lactation
butdeclinerapidlytobasallevelsafewhoursafter
weaning:mean FSH concentrations rise 23 days
Restorationoftheendometrium
afterweaning.Follicular growth and ovulation are
The uterine epithelium 1 day afterfarrowing is of a
inhibited during lactation because of suppressed LH
low columnar or cuboidal type and there is evidence
secretion;this probably occurs as a result of direct
of the extensive folding that is present during preg-
neural inhibition of GnRH synthesis and release.
nancy.The epithelial cells at 7 days are very low and
Inadequate nutrition,particularly severe weight
203
Part
121
Pregnancy and parturition
loss,can delay the onset of cyclical ovarian activity
References
as can the season of the year (Brit el al 1985).It is
generally accepted that exposure to theboar has the
reverseeffect.
AdamsGP1999JReprod Fertil Suppl54:17
Thetimeofweaning,and thusthe timeoffirst
Alsemgeest SPTavemeMABoosmanRetal 1993Am I Vet
oestrus,alsohas othereffectsonreproductivefunc-
Res54:164
tion,owing to the time taken for the completion
Andrews FN,MckenzieFF 1941 Res Bull UnivMissouri 329
of the puerperium.Fertilization rates and preg
BaumannH,Gauldie|1994ImmunolToday 15:74
Bridges Pl,Taft R,Lewis PE et al 2000IAnin Sci 78:2172
nancyratesareimprovedthelater thetimeof
Britt JHI,Armstrong ID,CoxNM,EsbenshadeKL1985
weaning,and hence the later sows are served after
[Reprod Feruil Suppl33:37
farrowing.
Buch NC,TylerWI,Casida LE 1955 ] Dairy Sci 38:73
BulmanDC,WoodPDP1980AnimProd30:177
CroweMA2000Personalcommunication
Dog
Da Rosa GO,WagnerWC1981JAnimSci52:1098
EdquistLEKindahl H,StabenfelG1978Prostaglandins
16:111
Sincethebitchismonocyclicparturitionsfollowed
Edquist LE,LindellJO,Kindahl H 1980In:Proceedings of
byanoestrus,the onset of thenext heatbeingunpre
the9th International Congress onAnimal Reproduction
dictable. Regression of the corpora luiea of pregnancy
and Artificial Inseminalion,Madrid
Edwards S,Foxcroft GR1983 J Reprod Fertil 67:163
isinitiallyrapid,sothatby1or2weelspost-partum
theyhavebeen reduced in size.However,thereafter
EleyDS,ThaicherWW,HeadHHetal 1981Dairy Sci
64:312
itismuch slower,so that even after 3months the
ElliotK,McMahonKJ,GierT,Marion GB1968AmJVe
corpora luteameasure2.5mmindiameter.
Res29:77
Therateofinvolutionissimilartothatofother
oldi J,Kilcsar M,Pecsi Aet al 2006Anim Reprod Sci
species and the uterine horns arerestored to their
96:265
pregravid size by 4 weeks.The lochial discharge
Fo0teWC,Call JW1969AninSci29:150
immediately post-partum is very noticeablebecause
GierWC,Marion GB1968AmJVet Res 29:83
ofits green colour due to thepresence of uterover-
Gomez-Cuetara C. Flores IM, Sanchez ]etal 1995 Anat
Histol Embryol 24:19
dine;unless there are complications this should
GravesWE,Lauderdale IW,Kirkpatrick RLetal1967J Anim
change1o a bloodstained,mucoid discharge within
Sci26:365
12 hours.
Gray CA,Stewart MD,JohnsonGA,SpencerTE2003
In the non-pregnant bitch,the surface of the
Reproduction125:185
endometrium undergoes desquamation followed
Griffin JFTHartiganPI,NunnWR1974Theriogenology
byregeneration,withrepaircompletedby120days
1:91
after the onset of oestrus (see Ch. 1). After preg-
CygaxAP,GanjamVK,Kennedy RM 1979IReprodFeril
Suppl 27:571
nancy and normal parturition,the time taken for
HafezESE19521Agr Sci Camb 42:189
regeneration of the endometrium is about 2weeks
Hunter DL,ErbRE,Randel RDetal 1968Dairy Sci52:904
longer.Theareas ofplacental attachment arenot
Johanns Cl,ClarkTLHerrick JB1967IAmVetMedAssoc
readily identifiable immediately post-partum but
151:1692
by 4weeks they are easy to identify.Desquamation
Kaidi RS,Brown P,David JSEetal 1991 Matrix 11:101
of the epithelial liningof the endometrium starts at
Kindahl H,Edqvist LE,LarssonK,Malmqvist A1982In:
6weeks post-partum and is complete by 7weeks;
KargH,Schallenberger E(ed)Factorsinfluencingfertility
in the postpartum cow.Martinus NijhoffThe Hague,
the whole process of regeneration has ended by
p173-196
12weeks.
King Gl,Hurnik jE Robertson HA1976IAnimSci42:688
Kyle SD,Callahan Cl,Allrich RD 19921 Dairy Sci75:1456
Lamming GE,DanvashAO 1998AnimReprodSci52:175
Cat
Lamming Gl,Foster JP,Bulman DC 1979Vet Rec104:156
LiptrapRM,McNally PI1976AmJVet Res37:369
Maizon DO,OltenacuPA,GrohnYIetal 2004 PrevMed Vet
Lactation will usually suppress oestrus effectively
66:113
(Schmidt et al 1983) but if the queen has no kittens
Mateus L,da Costa LL,Bernardo F,Robalo Silva |2002
tosuckle,oronly one ortwo,shemayshow apost-
Reprod Domest Anim37:31
partum oestrus7-10 days after parturition.
MollerK1970NZVet118:83
204
Chapter
171
The puerperium
MorrowDA.RobertsSl.McEnteeK1969Cornell Vet59:
SharpePHGiffordDRFlavel PFetal986Theriogenology
134,190
26:621
Nation DP,Burke CR,RhodesFM,MacMillan KL1999Anim
Sheldon IM2004VetClinFood Anim20:569
ReprodSci56:169
Sheldon IM,Dobson H 2004Anim Reprod Sci 295:82-83
NoakesDE,Wallace L,Smith GE1991 Vet Rec128:440
Sheldon IM,NoakesDE.Dobson H 2000 Theriogenology
Okanu A,Tomizuka T 1987 Theriogenology 27:369
54:409
Olson JD,Ball1,MortimerRGetal 1984AmVetRes45:
Sheldon IM,NoakesDE,RycroftA,DobsonH 2001 Vet Re
2251
148:172
PalmerWMH,TeagueHS,VenzkeWG1965]Anim Sci24:541
Sheldon IM,NoakesDE,RycroftANetal2002Reproduction
PetersAR,Riley GM 1982Anim Prod 34:145
123:837
Peters AR,Lamming GE 1990 In:Milligan SR (ed) Oxford
SvajgrAl.HaysVW,Cromwell CLLDuutRH 1974 J Anim Sci
reviews ofreproductive biology,vol 12. Oxford LIniversiy
38:100
Press,Oxford,p245-288
Tennant B.Peddicord RG1968 Cornell Vet58:185
Rasbech NO 1950NordVetMed2:655
Terqui M,Chupin D.Gauthier D et al 1982 In:Karg H,
Regassa I, Noakes DE1999 Vet Rec 144:502
Schallenberger E(ed) Factors influencingfertility in the
RiscoCADrostMThatcherWWetal1994Theriogenoloy
postpartum cow.MartinusNijhoffTheHlaguep384-408
42:183
ThatcherWW1986Cited byPetersAR,LammingCE1986
Roche1F2006AnimReprod Sci 96:282
VetRec118:236
RuderCA,SasserRGWilliams Retal1981Theriogenology
Tian W,Noakes DE 1991a VetRec128:566
15:573
TianW,NoakesDE1991b VetRec129:463
SavioID,BolandMP,IymesN,RocheIF1990]Reprod Fertil
UrenAW1935MichStateCollAgricExpStnTechBull 144
88:569
VanWykLC,VanNiekerkCH,BelonjePC1972ISAfrVet
Schallenberger E,Oerterer U,Hutterer G1982In:KargH
Assoc4313:29
SchallenbergerE(ed)Factors influencingferility in the
WagnerWC,OxenreiderS1.1972IAnimSci34:360
postpartumcow.MartinusNijhoff,1heHague,p123-146
WiliamsCYHarrisTBaagliaDFal2001 Endocrinolgy
Schams D 1976Hormonalcontrol of lactation.In:Breast
142:1915
feeding and the mother.Ciba Foundation 45.Elsevier,
WrighPJ,GeytenbeekPE,ClarkeI.indlay K1981 Reprod
Amsterdam,p27-48
Fertil 61:97
SchmidtPM,Chakraborty PK,WildtDE1983Biol Reprod
28:657
205
Part
13
Dystocia and other disorders
associated with parturition
8
Generalconsiderations......
15
Dystociaduetopostural defects:
David Noakes
treatment....
286
David Noakes
6
The approach to an obstetriccase.....23
David Noakes
16
Dystocia due to faulty position
and presentation, twins and fetal
10
Maternal dystocia:causes and
monsters....
297
treatment..
232
David Noakes
DavidNoakes
17
Injuries and diseases incidental to
11
Fetal dystocia:aetiology.incidence
parturition...
...306
and prevention
.247
David Noakes
David Noakes
Manipulative delivery per vaginam in
18
Postparturientprolapseof theuterus....319
12
David Noakes
farm animals andhorses.....
David Noakes
19
Fetotomy
3Vaginalmanipulations and delivery
JosVermunt
13
in thebitchandqueencat.
..275
DavidNoakes
14Dystociadue to fetomaternal
disproportion:treatment.
...280
DavidNoakes
207
—
8
Chapter
David Noakes
General considerations
Introduction
·increased stillbirth rate and mortality of the
offspring
· increased neonatal morbidity
Dystocia means difficult birth; the correspond-
increased mortalityratefor thedam
ing Greek word for normal birth is cutocia.The
diagnosis of dystocia is frequently based on a
reducedproductivityof the dam
high degree of subjectivity, since there are situa-
reduced subsequent fertility and increased chance
tionsihat one person will consider tobenormal
ofsterility in the dam
but another will consider difficult.For this rea
·increased likelihood of puerperal disease in the
son, some of the data on the incidence, causes
dam
or efficacy of treatment of dystocia are not very
·increased likelihood of subsequent culling of the
reliable, although there are many circumstances
dam.
when distinguishing between the two will present
no difficulty. The diagnosis and treatment of dys-
Cattle
tocia constitute a large and important part of the
science of obstetrics and require a good under-
The economic importance of bovine dystocia is
standing ofnormal parturition,sensitivity to the
emphasized in a number of different published
welfare of both dam and offspring. and good and
reports. The biggest single economic loss is due
sensitive practical competences. In addition, vei-
to stillbirth and early calf mortality. Sloss & Dufty
[1980) showed that about a third of the total of
where possible, by the application of sensible
17% of fetal and calf losses occur at the time of par-
sire and dam selection, and good husbandry and
turition and that most of these arise from calving
health care.
difficulties.Calves born to cows that suffered from
dystocia were five times more likely to die neona-
tally than those resulting from normal calvings and
Consequences and cost ofdystocia
accounted for 43.6% of all neonatal deaths (Azzain
et al 1993). Collery et al (1996), in a study involving
The consequences of dystocia are numerous, and
both dairy and beef suckler herds in lreland, found
will depend upon the severity. Firstly, there are
that, of tliose calves thiat were dead at birth, 68%
the financially unquantifiable effects on the wel-
were born following corrected dystocia. In a study
fare of dam and offspring. Secondly, there are the
in Colorado,USA,involving 73 units,Wittum et al
quantifiable financial consequences.Dystocia
(1994) reported thai 17.5% and 12.4% of calf mor-
results in:
tality was associated with dystocia and stillbirth
209
Part
131
Dystocia andotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
respectively;the mean cost percalf death was $216.
ent sire breeds,the total costs of slight dystocia
Ina studyinvolving4528calvingsovera30-year
period atIowa StateUlniversity dairy farm,perina-
350-400-espectively (McGuirk et al 2007). In
talmortalityofcalvesbornfollowingdystociawas
this study,the majorcost was associated with the
2.7 times that for calves born unassisted;although
increasedlabourrequired atdelivery,theincrease
otherfactors alsoinfluencedthemiortalityrate,such
in thenumber of days open and the costs associ-
asdamparity and seasonof theyear (Johanson&
ated’with cow and calf mortalityand cowculling:
Berger2003).Ina studyinvolving9897calvingsin
theeffectsoftheseverityofdystociaonthelatter
dairycowandheifersinseminatedwithsemenfrom
are summarized in Table 8.1 (see also Ch. 24).
beef sires, the calf mortality rate was 2.6% following
In a study in Bavaria, Sauerer et al (1988) reported
normal calvings,which increased to9.1% following
ihatthe cullingrate ofcows which suffered from
slight dystocia,53.5%following severe dystocia(no
dystocia was increased by 18%,and the calving
caesarian operation) and 26.7% following a caesar-
index extended by1l-14 days.Millyieldwas not
ean operation (McGuirk et al 2007).
affected unless the calf was stillborn(and there-
Kossaibati&Esslemont（1995)estimated that,
foreprobablyassociatedwithamoreseveredysto-
atthattimein theUK,the direct and totalcosts
cia),inwhich case theyieldswere reduced by50kg,
were141 and310respectively;thesefigureswill
126kgand148kgforthefirst,second andthird lac
beinfluenced by the current commercialvalue of
tations,respectively.ln a large study involving71618
calves.Dematawewa&Berger(1997)estimated the
Holstein cowsin theSA,it wasshown that differ
costs dueto dystocia tobe$0.00,$50.45,596.48,
encesbetweencowsthathadanormalcalvingand
$159.82 and s397. 61 for no assistance at calving
those that had an extremely difficult calving formilk
slight assistance,needed assistance,considerable
yield,fatyildteinyldnumberfaysn,
force needed and extreme difficulty,respectively.
services/conception andpercentage cowdeaths were
In a UK farm-based survey (1995-2002), involv-
703.6kg.24.1kg 20.8kg,33 days, 0.2 services and
inga total of 9897 non-induced calvings（single
4.1%,respectively.The effect of dystocia on milk and
calves)in dairy cows (9560) and heifers （337)
composition is summarized in Table 8.2(McGuirk
inseminatedwithsemenfromavarietyofdiffer-
et al 2007).
Table8.1Percentageof cowsexperiencingvarious degreesofdystocia,and theirfates(afterMcGuirket al2007)
Severityofdystocia
No.of births
Cows'fate*(%)
1
2
3
4
Normal (1)
7178
97.3
2.2
0.2
0.3
Slight(2)
2308
93.7
5.2
0.5
0.6
Severe(3)
381
61.7
24.7
3.1
10.5
Caesarean operation(4)
30
80.0
13.3
6.7
0
Scores3+4
411
63.0
24.1
3.4
9.5
1,nomal;2,eined butpor3porancculld;4id
Table8.2Estimatesof theeffectsof cystociaindairy cows and heifers（relative to thosewithanormal calving)onmilkyield
and fertility(fromMcGuirketal2007)
Severityof
Calculated effect on:
dystocia
Milk fat(kg)
Milkprotein(kg)
Days open
Services/conception
Slight
-4.22
-3.75
+9.2
+0.07
Severe
-11.77
-10.38
+21.5
+0.13
210
Chapter
181
General considerations
Salman et al (iyy1) identified dystocia as the dis-
Pig
ease with the largest veterinary treatment cost in
the Colorado National Animal Health Monitoring
It is well recognized that in the sow most stillbirths
occur intrapartum as a result ofdystocia andthe
System.Similarly Miller &Dorn(199o) found that,
in Ohio, 5% of the total cost of disease prevention
delayed expulsion of the litter. There are substan-
tial data on stillbirth rates in sows. It is generally
and occurrence per cow per year was due to dys-
acceptedthattherateshouldnotexceed7%of total
tocia.Veterinary costs will vary depending on the
individual practices involved in treating the dysto-
piglets born and if it exceeds 10% then there is a
cia cases;in the study by McGuirk et al (2007) they
need for an investigation (Carr 1998)
were classified into ‘high' and low' veterinary costs.
Based on this classification,they were fl06 and
Horse
107,and 364 and 395,for slight 10 severe dys-
tocia respectively.
Because of the relatively early separation of the pla-
centa, foal survival is very short; thus if there is dys-
tocia there will be stillbirth. In a survey involving
sheep
3527 cases of abortion, stillbirth and perinatal foal
Data on the effects of dystocia on the profitabil-
mortality inhorses,196could be directly attributed
ity of sheep enterprises are not extensive com-
to dystocia and dystocia was probably also involved
pared to those for cattle. The losses will be largely
in a substantial number of the other causes of neo-
restricted to theincreased incidenceoflambmortal-
natal death.Birth-related trauma was presentin50%
ity; Table 8.3 shows that the percentage of perinatal
of dystocia cases. Dystocia was found to be respon-
mortality ranged from 17-49% and that dystocia
siblefor20%of foalmortality within 48hours of
was responsible for between 10% and 50% of this
birth (Haas et al 1996). A study in an equine refer-
mortality.The effects on fertility will be less appar-
ral hospital involving 247 dystocias showedthat
ent, because in most production systems ewes have
91% of themaressurvived while only 42%of the
at least 6months after they have lambed before
foals were born alive and even fewer(29%) survived
they are served again. Severe trauma at parturition
to discharge (Byron et al 2003). The time interval
will result inlesions to the genital tract,which may
from hospital admission time to delivery of the foal
cause subfertility or sterility.It is much more dif-
had no effect on foal survival rates.However,there
ficult to quantify other production losses,bu it is
was a significant cffect on survival rate to discharge
likely that severe dystocia will reduce millkproduc-
(p<0.05)ofthe time interval fronrupture of the
tion and,as a consequence,will reducelambgrowth
allantochorion to delivery ofthefoal;71.7±343 and
rates and extend the times to weaning and reaching
853±37.4 minutes respectively, for the survivors
slaughter weight.
and thenon-survivors(Byron et al 2003).Mares that
Table 8.3 Incicence ofperinatal mortality and its relatiorship to dystocia
Author(s)
Year
Country
Breed(s)
Total no.
%Perinantal
Mortality due
Lambs
mortality
to dystocia
Moule
1954
Australia
Merino
2467
18
23
McFariance
1961
Australia
NS
15
49
NS
High:&Jury
1969
NZ
Rcmney
7727
18
ZE
Dernis&Nairn
1970
Australia
Merino
3301
25
10
Welmeretal
1983
UK
Cheviot
2453
26
22-53
Blackface
Wilsmore
1986
UK
Pollerd
227
17
50
Dorset
NS=noislated
211
Part
3
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
sufferfrom severedystocia should notbeservedat
size and shape,or when the presenting diameter of
thefoal heat;if theyarethen prenancyrateswille
thefetus isunabletopassthrough thenormal birth
lower than normal for this stage and a small number
canal becauseitistoolarge orits dispositionprevents
will suffer from traumatic injuries,which may result
itfrom doingso.Thetypesandcausesofdystocia
in sterility.Byron et al(2003) found that the live
are set out in Figure 8.1, and the specific diagnosis
foaling rate after dystocia was 67% compared with
and the treatmentofthesewillbedescribedinthe
84%before dystocia.
followingchapters.
Causes of dystocia
Incidence of dystocia
Obstetricians have usually regarded dystocia as
As was mentioned earlier in this chapter,whether
being either maternal or fetal in origin; however,
thebirthprocessisconsiderednormalorabnormal
there are sometimes occasions when it can be diffi-
can often bevery subjective.In addition,consider-
culttoidentifytheprimary cause,andotherswhen
ation must always be given to the effect of breed,
there will be a change in the dominant cause during
age and parity in the interpretation of results.Thus
the course of the dystocia.More realistically,dysto-
the overall incidence varies from species to species,
cia shouldbeconsideredinrelationto defectsin the
between breeds within species,and between ages
threecomponentsofthebirthprocess:
andparities withinbreeds.
theexpulsiveforces
·the adequacy of the birth canal
Cattle
thesizeanddisposition of thefetus
The incidence of dystocia in cattlehas beenwidely
Difficult birth will occur when the expulsive forces
studied because of its effects on productivity. In
areinsufficient,whenthebirthcanalisofinadequate
addition,aswill bediscussed later,therehavebeen
Dystocia
Maternal
Fetal
Inadequate expulsive forces
Inadequate sizeof birth canal
Oversize
Fault
广
disposition
厂
Uterine inertia
Weak
ncomplete dilation
Inadequate
Relative and Congenital
Fetal
monsters pathology
.Presentalion
orconstriction
pelvis
absolute
Primary
Secondary
straining
ol birth canal
Immature
·Smalliter
"Ascites
-Position
-Ulerus
Fraclura
"Anasaica
Posture
Overstrelching
'Age
.Breed
Incorect oestrogen
'exhaustion'
>Torsion
Breed delormity·Pralonged
>Displacement
-Emphiysema
progeslerone ralio
.Pain
gestation
.Cervix
Inadeqiate secreticn
*Hermialon
-VIVF
of oxylocin and
cf urerus
>Duplication
derived
prostaglandin secretion
embryos
Vagina
Failure ofreceptor
>Siricture
regulation/development
>Neoplasms
Ca²-and/or Mg²+deficiency
>Cystoccelo
>Prolapse
Fetc-maternal (pelvic) dispropartion
Fatty inlilliation ol
>Vestigialstructures
myomelrium
.Vulva
Nervous voluntary inhibition
>Striclure
Hysteria
>Incomplete
relaxation
Obstructive dystocla
Fig.8.1 The causes of dystocia.
212
Chapter
181
General considerations
substantial efforts toprevent dystocia due to feto-
Table 8.4 Influence of parity,calf sex,twins and breed
maternal disproportion, which, as we will discuss
of sire and dam on the frequency cf clystocia in cattle.
later, is the commonest cause of dystocia.lt is
These data were obtained from 123 cow calf herds
impossible to provide a single figure for the inci
in Ontario (McDermott et al 1992)
dence of dystocia in cattle because there are a large
Factor
Total
Easy
Difficult
number of variables such as breed, age of dam,
number of
calvings
calvings
body weight of dam,sex of calf, singleton or twins,
calvings
(%)
(%)
breed of sire,body condition of dam.Dystocia is
s
less common in dairy than in beef cattle. The situ
73
13.7
4.1
Singles
4296
5.2
3.4
ation is well summarized in the siudy ofEdwards
(1979) in a Friesian herd. He found that dystocia
Primiparous
667
14.1
12.3
Pluriparous
was more common in primiparae than in pluri-
3702
3.8
1.8
parae, and more common with the birth of male
Heifercalf
2083
4.4
2.2
than female calves,and also with twins.In rela-
Bull calf
2065
6.1
4.5
tion to parity, there were 66.5%, 23.1% and 14.3%
Breed of cam
assisted deliveries in first, second and third calv-
Hereford
1186
4.0
2.4
Lirnousin
264
ings respectively.
4.2
1.1
Charolais
284
6.0
3.2
More recent large studies confirm these original
Simmental
354
11.6
5.5
findings. In a large survey in Ontario (123 herds),
involving a wide range of breeds (Angus, Hereford,
Breedofsire
Hereford
1056
4.3
Shorthorn,Limousin,Saler,Simmental, Charolais),
2.9
Limousin
1236
4.9
2.4
the overallmeandystociaincidence was 8.7%
Charolais
896
5.6
3.3
(median 5.8%),of which 5.3%were classified by
Simmental
729
8.8
6.2
the farm as being easy (traction by one person) and
Further breakdown shows that parity, twins and sex
and Piedmont breeds, in which there is a higher
of calf,as well as breed of sire and dam,influence
proportion of the expensive cuts of meat of high
the frequency of dystocia (Table 8.4).
lean content and high quality.However, the fre-
This same study also provided some interesting
quency of dystocia is very high. althiough a urue
data on cuilling rates. For the study as a whole the
figure may be dificult to obtain since elective cae-
overall culling rate was 9.8%; however, when the
sarean operations are performed at the start of the
data on cullingrelated to thedifficulty ofcalving is
second stage of parturition. Hanzen et al (1994)
examined,then 7.9% of cows/heifers that had a dif
quote a figure of9o% inpure breed Belgian Blues;
ficult calving were culled, compared with 2.9% that
were retained (McDermott et al 1992).
Table 8.5Therelative frecuencies of dystocia sevenity
The influence of age at calving, and also the influ-
in Angus heifers at different ages (Berger et al 1992)
ence of calf sex and birth weight, are illustrated
in a large study involving purebred Angus heifers,
Ageof
Sexof
Total
Some
Difficult
a breed that traditionally is considered to be rela-
dam in
calf
number of
assistance
(%)
months
calvings
(%)
which involved53herds and 83467 calvings in the
<23
M
7543
21.0
6.2
USA, dystocia was recorded according to whether
<23
F
7909
13.0
2.6
il was necessary for some assistance to be provided
24-25
M
48859
7.2
4.0
or whether it was a difficult calving requiring sub-
24-25
F
49557
8.1
2.1
stantial help.The data are summarized in Tables 8.5
26-27
M
16892
6.0
3.0
and 8.6.
26-27
16716
6.5
1.3
Certain breeds of cattle have a high frequency of
28-29
M
6448
8.7
2.6
muscular hypertrophy (double muscling), which
28-29
F
6473
5.5
1.4
>29
M
4018
8.0
2.0
particular have been bred in the last four decades.
>29
F
4027
4.4
0.7
The highest frequency occurs in the Belgian Blue
213
Part
31
Dystociaandotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
animals when it is known that there will be a high
Table8.6Relative frequency of severityof dystociaand birth
weightandsexof calf (Bergeretal 1992)
probabilityofseveredystociaand theneedforan
elective caesafean operation.Morerecently,there
Birth
Sexof
Total
Some
Difficult
havebeen attempts to examinepelvicdimensions
weight
calf
numberof
assistance
(%)
intheBelgianBluebreed,whichmayin timelead
(kg)
calvings
(%)
toselectionbasedonpelvicsizeandeaseofcalving
20
M
23949
11.3
2.2
(Murrayetal2002).
20
25069
6.4
1.1
21-25
M
3085
5.9
1.0
Sheep and goat
21-25
F
5588
3.9
0.4
26-30
M
13023
9.3
1.3
Theincidenceof dystocia is influenced bybreed
26-30
F
19118
6.6
0.8
（Table 8.7）,ranging from 1% in the Scottish
Blackface(Whitelaw&Watchorn 1975)to77% in
31-35
M
21165
16.4
3.5
31-35
F
19368
11.5
2.2
the Texel (Grommers 1977）. In the goat, the fre-
quency of dystocia is generally low,being compa-
36-40
M
10372
29.0
10.1
36-40
F
5007
23.7
7.0
rablewiththatoftheScottishBlackface:between
27.8
2%and3%.Faultyfetal dispositioncan cause dys-
40
M
2164
33.6
40
542
30.0
20.6
tocia.In a study byWallace[1949),it was found
F
that94.5%ofpresentationswere anteriorlongitu-
dinal and only 3.6% were posterior.The common-
Murray et al (1999)reported a figure of 82%elec-
estfaultydispositionwasunilateralflexionofone
tivecaesarian operationsintheUK.Howeverin a
forelimb;ifthelamb issmall,this may notresultin
morerecent study,itwasfound that,in those hers
dystocia (Table 8.8).
wherecowswereallowedtocalvepervaginam,50%
subsequentlyrequireda caesarean operation.Much
Horse
ofthis isdriven bythevalue of thelivecalf,which
wasf375 in 1994(VanSoom etal1994).Against
Therearerelativelyfew studiesthatprovidereliable
this,mustbeoffset thewelfareimplications,aswell
informationon theincidence andcausesofdystocia
as the undesirable consequences of high calf mor-
in the horse.In general,it can be stated that,despite
tality rates and reduced fertility. For this reason,
being a monotocous species,where the fetus is rel-
myview is that it isunethical to breed from such
atively large in comparison with the dam (unlike
Table 8.7Incidence of dystocia(assisted births)in sheep
Author(s)
Year
Country
Breed
Total no.of
Dystocia (%)
parturitions
Laing
1949
NZ
Suffolk
NS
70
Gunn
1968
UK
Blackface
15584
2.5
Cheviot
4.2
George
1975
NZ
Merino
1510
4.2
Whitelaw&Watchorn
1975
UK
SCCheviot
1009
12
NC Cheviot
569
2
Blackface
433
1
George
1976
NZ
Dorset Horn
1509
34
Grommers
1977
Netherlands
Texel
NS
77
Wocliams et al
1983
UK
Blackface
2000+
5.3
Cheviot
Welsh
NS,not stated
214
Chapter
181
General considerations
Table 8.8Classification of ovine births according to the type
1972),0.25% in 772 farrowings (lones 1966)and
of presentation(data from Wallace 1949)
0.25-1% (lackson 1995) have been reported in the
literature.
Presentation
No.
Anterior,withheadandbothforefeet
191 (69.5%)
Dog and cat
extended
Details concerning the frequency of dystocia in the
Anterior,withhead and one foreleg
49(17.8%)
normal,other legretained
dog are few; this is because of the wide between-
Anterior,with head presented and both
breedvariations and thetendencyforbreeders1o
18(6.5%)
forelegsretained
sarily. In addition, there are some breeds that are
Anterior,with forefeetpresentedandhead
2(0.7%)
retained
achondroplastic and brachycephalic,where nor-
mal birthrarely,if ever occurs and elective caesar
Breechpresentation-bothhindlegsretained
7(2.5%)
ean operationsaretheroutine.Aretrospectivestudy
Posterior-lamb beingrightway upand both
2(0.7%)
byWalett-Darvelid &Linde-Forsberg(1994) of182
hind legs presented
cases of dystocia found that 42%of bitches that
Posterior-lamb upside down,i.e.
1(0.4%)
hadwhelpedbeforehadpreviously suffered from
ventrosarral position
dystocia.
Other miscellaneous types
5(1.8%)
In oneofthefewstudiesof thefrequencyof dys-
Total
275(100%)
tocia in thecat(Gunn-Moore&Thrusfield 1995),
dystociawasreportedtohaveoccurredin5.8%of
2928litters involving735queens.Therewere some
interesting breed differences;for example,ina large
the situation in polytocous species),theincidence
colony of cats of mixed breeding the frequency was
ofdystocia islow.There arelargebreedvariations.
For example,Vandeplassche (1993) quotes 4% for
0.4%,whereas in litters of Devon Rex it was18.2%.
Thoroughbreds and trotters;10%inBelgian draft
Pedigree litters were ata significantly higher risk
than cats of mixed breeding (the odds ratio being
horses, this relatively high level being due to fetal
22.6).Dolichocephalic and brachycephalic types
muscularhypertrophy;and 8% in Shetlandponies
because of a large skull.However, in many breeds
werefound tohaveasignificantlyhigherlevelof
of pony the incidence is 2%.In an interesting on-
dystocia than mesocephalic types.
farm study,involving517spontaneousfoalings and
including a widevariety ofbreeds(Quarter Horses,
Prevention of dystocia
Standardbreds,Thoroughbreds
and
Miniature
Horses),the total number of dystocias was 517
(11.2%),ranging from 8-19% on different farms.
As with all diseases and disorders,veterinarians
When thedetailsforthedifferentbreedsare exam-
should be endeavouringto prevent and reduce the
ined,then theincidences were 16%,10.5%,8.9%
incidence of dystocia.For certaincategories,such as
and 19% for the Quarter Horses,Standardbreds,
faultyfetal disposition,our knowledgeof themech
Thoroughbreds and Miniature Horses respectively
anisms that occur during thefirst stage of parturi-
(Ginther&Williams1996).Allstudieshaveshowed
tion and areresponsibleforensuringthatthefetus
that dystocia occurs more frequently in primiparae
assumesthecorrectdisposition foritsnormalexpul-
than in pluriparae.
sion is very incomplete.However, there are some
types of dystocia that can bereduced significantly;
these are invariably based on good husbandry.
Pigs
The principal one is fetomaternal disproportion.
In the pig,dystocia is generally considered to be
Ithas been lnown for some time,largely based on
less common than in the monotocous species.
anecdotal evidence,that the pelvic canal size var-
In addition,many large intensive breeding units
iesbetween breeds.For example,in cows ofthe
attempt toreduce dystocia,or certainlyreduceits
Channel Island breeds thepelvic canal is relatively
consequences,by the induction of farrowing(see
much larger than in other breeds, and cows of these
Ch.6). Figures of 2.9% in 103 farrowings (Randall
breedswill readilygivebirthunaidedwhenthey are
215
Part
3
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
pregnant as embryo transfer recipients with calves
2003). From the study of Johanson & Berger (2003),
ofbreedswith muscular hypertrophy.There are two
it would appeaf that dystocia andperinatal mortal-
approaches to reducing the frequency and the sever-
ity arenot he same traits,although correlated,and
iy of dystocia: first,attempting to ensure that the
that the.dystocia rateis falling,supporing theuseof
sizeof thebirthcanal isadequate; second,attempt
'easy calving sires.Other aspects of good husbandry
ingtoensure thatthesize andconformation of the
can prevent dystocia due to fetomaternal dispropor-
calfissuch thatit canpass throughthebirthcanal.
tionorreducetheadverseconsequencesifitoccurs;
For someyears, since the early attenpts to ea-
this is discussed in detail in Chapter 11.
sure the size ofthepelviccanal,there hasbeen con-
Littleattentionhasbeenpaid tothestudyofthe
siderable interest in using this measurement as a
basic causes of the other large category of dystocia -
method of predicting ease of calving.There are dif
namely,faulty dispositionofthefetus.lt isunlikely
ferencesofopinionastoitsvalue,largelybasedon
that its aetiology will be clarified until the normal
the accuracy of measuring the pelvic area using pel-
birth mechanism involved in parturient extension
vimeters inserted in the rectum.Deutscher（1995)
of thelimbsfromtheflexed gestational postureis
isofthe opinion thatpelvic area ismoderately to
understood.It seems likely to me that the uterus,
highlyheritableandcanbeincreased in a herd by
through itsmyometrialactivity,plays apart in this
the selection ofbreeding heifers and bulls.Hefound
limbexiension;postural defects aremorecommon
thatyearlingheifersshould have apelvicarea ofat
with twinsand withprematurebirths,and inboth
least 120 cm² to deliver a 27kg calf at 2years of age.
of theseinstances a degree ofuterineinertiais com-
The pelvic area:birth weight (in Ib)ratio should
monly present.Changes in hormones,ratios and
be2:1.Similarly,Gaines etal（1993)found that
concentrations(particularly that ofprogesterone),
theratio ofthepelvicarea at calving to calf birth
which occur as a result of the cascade that stimu-
weight significantly affected(p<0.01) theincidence
lates the onset of parturition (see Ch. 6), are prob-
ofdystocia,but thepelvic area before calving was
ablyimportant indetermininglimbposture.For
not an accuratepredictor.Others have doubted its
example,Iochleetal（1972)havefound that,when
truevalue（vanDonkersgoedetal1993).Although
progesteronewasgiven to cowsin which labourhad
excessbody conditionscore hasbeen consideredto
beeninducedbyflumetasone,therewasahighinci
increasetheincidenceofdystocia,becauseofhe
denceofdystociadue toposturaldeviation.This
presenceoflarge amountsofretroperitonealfat in
may be related to the influence of the endocrine
thepelviccanal,not all studieshave confirmed this.
changes on myometrial activity (see Ch. 6).
It islikely that only very fat cows will have problens,
and it is good husbandry practice to ensure that this
Obstetric terminology
doesnot occur.
Theselectionof siresthatresultin alow dysto-
cia frequency duetofetomaternal disproportion hias
Wehaveusedthetermfaultyor abnormalfetaldis
beenrecognizedformanyyears,as illustrated by the
position todescribethe situationwherethefetus
use of breeds such as the Angus and Hereford as sires
hasfailed to assumethe disposition thatenables it
for dairy heifers.In addition,there is a substantial
to be expelled unaided per vaginam.In order to be
amount of information on the genetic evaluation
abletoprovideadescriptionofthedispositionthat
ofsires andgrandsiresforease ofcalvingbasedon
anyveterinarian willunderstand,there isanagreed
theestimatedbreedingvaluesforcalfbirthweight.
terminologyfirstdefined byBenesch.This involves
Surprisingly,despite this,stillbirths rates (many
the use of the terms presentation,position and pos-
ofwhich will bedue todystocia)inUSHolsteins
ture,each ofwhich has a specificmeaning inrela
increasedbetween1986and1995from9.5%to
tion toveterinaryobstetrics.
13.2%inprimiparae and5.0%to6.6%inpluriparae
Presentation signifies the relationshipbetween
(Meyeret al2001).There are threepossiblereasons
thelongitudinal axisofthefetus and thematernal
for this: producers are ignoring the evaluations and
birth canal.lt includes longitudinal presentation,
aremoreinterestedinselectingsiresformillkyield;
which can be anterior or posterior depending on
the evaluations are inadequate to produce favour-
whichfetal extremityis enteringthepelvis;transverse
ablegenetic changes;a reduction in dystocia rate is
presentation,ventralordorsalaccordingtowhether
notreducingthe stillbirthrate(Johanson&Berger
the dorsal or ventral aspect of the trunk is presented;
216
Chapter
181
General considerations
and vertical presentation,ventral or dorsal.Vertical
·immaturity of the dam at the time of breeding,
presentation isvery rare, and only the obliquely ver
and hence calving
tical 'dog-sitting' presentation in the horse needs to
· the use of an inappropriate sire, either without or
be considered.
within the breed
Position indicates the surface of the maternal
●the use of embryos derived from in vitro matura
birth canal to which the fetalvertebral column is
lion,invitrofertilizationculture and cloningsee
applied. It can be dorsal, ventral and left and right
Ch.35).
lateral.
Posture refers to the disposition ofthemovable
Dystocia due tofaulty fetal disposition at the time of
appendages of the fetus and involves flexion or
calving is lower,i.e.26%(Sloss & Johnston 1967-
extension of the cervical or limb joints, for example
Table 8.9].A survey of 3873calvings over a21-year
lateral flexion of theneck orhockflexionposture.
period in Colorado,USA, showed that in 96% of
the calvings the fetus was in normal disposition;in
the remaining 4% the disposition was abnormal. In
Types of dystocia within species
these 4%(155 in total).72.8% of the feruses were
inposteriorpresentation and dorsal posture,11.4%
Cattle
had unilateral carpal or shoulder flexion, in 8.2%
the calf was a breech,in 2.5%there was lateral devi
ation of the head,1.9%had incomplete extensionof
fetal oversize into absolute andrelative: the former
the elbow, in 1.35% the calf was in posterior longi-
describes anabnorimallylargefetuswhilethelatter
tudinal presentation and ventral position, in 1.35%
refers to a normal-sized fetusbut where thematernal
it was in transverse presentation and in 0.6% it was
pelvis is smaller than normal. A more appropriate
in obliqueventro-vertical presenitation/position.
terminology isfetomaternal orfetopelvicdispropor-
The incidence offetal monsters is relatively high
tion; the former of these two terms will be used in
in the cow; they are generally of the distorted and
this book.Fetomaternal disproportion is the com-
celosomian types, schistosoma reflexus and peroso-
monest cause of dystocia in cattle (Table 8.9). The
mus elumbis being commonest (see Ch.4).In a sur-
incidence is dependent on such factors as:
vey by 21 veterinarians from 1966-1985 in the state
· breed, being especially common in those with a
ofVictoria,Australia,1.3%of the dystocias atrended
high incidence ofmuscular hypertrophy;this ran
were due to schistosoma reflexus (Kmight 1996). In
be compounded in a breed such as the Belgian
a survey in Poland from 1970-1974,115 or 12.9%
Bluewhere tlhiere is also asmall pelvicinlet
of891 fetuses ornewborn calves with developmen-
tal congenital abnormalities were also due to this
abnormality; allresulted in dystocia(Cawlikowski
Table 8.9 Causesof dystocia in 635 beef cattle (after
1993). Achondroplastic calves, typified by the
Sloss&Johnston1967)
bulldog’ calf of the Dexter-Kerry breed, were also
Cause
1J0 %
encountered.
dystocias
Departures from longitudinal presentation are
uncommon,because the anatomical arrangement
Fetomaternal disproportion
46
of the uterine cornua and the absence of a distinct
Faulty fetal disposition
26
uterine body in the cow do not favour transverse
Incomplete cervical anc veginal dilatation
9
presentation.Postural irregularities of the head and
Uterine inertia
5
limbs are common, particularly carpal flexion, lat-
eral deviation of the head and breech presenta-
Uterine torsion
3
tion'. Simultaneous presentation of twins is a well
Cervical prclapse
3
recognized causeofbovine dystocia,and one of the
Pelvic fracture
2
first duties of the obsteirician when proceeding to
Uterine rupture
2
manipulative delivery is to ensure that thepresent
Cervical neoplasia
0.5
ing limbs belong to the same fetus.Uterine inertia,
5
often associatedwith hypocalcaemia,iswell known,
Fetal abnormalities
217
Part
31
Dystociaandother disordersassociatedwithparturition
torsion has its highest incidence in cattle, while
different breeds of horse;again the study shows that
instancesofincompletedilatationofthecervixare
faulty disposition of the fetus was responsible for
occasionally seen.
causing69%of the dystocias.Of these,flexion and
retentionofoneforelimbaccountedfor13ofthe40
cases.Examination ofthe causes of dystocia when
Horse
fetal dispositionwas normal shows that fetomater-
According to Vandeplassche(personal communi-
nal disproportion occurredin5,weakcontractionin
cation to GHArthur,1972),only about5%ofthe
more serious equine dystocias are of maternal ori
lockin2of the18cases
gin,and theyaremainlyuterine torsions.Mostcases
Failureofthefetustorotateinto thedorsalposi-
result from irregularityofpresentation,positionand
tion, and its consequent engagement at the mater-
postureof thefetus,of which the commonest single
nalpelvisintheventralor lateralposition,areoften
cause is lateral deviationof thehead.Fetomaternal
disproportion anduterine inertia arerare,exceptin
tionof thedorsalwallofthevagina,andevenofthie
some draughtbreeds.Transversepresentation of the
rectum and anus.
foal across theuterinebody(eitherdorsotransverse
All forms ofpostural irregularity occur in the
or ventrotransverse)is well known,and another
mare.The head andneck maybe displaced laterally
formoftransversedispositioninwhich theextremi-
ordownwardsbetween theforelegs.Such displace-
ties of the fetus occupy the uterine horns is notori-
mentsmaybefurthercomplicatedbyrotationofthe
ous and peculiar to the equine species.In respeci of
cervical joinis. The limbs are frequently presented
theinfluence ofpresentationof thefetusondysto-
abnormally;one, several or all of the joints of the
cia,Vandeplassche(1993) summarizes thepresenta-
limbsmaybe flexed,and theirregularities areclassi-
tionsin 170000normalequinebirthsinBelgium,
fied according to their clinical significance as carpal
compared with the presentations diagnosed in
flexion,shoulderflexion,hockflexion andhipflex-
601dystocia casesbrought tohis clinicinGhent
ion.Bilateral hip flexion is known as breech presen-
(Table 8.10).Whereas posterior and transverse pre-
tation.An exceptional equineposturalabnormality
sentations occurred in only 1.0% and 0.1%,respec-
which occurs in anterior presentation,is displace-
tively,of normal births, hey were present in 16%
mentofoneorbothextendedforelimbsabovethe
and16%ofdystociacases.Anobliquelyverticalor
fetal neck (foot-nape posture).
‘dog-sitting'position ofthe fetus is another well-
Gross fetalmonstrosities arerare,but occasional
known dystociapeculiar tohorses.Ina morerecent
developmental anomalies that cause dystocia are
study,Leidletal (1993),from theMunichVeterinary
wryneck(fixed lateral deviation) and hydrocepha-
School,examined the causesof100 dystocia cases
lus.Wryneck islikely to occur with transverse bicor-
referredto theirclinic.Theyfoundthat 6lweredue
nual pregnancy.
tofaulty fetal disposition,17t0uterine torsion,10
tofetomaternaldisproportion,4wereassociated
Sheepandgoat
with twins,4were due to incomplete dilatation of
thebirth canaland3 touterineventraldeflection.
Wallace(1949)provided a useful basis for under-
These detailed studies involve casesreferred to clin-
standing the causes of sheep dystocia by observing
ics.InastudybyGinther&Williams（1996),details
allparturitions (275) in a single flock （Table 8.8).
werecollectedfromeightstudfarmsinvolvingfour
He found 94.5% anterior and 3.6% posterior pre-
sentations,which are strilingly similar figures to
those for bovine parturitions.Gunn （1968)col-
Table 8.10Influence of fetal presentation on dystocia in the
lecteddatafrom15584birthsinScottishhillflocks
mare(Vandeplassche1993)
and reporteda dystocia incidence of3.1%(3.5%
Normal foalings
with singles and1.3%with twins),butMcSporran
Presentation
Dystocia cases
et al(1977) recorded 20-31%of difficult lambings
Anterior
168130(98.9%)
408(68%)
inaparticularlockofRomneysheepinwhichfeto-
Posterior
1700(1.0%)
95(16%)
maternal disproportion wasprevalent.
Iis uniformly believed that, in sheep popu-
Transverse
170 (0.1%)
98(16%)
lations,irrespective ofbreed and age,fetopelvic
218
Chapter
181
Generalconsiderations
disproportionisthecommonestcauseofdystocia,
Wales practice over a 10-year period,lateral devia
that its incidencevarieswithbreedand thatitfre-
tionof theheadwasthecommonest type,whereas
quently occurs where there is crossingof disparate
in Wallace's (1949) and Blackmore's(1960) reports
breedsforcommercial lambproduction.Also,assis-
itwascervicalnon-dilatation(32%and15%,respec
tanceatlambingforthistypeofdystociaismorefre-
tively).Next after these two types in the veterinary
quently required inprimiparae;malelambs,which
surveyscameshoulderfexion,carpal flexion,simul
arelarger,predisposetoit.Wherepelvicsizeofthe
taneous presentation oftwins,breech preseniation
eweis themajor factorin thedisproportion,there
and fetal oversize.Otheroccasionalcauses ofsevere
islikely toberepeated dystocia.McSporran et al
sheep dystocia are uterine torsion,monstrosities
(1977) have demonstrated that its incidence can be
(including schistosoma reflexus),fetal duplication,
markedly reduced (from 31% 10 3.3% in a period
fetal oedema and perosomus elumbis.Similarly,in
of 4 years)-the level in Gunn's (1968) survey for
Thomas's (1990) survey the number of dystocias
Scottish hill sheep - by culling ewes that required
due to fetomaternal disproportion was small (3%)
assistance atconsecutiveparturitionsand bybreed-
because,unlessitisvery severe,such forms ofdysto
ing torams that had sired lanbs of lower birth
cia can be dealt with by the shepherd.In this same
weight.
survey, the large number of other causes were due
In certainbreeds and flocks,the incidence of dys-
tothosedisorders,suchasincompletedilatation of
tocia due tomaldisposition exceedsthat dueto
thecervix,thatmay requireveterinary intervention
fetopelvic disproportion;for example, in Gunn's
such as a caesarean operation (Table 8.11). This was
surveyit was more than 60%(Table 8.1l).It ismore
alsothecasein twostudiesthatemanatedfromvet-
commoninpluriparae thanprimiparae and ismore
erinary school obstetric clinics,where incomplete
frequent with twins than with singlebirths.Among
cervical dilatationiwas thecauseofdystocia in70%
maldisposition dystocias,shoulder flexion is com-
(Klosset al2002)and 61%(Sobiraj 1994)ofthe
monest,followed by carpal flexion,breech presen-
cases.Itis difficult tocompareresults from different
tation,lateral deviation ofthehead and transverse
studies,since there were differences in the criteria
presentation.Ewes with unilateral shoulder flexion
used to diagnose this disorder; however, there is an
often lamb spontaneously.
impression thatincomplete dilatation of the cervix
Only themoredifficultdystociasarereferred for
(ringwomb) in sheep is more prevalent now than it
was 30 or 40 years ago.
lists of assisted lambings the incidence ofparticu-
Itappeared from Gunn's(1968) data,and from
lar types of dystociavarieswith theprevalentbreed
other reports,that twinning does not significantly
and with flock management. In Elis's(1958) series
increasesheepdystocia overall.The explanationfor
of1200casesofsheepdystociaattendedinaNorth
this isthat,whereas twinsincreasemaldisposition
Table8.11Frequencyof themaincausesofdystociain sheep
Author(s)
Year
Country
Breed(s)
Totalno.of
Disproportion
Disposition
Other
dystocias
(%)
(%)
(%)
Wallace
1949
NZ
Romney
100
32
53
15
Gunn
1968
UK
[Cheviot
477
35
65
[Blackface)
George
1975
Australia
Merino
E9
77
23
0
Whitelaw&
1975
UK
[Cheviot
50
76
24
0
Watchorn
[Blackface)
George
1976
Australia
Dorset
513
57
0
Thomas*
1990
UK
Mixed
328
3
42
55
'Sobiraj
1994
Germany
Mixed
239
18
11
71
"Veterinary-practice-basedsurvey
Clinic-based survey
219
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
dystocia,thereis areduced incidenceoffetomater-
the dimension from the sacrum to the pubic bone,
nal disproportion dystociabecauseoftheirsmaller
and thus reduces the size of thepelviccanal,while
individual size.Thereisnodoubt from allpublished
inbrachycephalicbreeds thehead isverybroad.
work thatposteriorpresentationmarkedlypredis-
In a study involving155 cases of dystocia in
poses to difficult births.
bitches, which included 65 different breeds ranging
in agefrom 1-11years,75.3% of the causes of dys-
tociawerematernalin origin and24.7fetalinorigin
Pig
(Walet-Darvelid & Linde-Forsberg 1994).A fur-
ther breakdown of thevarious subcauses is shown
Thetypesofdystociaencounteredinthe sowresem-
in Table 8.12.This shows that uterine inertia was
blemorecloselythoseofthebitchthan thoseofthe
responsiblefor72%ofall dystocias.Theauthors of
monotocous species,maternal forms being almost
thispaperusedtheterm‘primarycompleteuterine
twice ascommon as fetal forms.InJackson's(1972)
inertia'toindicatewhenthebitchfailedtoexpel
seriesof202dystocias,37%werecausedbyuterine
any pups,comparablewith the classical definition
inertia,13%by obstructionofthebirth canaland
9%by downwarddeviationof theuterus,whereas
ofprimaryuterineinertia,and‘primarypartialuter-
ineinertia'toindicatewhere thebitchgavebirth to
14.5% were caused bybreech presentation,10%
at least one pup and then stopped before whelping
by simultaneous presentation, 3.5% by downward
was complete,more comparable with secondary
deviationofhead and4%byfetaloversize.Theinci-
denceoffetaldystocia increaseswhen the litter is
uterine inertia.
The Dachshund and Scottish Terrier are particu
small,for in these thesizeof theindividual tends
larly prone to primary uterine inertia.The Corgi
tobelargeandobstructionmayresult.Irregularities
shows extreme variation in the size ofits puppies
oflimb posture,and evenuncomplicatedposterior
andhencefetomaternal disproportion may occur.
presentation,often cause dystocia when the litter is
smallwhereashad thelitterbeenlargeanditsindi
Brachycephalicbreeds,together with the Sealyham
and Scottish Terrier, are prone to obstructive dys-
viduals small,theseirregularities would not have
tocia due to thefetuseshavingcomparativelylarge
interferedwith normalexpulsion.Monstrosities
heads and the dams having narrow pelves.Large
are not uncommon; they are generally of the dou-
ble type but schistosomes, perosomes and hydro-
cephalic specimens also occur.Together,bladder
flexion and vaginal prolapsewere reported io be the
Table 8.12Frequency of the cause in 182cases of cystocia in
thirdmostcommoncausesofdystociainastudyin
bitches(Walett-Darvelid&Linde-Forsberg 1994)
Germany (Schulz &Bostedt 1995), while hypocal-
Cause
caemia should also beconsidered as a cause of uter-
No.of cases
%
ineinertia（Framstadetal 1989)
Maternal
Amonglitters ofsows attendedfor dystocia,there
Primary completeuterine inertia
89
48.9
is a collective stillbirth rate ofabout 20%,as com-
Primary partial uterine inertia
42
23.1
pared with 6% in sows which farrow unaided.
Narrowbirth canal
2
1.1
Uterine torsion
2
1.1
Dogandcat
Hydallantois
1
0.5
ltis difficult tocollect meaningful data on causes of
Vaginal septum formation
1
0.5
dystociainthebitchandqueenirstlybecausesome
Total
137
75.3
experienced dog and cat breeders are very capable
Fetal
of treating all but the most severe causes.Secondly.
Faulty disposition
manybreedsofdogandtoalesserextentcatsuffer
28
15.4
from severe congenital deformities such as achon-
Fetomaternal disproportion
12
6.6
droplasia and brachycephalicism,which can exert a
Fetal monster
3
1.6
major influence on the birth process.The data will
Fetal death
2
1.1
be influenced greatly by thepopulation of animals
Total
45
24.7
in the study.Achondroplasia results in areduction in
220
Chapter
181
Generalconsiderations
Fetal hydrocephalus and anasarca occasionally
Table 8.13 Causes of dystocia in queens(Ekstrand &Linde-
Forsberg 1994)
occur, but other forins of monster are rare.In the
achondroplastic types and in kittens gross umbili-
Cause
No.of
%
cal hernia(schistocormus) is seen,but it is seldom a
cases
cause of dystocia.
Maternal
Abnormalities ofpositionare common inboth
Uterineprolapse
0.6
anteriorandposteriorpresentationandarethem-
1
selves a cause ofobstruction.Failure ofthefetus to
Uterine strangulation
1
0.6
rotate prior to presentation results in its engaging in
Narrowbirth canal (fetomaternal
8
5.2
the pelvic inlet in the ventral or lateral position.
disproportion)
Traverse presentation is rare.When it occurs the
Uterine inertia
94
60.6
bitch is generally gravid with a single fetus only,
Subtotal
104
67.1
and gestation is of thebicornual type.lt is generally
Fetal
accompaniedbyuterineinertia.
In the cat, maternal causes of dystocia are
Faulty disposition
24
15.5
morecommon,
particularly
uterine
inertia.
Fetal congenital defects
12
7.7
Felomaternal disproportion and faulty disposi-
Fetomaternel disproportion
3
1.9
tion are the most common fetal causes.These are
Fetal death
7
4.5
illustrated in Table 8.13, from a paper by Ekstrand
46
&Linde-Forsberg [1994);the authors used the
Subtotal
29.7
sameclassificationforuterineinertiaasdescribed
Other causes
5
3.2
above(Walett-Darvelid &Linde-Forsberg 1994).
Total
155
100
This study also shows the influence of breed on
dystocia(Table8.14).
fetuses, causing fetomaternal disproportion, are
commonly encountered in bitches gravid with only
one or two pups;disproportion may also result
Table8.14Relativefrequencyofcatbreedswith dystocia
from a fetal monster.A primigravid bitch of the
(Ekstrand&Linde-Forsberg1994)
small breeds often has trouble expelling her first
Breed
No.
%
puppy but, provided timely assistance is forthcom-
Short-haired
ingsheusuallyexpelstheremainderofherlitter
normally.If,however, assistance is delayed,the
British Short-hair
2
1.3
onsetofsecondaryinertiamaymakethe outcome
Devcn Rex
2
1.3
serious. Irregularities of limb posture are generally
Russian Blue
2
1.3
of little importance provided the puppy is of nor-
Burmese
7
4.5
malsize.Infact,many puppies areborn with their
fore-orhindlimbs flexed.However,when thefetus
Foreign Short-hair
1
0.6
isrelativelylarge,these postural deviations are often
Siamese
10
6.5
thefactor that causes dystocia.Notinfrequentlya
Semi-long-haired
bitch or cat,in attempting to expel a fetus with its
forelimbs retained, partially succeeds in that the
Balinese
3
1.9
headisbornbut thethoraxwiththelimbsbecomes
Norwegian Forest Cat
2
1.3
obstructedinthematernalpelvicinlet.Similarlya
Birman
6
3.9
puppy or kitten may have its hind parts born while
Long-haired
itsdistended thoraxis obstructed.
Irregularities of head posture are common,and
Persian
58
37.4
vertex(butt')presentation and lateral deviation of
Others
the head are frequently encountered.An interest-
Household cat
62
40.0
ingfeature of thelatter abnormality is that it often
Total
155
100
involves thelastpuppytobeborn.
221
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
References
Kossaibati MA,Esslemont Rj1995Daisy-theDairy
InformationSystem,report4.University ofReading
Azzan SM,Kinder JE,Nielsen MK et al 1993] Anim Sti 71:
LaingADMG 1949NZ|Agric79:11
282
LeidlW,StollaR,SchmidG1993Tierrz mschau48:408
BergerPCubasAC,KoehlerKHealeyMH1992AnimSi
McDermott J1.Allen OB,Martin SW,Alves DM 1992 Can
70:1775
VetRes56:47
BlackmoreDK1960Vet Rec72:631
McEarlaneD1961AustVet137:105
Byron CR,EmberisonRM,BernardWVetal2003EquineVet
McGuirk B,Forsyth R,Dobson H 2007Vet Rec161:685
135:82
McSporranKD,BuchananR,Fielden ED 1977NZVetI25:247
Carr |1998In:Garth Pig Stockmanship Standards.5M,
MeyerCLBererPI,ThompsonRaterCG001Dairy
Sheffield,p4
Sci84:1246
CawlilowskiI1993ZeszNaukoweAkadRolnicza Szczecin
Miller GY,Dorn CR1990 PrevVet Med 8:171
Zootech 29:52
Moule GR1954Aust Vet130:153
Collery P,BradleyJ,FaganJet al 1996IrishVet[49:491
MurrayRD,CartwrightTA,DownhamDY,MurrayMA1999
Dematawewa CMB,Berger Pl1997 |Dairy Sci 80:754
Anim Sci69:105
Dennis SM,Nairn ME 1970Aust VetJ46:272
MurrayRD,CartwrightTA,DownhamDYetal 2002Reprod
Deutscher GH 1995Agri-practice16:751
Dom Anim 37:1
Edwards SA 1979JAgr Sci Camb 93:359
Randall CCB1972Vet Rec90:178
Ekstrand C,Linde-ForsbergC19941Small AnimPract35:
SalmanMD,KingMEOddeKG,MorierRG1991A
459
Med Ass0c198:1739
EllisTH 1958Vet Rec70:952
Sauerer G,AverdunkG,MatzkePBogner H 1988Bayer
FramstadT,Krovel A,Okkenhaug H etal 1989NorskVet
Landwirtschaftl Jahrb65:969
Tidsskrift 101:579
Schulz S,BostedtS 1995Tierarzl Praxis 23:139
Gaines JD, Peschel D, Kauffman RC et al 1993
SlossV,Dufty JH 1980 Handbook of bovine obstetrics.
Theriogenology 40:33
Williams&WilkinsBaltimore
George|M 1975Aust Vet]51:262
SlossV,Johnston DE1967AustVetI43:13
GeorgeJM 1976AustVet J52:519
SobirajA 1994DtschTierarzil Wochenschr101:471
Ginther Ol,Williams D 1996  Equine VetSci 16:159
Thomas JO 1990 Vet Rec127:574
VandeplasscheM1993 inEquineReproduction.
Gunn RG 1968 Anim Prod10:213
Philadelphia:Lea and Febiger
Gunn-Moore DA,ThrusfieldMV1995Vet Rec136:350
Van Donkersgoed JRibbleCS,BookerCWetal 1993 Can
Haas SD,Bristol ICard CF 1996Can VetJ37:91
Vei Res57:170
HanzenC,LaurentY,WardWR1994Theriogenology41:
Van SoomA,MijtenP,VanVlaenderenIetal1994
1099
Theriogenology 41: 855
Hight GK,Iury KE1969 NZ SocAnim Prod29:219
Walet-Darvelid A,Linde-Forsberg C1994ISmall AnimPract
Jackson PGG 1972 Dystocia in the sow.Fellowship thesis,
35:402
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons,London
Wallace LR1949ProcNZSocAnim Prod 85
Jackson PGG1995In: Handbook of veterinary obstetrics.WB
Welner G,Wooliams C,MacleodNSM1983IAgricSci
Saunders,London,p 105
Cainb100:539
JochleW,Esparza P,GinenezT,HidalgoMA1972J Reprod
WhitelawA,WatchornP1975Vet Rec 97:489
Fertil 28:407
WilsmoreA]1986BrVetJ142:233
Johanson M,ergerP2003DairySci86:3745
WiumTE,SalmanMD,KingMEetal 1994PrevVeMed
JonesJET1966BrVetI122:420
19:1
Kloss S,WehrendA,Failing,BostedH2002Berl Mnh
Wooliams C,WelmerG,MacleodNSM1983IAgricSci
Tierarztl 115:247
Camb 100:553
KnightRP 1996AustVet]73:105
222
9
Chapter
David Noakes
The approach to an obstetric case
Each case of dystocia is a clinical problem that may
·Have anyparts ofthefetus appeared at thevulva?
be solved if a correct procedure is followed.The
·Has an examination been made and has assistance
veterinarysurgeonarriveswith aknowledge ofthe
been altempted? If so,what was its nature？
various typesofabnormality thatmayoccurin that
In the case of the multiparous species,have any
particular species and then,by a careful consider
ationofthefacts elicitedfromtheownerorattendant
youngbeenborn,naturallyorotherwise,andifso,
when?Were they alive atbirth?
and theinformationobtainedfrom themethodical
examination of thepatient,thenature ofthe abnor-
·Is the animal still taking food?
mality can be ascertained. A correct diagnosis is the
·In the case of the bitch and cat,has there been
basis of sound obstetric practice.
vomiting?
Byaconsideration oftheanswerstothese and
History of the case
similar questionsit is possible to form a fairly accu
rate idea of the case to be dealt with. The inference to
be drawn from many of them is obvious, but there
Therefore,beforeproceeding to examine theanimal,
areseveralpoints associatedwiththem thatmerit
a briefhistoryofthecaseshould,wheneverpossible,
discussion.
beobtained.Much of i will be the outcomeof ques-
The greatest attention will be paid to the dura-
tioning the owner or attendant but many points will
tion of labour.Calculatingthetime ofonsetoffirst
also be elicited from personal observation of the
stage is often difficult because,as you will know
animal.
from reading Chapter 6,the signs are sometimes
·Has full term arrived or is delivery premature?
very vague and indistinct.However,the onset of
vigorous and frequent straining,together with the
Is the animal a primigravida or multigravida?
appearance of the amnion, the expulsion of fetal flu-
What is her previous breeding history?
ids or the appearance of a fetal extremity,indicates
·What has been the general management during
the onsetof the second stage of labour,and parturi
pregnancy?
tionshouldproceednormally.Ifseveral hourshave
·When did straining begin?What was its nature-
elapsed since its onset,itis reasonably certain that
obstructive dystocia exists.Nevertheless, in is prob-
slightandintermittentorfrequentandforceful?
able in all species except the mare that the fetus or
·Has straining ceased?
fetuses are still livingunless the signs havenotbeen
Has awater-bagappeared and,if so,when was it
observed and their significance understood.In the
first seen?
primigravida,particularlytheheifer and thebitch,
·Has there been any escape of fluid?
itis often found that thecause ofthedystocia is
223
Part
31
Dystociaandother disordersassociatedwithparturition
relatively simple,such asslightfetomaternal dispro-
however, the membranes are dry and dark in colour,
portion, and the application of a little assistance is.
it maybetakenthat thecase isprotracted.
all that isrequired.In the mare,thenormal courseof
Maybe nothing protrudes from the vulva, in
deliveryis sorapid,and separationof theplacenta
whichcaseparticularattentionshould bepaid to
occurs soquicklyoncethe secondstagehascom-
thenature ofthe discharge.Freshblood,especially
menced,that any delaygenerallyresults n thedeath
if profuse, generally indicates recent injury to the
ofthefoal as aresult of anoxia.
birth canal.A dark brown,fetid discharge indicates
However,when the call for assistance has been
agrossly delayedcase.Whereitisclearfrom the evi
delayed24ormorehoursanditisnoticedthat
dence alreadyobtainedthat thefetusis dead and the
strainingeffortshaveceased,itmaybe assumed that
uterus grossly infected, the desirability of inducing
hefetusisdead,much of thefluid has beenlost,the
epidural anaesthesia beforeproceeding to avaginal
uterusisexhausted andputrefaction ofthefetus has
exaininationshouldbeconsidered.In thisway the
begun.These facts in themselves,quite apart from
riskofinfectingtheneuralcanal shouldspinal anaes-
themoredetailed featuresofthecase,indicate that
thesialaterbefoundtobenecessaryisreduced
theprognosismusi beguarded.Thisisespecially the
When dealingwith the bich and cat,the degree
caseinthepolytocous species,foritisprobable that
ofabdominal distension should beobserved,forit
there are several fetuses in utero.
maybepossibletomakeanestimateofthenumber
If thehistory isthatefforis to deliver the animal
of fetuses that occupy the uterus.The onset of vom-
havealreadybeenmade,orwhen suchevidence is
iting,togetherwitha greatincreaseinthirst,should
absent but one suspects it tobethe case,a searchfor
be regarded as grave signs in the bitch.
injury ofthegenitalcanalwill bethefirstfeature of
the detailed examination of the animal.Ifany injury
isidentifiedthentheownerorattendantmust be
Detailed examination of
informedimmediately,and thelikely consequences
the animal
for the health of the dam explained. Sometimes,
attempts at assistance will be denied; lhowever, it
Large animal species
is generally accepted that, with the exception of
the marewherethe expulsive forces during second
The animal should be effectivelyrestrained for the
stageareverypowerful,spontaneousinjury doesnot
safety of both the veterinarian,any assistants and
occur.In this case, the honesty or accuracy of the
the animal concerned, in a clean environment. In
informationshouldbequeried.
the case of the mare, cow, ewe and doe goar it is
easieriftheyremainstanding:inthesowtheexam
Generalexamination of
ination isbestperformedwithher in lateralrecum
bency (Fig. 9.1). Very rarely it may be necessary to
the animal
sedatethe dam if sheisveryfractious.Plentiful sup
plies of clean hot water with soap or surgical scrub
Theanimal'sphysicalandgeneral conditionshould
should beavailable,aswell asa table,bench ortruss
be noted.If recumbent,is she merely resting or is
ofstrawcoveredwithasterileclothonwhichthe
she exhaustedorsufferingfrom a metabolic disease?
instruments maybeplaced.While it is impossible
Body temperature and pulse rate should benoted
and the significance ofabnormalities considered.
species,the amount of contamination ofthegenital
Particular attention should be paid to the vulva.
tract should be kept as low as possible.A plentiful
Parts of a fetus may be protruding and it maybe pos-
supplyofclean strawshould beplacedunderand
sible to assess thenature of the dystocia from these.
behind the animal;also,sincethe floor isoften wet
Areexposedfetalpartsmoistordry?Suchevidence
and slippery, a prior application of sand or grit is a
serves not only as a guide to the duration of the con-
worthwhileprecaution.
ditionbut also to the effort that will be necessary
Withanassistantholdingthetail tooneside,the
tocorrectit.Shouldparts of the amnion protrude
external genitalia and surrounding parts are ihor-
what istheir condition?Aretheymoist andglisten-
oughlywashedfrom onebucket,and in themare a
ingand isfluid caught upin their folds?If so,their
clean tail bandage is applied since the tail hairs are
exposure is recent and the case is an early one.If
frequentlyintroducedintothevulva andvaginaand
224
Chapter
91
The approach to an obstetric case
the ears and occiput, the case being one of lateral
deviation ofthehead.Butwhat oftheforelimbs?
Cantheflexedcarpi befeltbeneath theneckoris
therecompleteretention oftheforelimbsinaddi-
tiontotheheadabnormality?Inthemare,complete
emptinessofthevaginaapartfrom themembranes
maybeduetoposturaldefects,aspreviously out
lined,but more often indicates a dorsotransverse
presentation,If it is impossible or almost impos
sibletoreach anyparts of thefetus in this species,
thecase isprobably one ofbicornualgestation.The
protrusion of the allantochorion into the vagina
and from thevulva-‘red bag'-indicates placental
Fig.9.1 Mare with dystocia;restrained in stocksforvaginal
separation.
examinationandcorrection of dystocia.
However,inthemajorityofcasessomepart of the
fetusoccupiesthevagina-thehead,a limb orlimbs.
Recognitionof thehead isnot difficult;themouth
can causequiteseverelacerations.Theoperator,hav-
and tongue, the orbits and the ears are generally
ingwashed hisor her hands and arms from another
obvious. ln the case of a limb,the first requirement
bucketandafter donningacleandisposableplastic
istoascertainwhetherit isaforelimborhindlimb.
sleeve,proceeds tomakeavaginal examination.The
Iftheplantar aspect ofthedigit isdownwards,itis
introductionofthehandthroughthevulvarlabia
highly probable that it is a forelimb; the converse is
almostinvariablyprovokesdefaecationinthecow
equallytrue.Thisstatementapplieswithgreaterforce
and iubecomesnecessarytowashthevulva andthe
to the cow than the mare for in the latter, presenta
operator's arms again.
tion of thefetusintheventralpositionisrelatively
Without the previous induction of epidural anaes-
common.Proofis obtained by noting the direclion
thesia and theresultant paralysis of the rectum,it is
offlexion ofthelimbjoints.Ifthejointimmediately
almostimpossibletomakeavaginal examination in
abovethefetlockflexesinthesamedirectionasthe
thecowwithoutintroducingsomefaecalcontami-
lalter,thelimbisaforeone,andtheconverseholds
nation.This statement certainly holds true for ani-
true. The beginner may experience some difficulty
malsthat havebeenfedon grass and in whichfaeces
in recognizing thefeial partsbeingpalpatedif they
are semi-fluid. Usually, no serious consequence
arecovered by amnion.Toovercoimethis,the ton
will result from thiscontamination of thevaginal
edges of the amniotic sac should beidentified and
mucous membrane, provided the latter is intact.
opened, and the hand inserted so that the fingers
Ifon examination the vagina is found to be empty,
comeintodirectcontactwiththeferus.Ifwo limbs
attentionshouldbedirected tothecervix.Isit com-
arepresentit mustbeestablished that they areboth
pletelyeffaced？Ifitisnot,isitpartiallydilatedand
foreorhind,andiftheyarefrom thesamefetus
isitstilloccupiedbysomestickymucus?Ifso,then
Notinfrequently,itisnecessary torepel thefetus
itmaybeconcluded thaithefirststageoflabour is
in theuterusto ascertainthenature and direction of
not completeandthesecondstageoflabour hasnot
displacedparts.Ifcontinued straining makesthis dif-
yet begun, and the animal should be given more
ficult,theinduction of epidural anaesthesia should
time.Maybe thecase is one of uterine torsion.Does
beconsidered atonce,but it shouldberemembered
thevaginaend abruptly atthepelvicbrimand isthe
that thedam'sexpulsiveeffortmayberequiredafter
mucosa drawn intotight,spirally arranged folds?In
any corective procedure has been performed.
theeventofthevaginabeingoccupiedbyamnion
In the protracted case,assessmient of the exact
only,the nature of the fetal parts presented at the
nature of the dystocia and methods ofcorrection
pelvicinletmustbeascertained.Can afetal tail and
maybemoredifficult.Often,particularlyinheifers,
anusbeidentified?If so,it ishighlyprobable that
mares and sows, the vaginal wall becomes grossly
thecaseisone ofbreechpresentation.Isittheflexed
swollenandoedematoussothateventheinsertion
neckwhich is being palpated?Can themanebe
ofahandandarmbecomesdifficultandthere is
detected?Asearchononeorothersidemayreveal
no room in which to carry outmanipulations.Loss
225
Part
31
Dystocia andotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
offluidhasresulted in themucousmembrane and
Whether ornot thehairisclippedfrom the area
the fetalparts becoming dry.Contraction ofthe
around the vulya before making a vaginal exam-
uterusdirecilyontheirregular contour ofthefetus
ination wilfepend on the length of the coat.
makesretropulsion difficult oreven impossible,in
In long-coated animals it is a great convenience
which caseaspasmolyticsuch asclenbuterolmay
to do so;althoughit isimpossibletorender the
be used,while in many cases the ferus has become
area sterile,it should be thoroughly cleansed
impacted in thepelvis.Plenty ofobstetrical lubri-
beforehand.
cant is required.
Sometimes on raising the tail it is seen that part
The assessment of the viability of the presented
ofa fetus,a head or hind parts,is prouruding from
fetus is necessary at an early stage in the examina-
the vulva. Such a finding is more common in the cat
tion because this will influence the options for
than thebitch.The case is a simple one; traction on
treatment This can be done by attempting to elicit
theexposedpartseffectsdeliverywithoutdifficulty
reflexessuch as corneal/palpebral,suck,analif they
and,provided this assistance hasbeen forthcoming
are in posterior presentation,and limb withdrawal.
early,it isprobablethatparturitionwill proceednor-
In addition,palpationfor thepresence ofapulse in
mally.Occasionallyitisfound thatthevagina isoccu-
theumbilicusisparticularlyusefulwhen the fetus
piedbyafetal headorbuttockswhich havebecome
isinposteriorlongitudinalpresentation.If thefetus
impacted.Inthemajority,however,thepelvic canal
is dead,then it maybe important tobe able to esti-
isunoccupied and obstruction occurs at the inlet
mate the time interval since death.When there is
Whatisthepresentation?Ifahead,can one detect
fetalemphysema anddetachmentofhair,thenthe
themouth?Oris it theocciputwiththeears?If the
fetushasbeendeadforatleast24-48hours.Ifafter
latter,thecaseisoneofvertexpresentation.Maybea
thefetushasbeenremoved thereisnoemphysema
singlelimbisfeltbutthereisno signoftheheadthe
and the cornea is cloudy and grey,then it will have
caseisprobably one oflateraldeviationofthehead
been dead for 6-12 hours.
isthe presentation posterior? Recognition ofthe
tailisgenerally simple,although it maybe directed
forwards over the fetal back.Have the hindlimbs
Dog and cat
entered thepelvisoraretheyretained?Hlasthefetus
Thebitchunlessanexceptionallylargeoneshould
rotatedintothedorsalposition oris thecaseoneof
be placed standing on a table.It is preferable that
ventral orlateralposition?Istheuterinebodyunoc-
a person with whom the animal is familiar should
cupied?Determination of fetalviabilityby altempt-
hold its head and be warned that even some quiet
ing to elicit reflexes is unreliable.
stoical bitches may resent a vaginal examination.
Fetal numbers maybe assessed in some bitches by
Consideration of treatment
gentle abdominal palpation.However,if a B-mode
realtimeultrasoundscannerisavailablethen theuse
to be adopted
ofthis transabdominallywill enableafairly accurate
assessmentoffetalnumberstobemade,and has the
General
addedadvantage of being able to determine if the
pups are alive byidentifying thebeatingfetal heart.
The great majority of dystocia cases in the monoto-
At a laterstage in the examination,it might also be
cousspeciesarefetalin originandaretheoutcome
necessary to take radiographs.
ofeitherfaultydispositionorfetomaternaldispro-
As a general rule, the operator will proceed to
portion.In the former,the first aim of treatment is
make a digital examination per vaginam, especially
toconvertittonormaland,havingdonethis,hasten
in earlycasesinwhichitislikelythat obstruction is
deliverybyrelatively gentle traction.Such correction
the cause of the delay,and alsoinprotractedones in
must,ifpossible,be performed by manipulation,
whichitisestimatedthatasinglefetusonlyremains
assistedperhaps bytheuse ofsimpleinstruments
unborn.Nevertheless,cases will be met in which
such assnares andrepellers.Incases offetomaternal
itisobvious thatinertiahassupervenedandthere
disproportion,a decision must bemadepromptly
areseveralfetuses tobe delivered,inwhich case an
onwhether to atteimpt deliveryby traction orbya
immediatecaesareanoperationorhysterectomyis
caesarean operation. Various studies in cattle have
indicated.
shown thatoneofthemajorfactorsthatdetermines
226
Chapter
161
The approach to an obstetric case
theoutcomeforthecow andcalfincasesofacae-
Not infrequently the operator begins manipulative
sareanoperationisthedegreeoftractiontowhich
correction with the mare unsedated and standing
the cow was subjected before the decision to oper-
but soon realizes that,for success, the other states
ate was made.The rationale for the obstetrician
described above are preferable (Fig.9.1). Itis impor-
should always be that,if presented with live and
tantin such casesthat this decision bemade early,so
viable young at term inside a viable dam,then the
thatthe obstetriciandoes notbecome exhausted as
onlymeasureofsuccessisthedeliveryofliveand
theresult ofprolongedbutfutileefforts.
viableyoungwithoutcompromisingthehealthor
Relatively simple abnormalities, such as carpal
future fertility ofthe dam.However, the decision
flexionorlateralordownwards deviationofthe
astowhether deliveryshould he accomplished by
head,can often be corrected using the hand alone,
traction or a caesarean operation is one of the most
particularlywhen themareis comparatively small
difficult facing the obstetrician.In addition,veteri-
and straining hasbeen eliminated.However,it must
narians will sometimes be pressurized by owners
berememberedthat thelimbsoftheThoroughbred
into performing a caesarean operation when it is not
newborn foal are very long (70% of their adult
necessary,particularly incowswith uscular hyper-
length),which requires a substantial amount of
trophic calvesor brachycephalic/achondroplas-
space to facilitate flexion and extension.When,
ticbitches,purelybecause ownerswantto ensure
however,oneofthemoredifficultforms ispresent,
thebirthof liveoffspring.Conversely,owners will
such astransverse presentation,ventral position or
sometimesrequesttheuseofsevere andprolonged
impaction ofthefetusinthepelvis,or when there
traction rather thanpayfor thecost ofacaesarean
islaceration ofthevagina or vulva,it isgenerally
operation. In both situations the veterinarian must
best to anaesthetize the animal at the outset,partic-
rememberthatthewelfareofbothdamandoff-
ularlyinahospital environment.Oneof the advan-
spring are paramount, and act accordingly.
tages of general anaesthesia is that by changing the
With the advent ofnew and safer anaesthetic
position ofthe mare-for example,so that she is
agents,the caesarean operation should not be con-
in dorsal or lateral recumbency,or even suspended
sideredas'thelastresort'but aneffectivemethod of
by her hindlimbs (the anaesthetists will not be very
treatment when used appropriately. Fetotomy as a
enthusiastic about this approach because of pressure
method of treating dystocia in large animals still has
on the diaphragm)-the changein thepressures on
its place if the fetus is dead.With the greater ease
thefetus within the uterus canbeutilized tofacili-
and increased effectiveness of the caesarean opera-
tatecorrection.Wheneverfetotomyisrequired,both
tion,however,inmany parts of theworld veterinar-
sedation andcaudalepidural anaesthesiashouldbe
ianshavelosttheskillsthatarenecessarytoperform
used.In veterinary hospitals,general anaesthesia is
fetotomyeffectively(seeCh.19).
preferablesincethefoalisalreadydeadandwillnot
Uncontrolled forcibletraction may lead to lac-
be affected by transplacenial transfer of anaesthetic
eration and contusion of maternal soft tissues,
agents.
pelvicnervedamageand occasionally sacraldis-
In all severe cases,the operator should consider
placement.If the mother survives, a third-degree
the advisabilityofseekingtheassistance ofa col-
perineal laceration, deformity of the perineum,
league,for it is always possible that the combined
fistula of the vagina and rectum, or paralysis may
efforts oftwowill succeedwherethoseofonealone
ensue(see Ch.17).The obstetrician should seek1o
fail.
avoid thesecomplications at all costs.
The value ofpartialfetotomy as a treatmentof
equine dystociawherethefetus is dead ordeformed
Horse
has been emphasized by Vandeplassche (1972,
19s0).but totalfetotomy was notrecommended
The first consideration is whether attempts at cor-
because it usually causes severe damageparticularly
rection should be made with the animal standing or
totheuterus.Hepointed out that,inthemare,feto
recumbent,orrestrained andsedated,orunder cau-
tomy was difficult because of powerful straining,
dal epidural or general anaesthesia.The decision will
longbirthcanal andearlydehiscenceoftheplacenta.
be influenced in part by the size and temperament
A longThygesen fetotomewas the best instrument.
ofthemare,by the type of dystocia and theaccessi-
Theindicationsfor,andresultsof,partial fetotomy
bility of facultiesfor general anaesthesia and surgery.
areshowninTable9.1.Vandeplassche foundthat
227
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
altempted but,before this is done it is important
Table9.1Resultsoffetotomyinmares suffering from
dystocia(Vandeplassche 1972,1980)
that the vagina and those parts of ihe fetus occu-
pying it areibricated as well as possible. For this
Cause of dystocia
No.of
No.
purpose,one oftheproprietarybrands ofcellulose-
mares
recovered
based obstetric lubricant should be used. Failing
Reflexion ofhead and neck
72
67(93%)
this,the copious application of soap (often in the
6(100%)
form f soapflakes)and water is indicated,orpetro
Hydrocephalus of twoheads
6
leum jelly (Vaseline).Traction,however, must be
Breechpresentationwith ankylosis
17
14 (82%)
employedwith consideration and discretion for,if
Partial transverse presentation
25
21(84%)
it is impossible to extract the fetus by this means, its
Deformity,ankylosis orreflexion
12
11(92%)
continued application makes for more severe impac-
of forelegs
tion and this renders subsequent fetotomy very dif
Totall
132
119(90%)
ficult or even impossible. In all cases such as these,
epidural anaesthesia should be induced at the out-
set,togetherwiththeuseofa spasmolytic such as
25%ofmaresretainedtheafterbirthafterfetotomy
clenbuterol.Asa result of these treatmenis,it is gen-
comparedwith5%afteranormalbirth,andthatfer-
erallypossibletorepel thefetussufficientlyforthe
tilityafterfetotomywas 42%.With improvedmeth-
performance of intrauterine fetotomy (see Ch.19).
ods of general anaesthesia and aseptic surgery,the
When applyingepidural anaesthesia subsequent to
caesarean operation has a definite place in equine
handling a putrid fetusgreat caremust be taken to
obstetrics,particular indications being maternal dys-
ensurethatinfection isnotintroducedintotheneu-
tocia due to bicornualgestation,uterine torsion and
ralcanalthroughthemedium ofeithertheneedleor
narrow or deformedpelvis,aswell asthosecasesof
the anaesthetic solution.
fetaldystociawherethereisoversizeorfaultyfetal
However,more often thecase will bean earlyone;
disposition combined with maternal injury or where
the calf is alive and theuterus healthy.In the heifer,
the uterushas contracted on to a dead,emphysema-
itisoftenfoundthatfetal dispositionisnormal and
tousfoal.Vandeplassche'smaternalrecoveryratesfor
that obstruction is duetoslightfetomaternal dispo-
fetotomy（132cases)and caesareanoperation （77
sition.In these cases,it is a comparatively simple
cases)were, respectively,90% and S1%. Because of
matter to apply snares to thefetal extremities and,
earlydehiscenceoftheallantochorioninmaredysto-
following the principles described in detail in later
cia,only30%of foals survived thecaesarean opera-
chapters,toeffect delivery by traction.Asa rule,the
tion(ascomparedwith85%ofcalvesin thecow).
animalremainsstandingduringthe application of
snares but often goes down during the passage of
the calfs head through the vulva. In the multigravid
Cattle
cow,while fetomaternaldisproportionis some-
In the cow,delivery per vaginam is theforemost
timesencountered,itismorelikelyhatthecauseof
consideration.The delay before professional aid is
obstruction isfaultyfetal disposition.Ifitis found
soughtvariesgreatly,andthis is afactor that influ
that the spacerequired forcorrection is continually
ences the coursetobeadopted.Inprotractedcases
lostduetotheeffectsofstrainingorthecontracted
there is often severe impaction of parts of the fetus
uterus,then caudalepidural anaesthesia and clen-
in the pelvis; the greater part of the fetal fluids has
buterol should be given without further waste of
often been lost and there is insufficient space to
effort.A further advantage of epidural anaesthesia
repel thefetus;thefetal skin and thevaginal mucosa
isthat ananimalthat hasbecomerecumbentoften
have lost their natural lubrication,while thevagina
rises after its induction,whichinvariablymakes any
andvulva are often swollenandmanipulation is
manipulative procedures easier because theveieri-
rendered difficult.Correction of the faulty disposi-
nariancan standand theintra-abdominalpressure
tion in such cases may provevery difficult andmay
isreduced.
prompt an early decision to undertale fetotomy or
If the calf is a monster,e.g. schistosoma reflexus
a caesareanoperation.If,however,fetal disposition
presentedviscerally,it is almostceriain that fetotomy
isnormalandthecaseisoneofsimplefetomater-
will be necessary before it can be deliveredvia the
nal disproportion,controlled traction will be first
vagina(seep.341).In many,especially schistosoma
228
Chapter
61
The approach to an obstetric case
reflexus in which the head and limbs are direcied
can be done by rolling her on to her back and getting
towardsthepelvicinlet,fetotomy may be extremely
an assistant to pull both hind legs upwards and for-
difficult, and a better means of removing the fetus is
wards.In cases of Iateral deviation of the head and
by a caesarean operation.
breech presentation in which manipulative reposi-
In cases of fetomatenal disproportion of an oth-
tion fails, fetotomy using the guarded wire-saw is
erwise normal calf in normal disposition, the incli
indicated. Owing to the smallness of the lamb, the
nation of the operator will be to resort to traction. In
operation is easier than in the calf.
In thie ewe, it is especially inmportant to ensure
means delivery is often effectedwithiout the mother
that the presented parts belong to a single fetus. The
sustaining irreparable injury. However, the amount of
young, in cases of twins and triplets, are small and
traction must be limited to that of three persons or a
retropulsion and reposition are seldom difficult.
calving aid (lhis will be discussed later) and te prog-
In ewes in which it is impossible topass thehand
ress of the operation must be very closely scrutinized
into the uterus, delivery by forceps traction may be
by the veterinary surgeon, who will pay due regard to
possible. The manner of the application of the for-
lubrication and to the method and direction of trac-
ceps is sinilar to that later described for the bitch.
tion. If no progress is made after 5 minutes, or if the
Forceps of the Hobday type, of appropriate size and
fetus becomes lodged andfails toyield to5minutes
fitted with aratchettomaintain a secure holdwhen
of further iraction,then partial or total fetotoimy (see
applied,are best for the purpose. Snare forceps of
Ch. 19) or a caesareani operation should be performed.
the Roberts type or vatious proprietary fixed snares
Here again, the operator should always consider
[see Fig. 12.5) are also useful in head presentations.
the advisability ofseeking the aid of a colleague.
Great care musr be taken during intravaginal
manipulations that ihe mucous membrane at the
Sheep and goat
pelvic inlet is not lacerated.It is an accident thiat
may occur quite simply, particularly when a finger
In this species,the facility with which faulty fetal dis-
is being used to lever a head or limb upwards. Such
position canbe correctedwill depend in large mea-
lacerations are usually followedby infection and
possibly death.
the pelvis into the uterus.In the majority ofewes
this ispossible but occasionally,especially in primi
Pig
gravid animals of the smaller breeds,itis impossible
and delivery per vaginam may fail. The same diffi-
In the sow, the easewith which obstructive dystocia
culty arises in cases ofincompleie dilatation of the
can be relieved depends almost entirely on the oper-
cervix('ringwomb'). In this troublesorme condition,
unless patient digital and manual efforts to dilate
Provided this is possible,it is usually a relatively easy
the cervixsoon suicceed,a caesarean operation must
matter to grip the head or hind parts and withdraw
be resorted to.
the fetus. In small gilts and in sows of breeds such
In cases of fetomaternal disproportion with nor-
as the Vietnamese pot-bellied breed,the use of a
mal fetal disposition, the application of snares after
lambing snare (see Fig. 12.5) may be useful to apply
retropulsion of the head or hips from the pelvic inlet
traction to the head. The disposition of the limbs is
is not difficult, and gentle traction effects delivery.
seldom of muchi consequence.When such assistance
Unless the amount of vaginal manipulation is mini-
has been forthcoming early, i.e. within an hour or
mal,caudal epidural anaesthesia should be used on
two of the onset of second-stage labour, removal of
welfare grounds; because the uterus of the ewe is
a fetus is often followed by the normal expulsion
particularly easily torn or ruptured it allows a more
of the remainder.Assistance in the sow is frequently
gentle approach to any manipulative procedures and
delayed,however, and in these cases the obstetri
reduces the likelihood of trauma.In addition,where
cian will be well advised to remove as many pig-
faulty disposition involves the limbs or head,repo-
letsfrom thieuterinebody and cornua as arewithin
sition after retropulsion is,as a rule, relatively easy.
reach. The subsequent course will depend chiefly on
Retropulsion, replacemeni of lost fetal fluids and
the measure of delay and thus the degree of inertia
correctian ofa faulty disposition are mademuch
which has supervened. It may be found in an hour
easier by elevating the hindquarters of the ewe. This
orso thatnormal expulsion hasrecommenced,or
229
Part
31
 Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
that on further examination more fetuses are acces-
Dog and cat
sible to manual extraction, and by continued atten--
tion tothe sowin thismanner thewholelitter can
The primarytonsideration in the management of
be removed. It is wortl remeinbering that intravag-
a case of dystocia in the bitch or queen is-shall
inal and intrauterine manipulations will stimulale
the release of endogenous oxytocin, and thus stimu-
immediately resort to a caesarean operation?Factors
latemyometrial contractions.Quite often,however
that will influence the decision are:
complete inertia has developed and no further prog-
the cause of dystocia, whether obstruction or pri-
ress follows the removal of the accessible fetuses. In
mary inertia
these, a caesarean operation is the only means of
·the duration of second-stage labour and hence the
saving the sow.
condition of the fetuses and the uterinemuscle
The strategic ise of oxytocin to induce myometrial
contractions can be used to treat overt cases of dys-
·the number of fetuses retained and their viability.
tocia, and also to hasten the expulsion of piglets if
When the case is recent, a matter of a few hours only.
there is an extended time interval before the arrival
one will proceed to assist the bitch or queen per vagi-
of the next, thus preventing stillbirth.It is important
nam.If the causeis a modest degree of fetomaternal
to give low doses of oxytocin initially, since it is a
disproportion with the fetus in anterior or posterior
potent ecbolic and large dose rates will cause spasm
presentation,it is probable that traction using thefin
of themyometrium rather thanrhythmical peristal-
gers only (see Figs.13.1 and 13.4),or finger and vec-
tic-like contractions.In addition, the myometrium
tis or forceps (these should be used with great care
will become refractory to its effect and it may be nec-
to prevent trauma to both dam and offspring), will
essary to increase the dose rate in order to ohtain a
succeed in effecting delivery andparturition will then
response.
proceed normally. Similarly, in cases of faulty fetal
In a series of200 porcinedystocias,Jackson (1996)
disposition, such as vertex posture or breech,traction
found that an injection of iml of a solution con-
may succeed after correction of the abnormal posture.
taining 0.5 mg of ergometrine maleate and 5 units of
Ifhowever,thereisgross fetomaternal disproportion,
oxytocin gave a better and more prolonged ecbolic
and this should be suspected in litters of one or two
effect. The same author observed that the greatest
only, an early caesarean operation is indicated.
problem in porcine obstetrics was to know when a
In protracted cases of 24 hours or more, a caesar-
parturient sow had expelled all her piglets. Good,
ean operation is theprimaryconsideration,forit is
but not infallible, indications of the end of labour
probable that secondary inertia has supervened and
are that the sow rises,passes a large volume of urine
removal ofthe obstructed fetuswillnot alter the
and thenresumesrecumbency in an attitude ofcon
ultimate outcome.The question sometimes arises of
tentment. When it is suspected tiat parturition is
whether one should first attempt toremove the pre-
incomplete,the clinician should pass a hand as far
sented fetus per vaginam before performing surgery.
as possible into the uterus and sweep it gently about
It is highly likely that this fetus is infected,and inter
the abdomen in the hopeofballoting indirectlya pig-
ference with it through an abdominal wound will
let in an adjacent segment of thelonguterinehorn.
favour the development of peritonitis. There is also,
Transabdominal B-mode real-time ultrasonography
of course, the possibility that forceps interference
can be used to locate a retained fetus (see Ch.3).
will subject the bitch 1o even graverrisk.My attitude
The presence of retained fetal membranes is even
is that, when the presented puppy is impacted in the
more difficult to determine,Where the clinical
pelvis,it is best to attempt its removal with forceps
manifestations suggest that a fetus (or fetuses) is
prior to commencing abdominal operation but in
still retained and there has been no response to the
other situations thepresented fetus is best removed
administration of ecbolics, the only approach would
bya caesarean operation
be an exploratory laparotomy. Sows and gilts will
A further question that arises in laparotomy cases-
often survive the presence of retained piglets, which
and this has special reference to the influence of the
sometimes become mumified (see Ch.4). Since
anaesthetic agents to be employed - is how long
they are occasionally seen in the uteri of culled sows
after the onset of second-stage labour puppies are
and giltat heabatti,iislikelyhatalough
likcly toremain alive.It isveryimprobable that the
mothers survived,they were infertile.
presented fetus willive longer than 6-8 hours, for
230
Chapter
9
The approach to an obstetric case
by that time its placenta will have completely sepa-
of 75% for dogs and 42% for cats; these are compa-
rated.The remaining fetuses,however,may be alive
rable to those published following caesarean opera-
for much longer periods; it is possible that after 36
tions to treat dystocia (Robbins & Mullen 1994).
hours' delay the presented fetus may be dead with
early signs of emphysema yet those occupying the
References
anterior parts of the cornua may be alive. After a
delay of 48 hours this is highly unlikely to occur.
The respective indications for the two operations,
lackson PGG 1996 In:Handbook of veterinary obsietrics.WB
hysterotomy and hysterectomy, will be discussed in
Saunders, London
Chapter 21. However, a study involving 37 bitches
Robbins MA,Mullen HS 1994 Vet Surg 23:48
and 26 queens that were subjected to ovariohysterec-
Vandeplassche M 1972Equine Vet| 4:105
Vandeplassche M 1980 EquineVet J 12:45
tomy found it tobe safe,withnewborn survival rates
231
10
Chapter
David Noakes
Maternal dystocia:causes and treatment
Dystocias duetomaternalfactors arecausedeither
medicalpracticetoensurethatanybitchorqueen
byinadequaciesof thebirth canal orbya deficiency
cat that has suffered from such an injury is radio-
of expulsiveforce;they areset out inFigure 8.1.
graphed before breeding,to ensure that the pelvic
canal is capable of allowing a normal fetus to pass
through at parrurition without obstruction.
Inadequacies of the birth canal
Incompletedilatation of the cervix
Pelvic constriction
The cervix provides an important protective physi-
Developmental abnormalities of the pelvis are gener-
cal barrier for the uterus during pregnancy. Several
allyrareinanimalsbutintheachondroplasticbreeds
days before,and duringthefirst stageofparturition
ofdogthepelvicinletisflattenedin thesacropubic
the cervix undergoes considerable changes in its
dimension and this,together with the large head of
structuresothatitcandilate,becomingcompletely
thefetusinbrachycephalicbreeds,isacommoncause
effaced and thus allowingthefetus(es)topass from
ofdystocia.Aninadequate pelvis is a very frequent
theuterusintothevagina andthencetotheexterior
cause of dystocia in bovine primipara (heifers).The
The changesin the cervix are described in Chapter
pelvis islate maturing,comparedwith some other
6.Incomplete dilatation occurs in cattle, goats and
aspects of skeletal development;however,between2
sheep;inthelatter speciesitisone of thecommoner
and6yearsof ageitkeepspacewith,orevenexceeds,
causes of dystocia.The degree ofincompleteness of
overall body weight. For this reason dystocia is far
dilatation variesfromvirtuallycompleteclosureto
lessfrequent incowsthanheifers.In some herdsof
the situationwherethereisjust a small frill ofcervi-
somebreedsof cattle,notablytheBelgian Blue,the
caltissue present,which is sufficient toreduce the
size of the birth canal,thereby causing obstruction.
delivery is, in many cases, not attempted because of
Thefact that it isa disorder oftheruminantcervix
the high probability of dystocia occurring (Murray et
perhaps suggests a common aetiology,since in all
al 2002).All aspects of fetomaternal disproportion
threespeciesthecervixisa toughfibrous structure
are discussed in Chapter14.
with substantial amounts of collagen.
Pelvicconstrictionfollowing fractures,wherethere
has beenpoor alignment of thepelvicbones,can be
Cattle
an important cause of dystocia in any species.It is
in those that areparticularly proneto road traffic
In cattle,incompletedilatationmay occurin both the
accidents,such as dogs and cats, that the frequency
heifer and the multiparous cow.Inthelatter,the con-
is highest and for thisreason it is goodpreventive
ditionhasgenerally been ascribed to fibrosisof the
232
Chapter
10
Maternal dystocia:causes andtreatment
cervix resulting from injury atprevious parturitions
Sheep and goat
but it is doubtful ifthisexplanationis correct.lt is
morelikelytobeduetohormonal dysfunction,which
Incompletedilatationofthecervixoftheewe
normally causes the cervix‘to ripen',or to a failure of
and doe goat is descriptively named ‘ringwomb.
thecervical tissue(most probablycollagen) to respond
Itaccounts fora substantial number ofthe ovine
to the hormones that cause ripening.The characteris-
dystocia cases referred to veterinary surgeons; for
ticsignsof discomfortassociatedwith thefirststage of
example,Blackmore(1960)reported28%,Thomas
parturition are oftenmild and transient only,so that
(1990) 27%,Sobiraj(1994)71% and Klossetal
often itisdifficult toascertain accuraielyfor howlong
(2002)32%.The conditionis suspectedwhen,after
labour hasbeen in progress.For thisreason,it ispos-
protracted restlessness, the ewe does not progress to
siblethatweakuterine contractions,whichwould be
the second stage of lahour. Manual exploration of
relativelyineffeciualin causing dilatation ofthe rip-
the birth canalrevealsthat the cervix is inihe form
enedcervix,maybeinvolvedinthepathogenesis.Inthe
ofatight,unyieldingringthatwill admit onlyone
multiparous cow hypocalcaemia,perhaps subclinical,
ortwo fingers.Usually the intactallantochorion
canimpairuterinecontractions andperhapsprevent
can be felt beyond thecervix,but occasionally this
cervical dilatation.
membrane hasrupturedanda portion of itmay
On vaginal examination,the cervix is normally
have passed into the vagina;thelaiter observation
found tocomprisea frill about 5cmbroad separating
distinguishes the condition from a protracted first
thevagina from theuterus,and it isclear thatdeliv
stage,withwhichitmay easilybeconfused andthus
erybytractionmust inevitablycauseseveretearing.
wronglydiagnosed.If thiere is a fetid vaginaldis-
Often the amniotic sac has passed through the cer-
charge and necroticfetal membrane in thevagina,
vix andmaybepresent at thevulva;itmayhaverup-
in the presence ofa non-dilated cervix,there is no
turedwithescapeofamnioticfluid.Sometimesfeial
doubt that the condition is abnormal andmay be
limbs havepassed into the anterior vagina.Atthis
due toretentionafter a failedabortion ordysto-
stage it is advisable to determine whether the cow
cia due to some other reason inwhich thelamb(s)
is showing signs of hypocalcaemia,but even ifnot
was/werenot expelled after the cervix had dilated
it is advisabletoadministercalciumborogluconate
normally.
subcutaneously andwaitseveral liours.Itispossible
When thereis doubt over thediagnosis,theewe
that,if dilatation occurs after this timeinterval,he
should be left for 2 hours and then re-examined
cowhadnotcompletedthefirststageofparturition
to ascertain if any firther cervical dilatation has
authetime ofthefirsiexamination.The danger in
occurred,asinnormal first-stagelabour.Caufield
decidingtowaitseveral hoursbeforeinterferingin
(1960) found thatonlyabout20%ofcasesofcer-
thehopethat thecaseissimplyoneofdelayand
vical failurerecognized byhim opened naturally
thatnormal dilatationwill lateroccuristhatthecalf
andeven theserequiredsomeassistancetolamb.
maydie.Ihaveonoccasionwaitedforafurther12
Othershavefound thatpatientefforttodilatethe
hours,bywhichtimethecalf hasdied,withoutany
cervixby digitalmanipulation isrewarding,and
changeinthecervix,inwhichcaseacaesarean oper
Blackmore(1960) was successful by this means
ation should havebeenperformed.ltisprobably
in the treatment of28of 32cases of ringwomb.
sensibletoleavethecowforamaxinmumof2hours
Many experienced shepherds will attempt digi-
and then,if there isnoprogress in parturition,the
tal dilatation.Some veterinarians regularly use
alternative option shouldbefollowed.
a spasmolytic such as vetrabutine hydrochloride
Also,in some cases ofabortion the cervix fails
(Monzaldon, Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd);how-
todilateproperly and the fetus isretained,subse-
ever,I cannot see the logic ofsuch a preparation
quentlytoundergoputrefactivemacerationinthe
since it does notaffect thecomposition of the cer-
uterus(seep.140).Incomplete dilatationofthe cer-
vical tissue,whichis suchanimportantpartofthe
vix frequently accompanies uterine torsion.In addi-
ripening and subsequent dilatation process.Ifit is
tion,the disordermayalso be diagnosed incorrecily
effective, then this maybebecauseit delays partu-
whenanearliercauseofdystocia atterm hasresulted
ritionbyvirtue ofinhibitinguterinecontractions,
infailureofthecalftobeexpelledafter thecervix
thereby giving the cervix a longer time to ripen
has dilatednormally allowingbacteria to enter the
andrelax.The method ofvaginal hysterotomy,
uterusfollowedbymaceration.
wherebythe cervixis retractedwith vulsellum
233
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
Incomplete relaxation of the
points of the compass',has its advocates,particu-
posterior.vagina and vulva
larly inNewZealand,but such a brutal approach
cannot be condoned on welfare grounds. Further-
This is a relatively comon finding in daity heif
more,such trauma must affect cervical function
ers.It seems tobeassociatedwith heifers that arein
subsequently andprobablyrequirescullingof
over-fatbodycondition,orin herds wherethe ani-
theewe.
mals have been moved just before calvingor where
Manycasesofringwombinewesfollowpreparturi-
theprocess of calvinghas been interruptedby too
entprolapse ofthevagina(see Ch.5),and both con-
frequent observationsorinterventions.
ditions occurin similar circumstances ofbreed and
Treatment requires the patient application of slow
environment.Hindson (1961)hasdrawnattention
andgentle traction.Ifexcessiveforce isusedbecause
to an apparent connection between the incidence of
ofimpatience then there will beperineal damage,
'ringwomb'at parturition and the prevailingweather
which maybe sosevere that a third-degreeperineal
conditions during pregnancy.Thus, in two summers
laceration will occur (seeCh.17).lf continuous prog-
andearly autumnswhen therewasplentiful,good-
ressismade,thendelivery canbeaffected.lfthevulva
quality grazing preceding the lupping seasons there
will not dilate properly then an episiotomy should be
were158and123casesofringwombinhisDevon
carried out (see Ch.12). If there is any doubt about
practice,whereas following avery dry summerwhen
the likelihood of success with continuing attempts
grazing was poor only 62 cases were seen. In the
atvaginal delivery,acaesarean operation should be
latter season,there was a highincidence of single
performed.Thereare occasionswhen largenumbers
lambs (probably due to a lackof flushing),and the
of heifers in a group will be affected.The reason for
eweshadtorangewidelytogetsufficientkeep.Far
thisisnotknown;however,if a substantial number
less is known about the causes of the disorderin doe
are affected then treatment with clenbuterol at the
goats,where it occurs sporadically.Treatment is the
first signs of the onsetof thefirststage ofparturition
same as for the ewe.
will delay calving and give the heifer extra time for
Hindson et al (1967) were able to produce ring-
the vulva,vagina and perineum to soften andrelax,
womb experimentally by the injection of 20 mg
thusreducingthechances of dystocia.
ofdiethylstilbestrol into pregnant ewes as early
Leidletal(1993)reported that3%of thedystocias
as 85-105 days of gestation. During this type of
inmaresreferredtotheMunichVeterinarySchools
dystociathemyometrialcontractionswerenormal
obstetricsclinicwereduetoincompletedilatationof
andtheauthorsthereforeconcludedthatnatural
thebirth canal;thesewere allassociated withwhatis
ringwomb was a cervical rather than a myome-
described aspremature delivery(abortion).
trial disorder.Hindson &Turner (1972) suggested
that ringwomb might be caused by ingestion of
oestrogenic substances by pregnant sheep -as,for
Vaginalcystocele
example,by grazing on red clover pasture or by
This is the name given to a condition occasion-
feeding on herbage or grain contaminated with a
allyencounteredintheparturientmareandcowin
fungus such as Fusarium graminaerum.Mitchell &
whichtheurinarybladderliesinthevagina orvulva.
Flint (1978) demonstrated that,when synthesis of
It is of two types:
prostaglandin was experimentally reduced,cervi-
cal ripening did not occur.More recent studies on
Prolapse of the bladder through the urethra.This
cervical ripeningin the ewehave shown that not
ismorelikely tooccurin themareconsequent on
only is there degradation of cervical collagen but
the great dilatabilityof the urethra and the force of
straining efforts in ihis species.The everted organ
also a remodelling of thecervical matrix with new
will occupy thevulva andwill bevisiblebelween
collagenandproteoglycan synthesis(Challis&Lye
1994).These changes are endocrine-mediated and
the labia (see Figs.17.10,17.11).
obviouslydonot occurwhen thereisringwomb.
·Protrusion of the bladder through a rupture of the
Asyet,we areuncertainofthe deficiency and thus,
vaginal floor. In this condition the bladder will
until such tineasweknowwhyandhowitoccurs,
liein thevaginaand it will further differ fromthe
it will be necessary to treat cases as has already
previous onein that theserouscoat of theorgan
been described.
willbeoutermost.
234
Chapter
10
Maternal dystocia:causes and treatment
li is important to differentiate both the above from
Other physical abnormalities causing
protrusion of fetal membranes; this is particularly
obstruction
the case in the mare,where the prolapsed bladder
andthevelvety(villous)surfaceofthe allantocho-
Remnants ofihe mullerian ducts often persistin
rion arevery similar('redbag’).Inboth conditions,
the anterior vagina of cattle.They generally have
thefirstaimoftreatmentistoovercomestrain-
theform ofoneormorebands'passingfrom the
ing:this is best effected by the induction of epidu-
rooftothefloorjustcaudaltothecervix and are
ral anaesthesiawith orwithoutsedation.Thismust
usuallybrokenduringparturition.Sometimesthey
be followed by retropulsion of those parts of the
arelaterally situated,and the fetuspassesto one
fetus that already occupy the vagina.In the case of
side of them. Occasionally, however, a remnant is
the prolapsed bladder, it is then necessary to invert
ofsuchsizeandstrengththat it forms an effective
the organ again by manipulation.Where there is a
barrier to the birth of the fetus.The forelimbsmay
protruded bladder,it must be replaced through the
pass on either side of it.It is important that the
tearin thevaginalwalland thelatter sutured.In
obstetrician recognizes what s/he is dealing with
themare,if the tear islargetheprocedure is best
and does notconfuse theconditionwith a partially
done under general anaesthesia.The fetus should
dilatedcervix.Toexamine thevagina satisfactorily.
be delivered by tractionafterthecorrection ofany
it is often anadvantage to inducecaudal epidural
faulty disposition.
anaesthesia and repel the fetus into the uterus.The
obstruction can becut withoutrisk,using a hook-
knifeoraguardedfetotomyknifeoftheColinor
Neoplasms
Roberts type.
Neoplasmsof thevulva andvaginamay occur in all
Casesofbifidanddoublecervixareoccasion-
species and thus serve as potential causes of dysto-
allyseenonrandompostmortemexamination of
cia because ofphysical obstruction,although infact
bovine genitalia and there is generally plentiful evi
they seldom do so.In the cow,papillomata, sarco-
dence that the animal involved has had one ormore
mata and submucous fibromata of thevagina and
calves.The condition is unlikely tobe a cause of dys-
vulva occur,while in thebitch thevaginal submu-
tocia, although I have seen dystocia in which both
cousmyxofibroma iscommon.
canalshad dilatedandoneforelimbhadpassedinto
Neoplasms ofthecervixaresorarein animals as
onecanal andtheheadandthesecondforelimbhad
to be of no consequence in a consideration of the
entered the other.
causes of dystocia.
Torsion of the uterus
Pelvic obstruction by the distended
Torsionf theuterus,rpartofit,iseenasacaue
urinarybladder
ofdystocia in all domestic species.However,there
Jackson(1972)hasdescribed a typeofporcine dys-
isawidevariationinitsfrequencybetweenspecies,
tocia in which thebirth canal was obstructed by
which isgenerallyconsidered tobeduetodiffer-
thedistendedurinarybladderbeingforcedbackby
encesin suspensionof thetubulargenital tractthat
straining in the form of a mound under the vagi
affect the'stability'of the gravid tract.
nal floor,where it actedlikeaball-valve in thebirth
canal; it was associated with a very relaxed birth
Cattle
canal. Schulz & Bostedt (1995) reported blad-
der flexion and vaginal prolapse as the third most
Rotation of theuteruson iis long axis,withrwisting
common causeofdystocia insows in their survey
ofthe anteriorvagina,isa commoncauseof bovine
in Germany.Bladder flexion,which is probably
dystocia.lt hasvariouslybeen reported toaccount
caused by straining,will causekinlingof theure-
for6%（Tut1944)and5%（Morton&Cox1968）of
thra resulting in urinary obstruction and distention
dystocias,whilein the NewYorkStateAmbulatory
of the bladder.Careful cathieterization of theblad-Clinic,Roberts （1972)reported an incidence of
derrelieves thecondition,ensuring that the catheter 7.3% among1555 dystocias attended over a 10-year
is not forced through the urethral wall at the point
period.In velerinary hospitals to which the more
whereit isbent.
severe types of dystocia are referred, irreducible
235
Part
31
Dystocia and otherdisorders associatedwithparturition
uterinetorsionwastheindicationforthecaesarean
Aetiology
Uterine torsion is a complication of late first-stage
orearly second-stagelabour.Itisprobablydue to
instabilityofthebovineuterus,whichresultsfrom
the greater curvature of the organ being dorsal and
the uterus being disposed cranially to its subileal
suspension by thebroad ligaments.However,there
must be some contributory factor,additional to
instability, that operates during first-stage labour;
otherwise torsionwouldbemorefrequentlyseen
Fig.10.1A heifer in theproce5s of regaining the stancing
during advanced pregnancy than at parturition.The
positicn fromrecumbency.Note that sheisresting on her
precipitating parturient factor is probably thevio-
knees(carpaljoints)while the hind legs are fully extended,so
that thelongitudinal axisof thegravid uterusof thecowis
lentfetalmovementsthatoccurinresponsetothe
almost vertical at this stage.
increasingfrequency and amplitudeofuterinecon-
tractions during the first stage ofparturition,as it
assumes the normal disposition for normal birth
Vandeplassche(personal
communication,1982)
(see Ch. 6). Excessive fetal weight is also a predis-
observes thatuterine instability couldbe accepted
posing factor;Wright (1958) recorded an average
as acause of torsions ofup to 180°but it cannot
calfweight of48.5kgin torsioncases,andPearson
accountfortorsionsof36o°ormore.
(1971) a coimparable figure of49.8kg.The final fac-
torthatallowstheuterus torolate aboutitslongi-
Clinical features
tudinal axis occurs when the cowis attemptingto
risetoherfeetfrom sternalrecumbencyparticularly
Tlie consensus ofveterinaryopinionisthattorsion
when she is in a confined space.Shefirst flexes her
inan anticloclwisedirection(asviewedfrombehind
forelimbssothatshebearsherweightonbothknees
thecow)ismorecommonthan intheother direc-
(carpal joints);thisis followed by a forward lurching
tion and accounts forabout 75% of cases.Ina study
movementofthehead andwholebodysothatboth
involvingcasesreferred toall24veterinaryschools
hind legscanbe extended;sheisnowrestingon her
in theUSA from 1970-1994,635ofthe torsions
knees and hind feet.At this slage,she maywell rest
were anticlockwise(Frazeretal 1996).Although the
temporarily,beforemaking thefinal effort to extend
ulerusrotates about itslongitudinal axis,the actual
theflexed carpal joints and standon all fourfeet.
twistinthemajorityofcasesinvolves the anterior
When thecowisbearingherweightonkneesand
vagina;in theminority ofcases inwhich thetwist
fully extended hindlimbs,the longitudinal axis of
affectstheposteriorpart of theuterus there ismini-
the uterus will be almost vertical, thus allowing it
mal distortion of thevaginal walls.In the survey by
torotatequiteeasilyaboutthis axisifviolent fetal
Frazeret al(1996),345ofthe torsions were precer-
movements occur at this stage (Fig.10.1).
vicaland didnotinvolve thevagina.Wright(1958)
The presenceof bicornually disposedbovine twins
consideredthemostcommon degreeoftorsion to
would appear to stabilizetheparturient uterus,and
be of the order of 90-180°.However, in a series of
thisview is supportedby the great rarity of torsion
133cases,whichwere possibly more severebecause
in twin pregnancy.However,inewes the anatomi
theywerereferredbypractisingveterinary surgeons
calattachmentof themesometrium is sublumbar
toa veterinary clinic,Pearson（1971) found that in
rather than subileal as in cattle and bicornual ges-
only37 was theamount ofrotation 180°or less,
tation isvery common,yet uterine torsion occurs.
while in the majority (8s) the torsion was 360°
In10 cases recorded by Pearson （1971),fivewere
Frazer et al (1996) found that 57%ofcows had
in bicornual twin pregnancies.Neither breed nor
180-270°and22%271-360°1orsions.Williams
parity appears to afect the incidence of the con-
(1943)maintained thatmany dystorias diagnosed
dition.Regarding the aetiology of bovine torsion,
asduetolateralandventralpositionsofthefetus
236
Chapter
101
 Matemal dystocia: causes and treatment
were actually uterine torsions of low magnitude The
membranes often remain intact,secondary bacterial
severity of the twist does not directly affect the sur-
infection ofthefetuswilldeveloplater thanwith
vival of thefetus,fetal death beingcaused byloss of
other forms of dystocia.
fetal fluids or separation of the placenta.
The most constant feature of uterine torsion is
Diagnosis
its association with parturition; Frazer et al (1996)
reported that 81% of their cases were at term. It is
Diagnosis is readily made by palpating the stenosed
generally believed to occur during the first stage of
anterior vagina,whose walls are usually disposed in
oblique spirals that indicate the direction oftheuter-
rected, the cervix is found to be dilated to a vari-
ine rotation.The cervix may not beimmediately pal-
able degree.However, if after correction the cervix is
pable bu,by carefully following the folds into the
found tobefullydilated,or if beforecorrection the
narrowing vagina, the lubricated fingers can usually
membranes are ruptured and portions of them or the
be pressed gently forwards and through the partially
fetusareprotrudingthrough the cervix,theinference
dilated cervix.Where the site of thetwist is precervi-
shouldbethiat thetorsion occurred during early sec-
cal,thevagina ismuch less involved and diagnosis
ond-stage labour. Roberts (1972) believes that tor-
is assisted by palpating the uterus per rectum.In tor-
sions ofless than 180° cause litile interference with
sions ofless than 180°,portions of the feius may
gestation, and that they often arise during advanced
enter thevagina and the dystocia may bewrongly
pregnancy and may persist for weeks or months,
ascribed to faulty fetal position (lateral or ventral).
being recognized only when they cause dystocia at
term. He firther contends that torsions of 45-90°
Treatment
are often detected at pregnancy diagnosis and that
they probably undergo spontaneous correction.
There are records of spontaneous recoveries but it
is generallybelieved that unrelieved uterine torsion
will progress to fetal death, putrefaction and fatal
Symptoms
maternal toxaemia.Fetal maceration with maternal
Up to the onset of parturition the animal has been
survival is possible.With the adoption of prompt
normal, and when it enters the first stage of labour
treatment, prognosis is favourable for mother and
the usual signs of restlessness due to subacute
fetus.Delayleads to fetal death ana makes treatmenf
abdominal pain associated withmyometrial contrac-
more difficult but there is still a hiigh rate of maternal
tions and cervical dilatation are shown. In the typi-
recovery. At the New York State Ambulatory Clinic
cal case,the only real symptam is thai the periad of
between 1963 and 1968,Roberts (1972) rerorded a
restlessiiess is abnorimally protracted or that it wanes
4.3%aternal mortality.In Pearson's (1971) series
and does not progress into second-stage labour.If
of168more severecasestreatedinaveterinary hospi-
the torsion does not occur intil early second-stage
tal, only 67 calves were born alive; however, it is cer-
labour, then a short period of straining will have fol-
tainthat abelterrateof survival wouldbe obtained
lowed the restlessness but will lhave ceased abruptly.
in theless severe cases treated more promptly on
In severe cases of torsion there may be increasing
farms. In the series by Frazer et al (1996), cow sur-
restlessness but moreprobably all parturient behav-
vival was 78% and calf survival was 24%. The pos-
iour will cease and,unless the animal has been
sible forms of treatment are as follows.
closely observed, there may be no knowledge thiat
Rotation of the fetus per vaginam. The aim of this
parturition has begun. Pearson (197l) has noted
method is to reach the fetus by insinuation of the
slight depression of the lumbosacral spine as a fre-
hand through ihe constriction of the anterior vagina
quent symptom. In the study by Frazer el al (1996),
and partially dilated cervix and then to apply a rota-
there was pyrexia (23%), tachycardia (93%), tachyp-
tional force tothe uterus through themedium of the
fetus.Its likelihood of success depends mainly on
vaginal discharge (13%)
two factors:wheiher thecervixis sufficiently dilated
If the condition is unrelieved, the placenta will
to admit the hand and whether the fetus is alive.
separate and the fetus will die. There will develop
Pearson was successful in 64 of 104cases attempted
persistent low-grade abdominal pain, progres-
by this method, 39 live fetuses being obrained from
sive anorexia and constipation.Because the fetal
the 64reducible, and31 dead fetusesfrom the cases
237
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
that were irreducible and subsequently treated sur-
The same procedure of rapid turning is repeated,
gically. Care must be taken not to rupture the fetal
and to check that the rolling is in the correct direc-
membranes,for this markedly reduces the fetal via-
tion the-operator should try to retain a hand in the
bility.When the fetus is reachied,purchase is obtained
vagina during the manoeuvre. If thiere is no suc
on its shoulder or elbow region in order to rotate it
cess on this occasion and the spiral folds are felt to
in the opposite direction to the twist, but the first
tighten, one infers that the rolling is in the wrong
manoeuvres are designed to generate a gently swing-
direction, and sharp rotation in the contrary manner
ing motion in the fetus before attempting to reduce
is carried out. Otherwise, repetition of the original
the torsion.The most difficult part of the procedure
procedure is applied until correction is achieved. 1f
is rotation through the first 18°; after this, replace-
a calf's extremity can be grasped and partially flexed
ment is spontaneous. lt is helpful to have the rear
while the cow is rolled,this will help tofix the uterus
of the cow at a higher level than the front, and epi-
and allow correction of the torsion to occur.
dural anaesthesia should be beneficial. Studies have
A modification of the foregoing traditional tech-
shown thattheuseoftdhe spasmolyticclenbuterol
nique described by Schafer(1946) entails the appli-
hydrochloride facilitates correction (Sell et al 1990,
cation ofa wide planl of wood or ladder,3-4m long
Menard 1994). The larter author used ii at a dose
and 20-30cm wide,to1he flank of thecast cow,the
rate of 0.6-0.8μg/kg bodyweight intravenously in
one end resting on the ground.An assistant stands
70 cases and reported thiat it made the task of correc-
on the plank while the cow is slowly turned over by
tion much easier,resulting in a success rate of 77%.
pulling on the leg ropes. The advaniages of this tech-
When the head of thelive calf is readily accessible,
nique are that the plank fixes the uterus while the
pressing on its eyeballs will cause a convulsive reac-
cow's body is turned and,because thecow is turned
tion that can be translated into a rotation by apply-
slowly,less assistance is required and it is easier for
ing a sufficient torque. Auld (1947) recommended
the veterinary surgeon to check the correci direction
abdominal ballotternent to assist swinging the calf
of the rolling by vaginal palpation; moreover, the
prior to reduction per vaginam.
first rolling is usually successful
Torsion of theuterus anterior to the cervix cannot
Surgical correction.If the casecannot be corrected by
be treated by vaginal manipulation, nor can the rare
either of the previous methods, a laparotomy should
cases of twists of 720° or more.
be performed on the standing cow through the left
Rotation of the cow's body:correction by 'rolling'.
or right sublumbar fossa and an attempi made to
This was the most popular method of correction
rotate the uterus by intra-abdominal manipula-
but because it requires the assistance of at least three
tion.Because a caesarean hysterotomy may also be
people it is being replaced by the previous method.
required before the torsion can be corrected - or
The aim is to rotate quickly the cow's bady in the
after the torsion is corrected when the cervix will not
direction of the torsion while the uterus remains rel-
dilate - a left flank approach is preferable. However,
atively steady.Themechianics ofthemethodmaybe
it should be remembered that in cases ofuterine
questioned but it is often successful.The cow is cast
torsion there are often loops of small intestine dis-
by Reuffsmethod onthe sidetowhich thetorsion
placed on theleft sideofthe abdomen.Under para-
is directed.Oneassistant holds downtheheadwhile
vertebralorfieldinfiltration anaesthesia,a15-20cm
first the two front feet and then the two hind feet are
incision is made in the left sublumbar fossa. A hand
tied together with separate 2.5-3 m lengths of rope,
is inserted,the omentum ispushed forwards and the
each of which is held taut,preferably by two assis-
direction of twist confirmed.For a wist to the left,
tants on each rope. At a given signal a sudden smart
tie hand is passed down between the uterus and the
coordinated pull is made on the leg ropes so that
left flank and a fetal handhold is sought, whereby an
the cow israpidly turned over from one side to the
attempt is made first to‘rock' the uterus and then to
other.Avaginal examination is thien made to ascer-
rotateit by strongly lifting and pushing to the right.
tain whether correction has occurred,in whichcase
For a twist to the right,thehand is passed over and
there is ready manual access to the cervix and prob-
down between the uterus and the right flank and, as
ably to the fetus inthe uterus.If thereisno relief the
before, a swinging manoeuivre is followed by pull-
cow is slowly restored to her original position, or
ing upwards and to the left. Owing to oedema of
thelegs can beflexed under herbody and she can
its walls theuterus is unusuallyfriable and there is
he furned 1soover her legs on to the original side.
copious peritoneal transudate.
238
Chapter
10
Maternal dystocia:causes and treatment
In some cases, it is impossible to rotate the uterus
laparohysterotomy for uterine torsion are discussed
by abdominal taxis and a caesarean operation must
in Chapter 20.
then be carried out before the torsion can be cor-
recied. In other cases, despite abdominal relief of the
Horse
twist, the cervix will not dilate and a caesarean oper-
ation must be perforned to deliver the calf. Where
Torsion of the uterus is a rare condition in riding
the fetus has tobe reinoved before the uterus can be
horses in Britain;Day (1972)recalled seeing only
turned, it may be found that the uterine wound is
three cases over some 30 years in a practice where
relatively inaccessible for suturing.
approximately 1oo0 mares foaled annually. ln a
Whatever method is used to correct uterine tor-
imore recentstudy involving 517 spontaneously
sion, a decision has to be made on the subsequent
occurringfoalings on eight stud farms where there
management of the case. Because some placental
were 58(11.2%) dystocias,n0 cases of uterine tor-
separation and a degree of uterine inertia will have
sion were identified （Ginther & Williams 1996）.
developed in many cases,and because there is a ten-
It appears to be less rare among draught horses in
dency in other cases for the cervix to close quickly
Europe, although the incidence is difficult to mea-
after the uterus is replared and nof to dilate again
sure in the horse population as a whole, since many
(Pearson 1971),it is wise to deliver the cow atonce,
ofthereports onthedisorder emanatefromreferral
per vaginam if possible or, if failing that, by caesar-
clinics where only themore difficult cases are seen.
For example, Leidl et al (1993), in a study from the
after correction of the torsion and provided there is
Munich Veierinary School, found uterine torsion
no inordinate fetopelvic disproportion, delivery of
present in 17 out of 100 dystocia cases. Similarly.
the cow by judicious traction on the calf will presenf
Skjerven (1965) discussed 15 cases of surgical cor-
no problem. If the cervix is only partially dilated,
rection of uterine torsion and Vandeplassche et al
rather than resort to immediate caesarean opera-
(1972) reported on 42 cases (four of which were
tion, Pearson (1971) has recommended sectioning
included in Skjerven's previous review). The lat-
the cervix per vaginam if the following clinical fea-
ter authors found that more than half their cases
tures are present:
occurredbefore the end ofgesiation,but that 5-10%
·Thebirth canal caudal to the cervix is dilated suf
ofall serious dystocias inBelgian horses were due to
ficiently to allow delivery
torsion; twisting in an anticlockwise direction was
more common and in the majority the extent of
·The remaining cervical rim is thin and stretches
rotation was360°ormore.
like a sleeve on the fetus when raction is applied.
The possibility of uterine torsion should be con-
Section is contraindicated if the cervix is thick and
sidered in cases of colic during late pregnancy.Doyle
indurated
The fetus does not feel excessively large.
tation shows signs of pyrexia,anaemia,tachycardia
The technique of cervical section is simple and pain-
and anorexia over a 2-4-week period then chronic
less.The fetus is pulled backwards so as to engage the
uterine torsion should be considered as one of the
cervixfully and the stretchedcervicalrimis incised
differential diagnoses.Diagnosis is readily estab-
deeply at one point. This incision gives immediate
lishied by rectal palpation of the crossed broad uter-
relief and allows delivery to proceed.
ineligaments,which alsoprovides information on
The caesarean operation is indicaied if the torsion
both the direction and degree of the torsion.The
is irreducible orif thecervixisinsufficiently dilated,
circulatory disturbance in the uterus is greater thian
or fails to dilate further after reduction.In the
with the same condition in cattle,with consequent
168 cases ofuterine torsionreferred to the Bristol
risk to the survival of the fetus and the development
Veterinary School Clinic, Pearson (1971) reported
of shock in the dam.
that a caesarean operation was carried out on 137
Rolling the mare under general anaesthesia has
animals, with a maternal recovery rate of 95%.It
proved a successful method of treatment, resulting
was noted that the fetalmembranes were either
in the delivery of six out ofseven mares (Wichtel
already detached at the time of the operation or
were passed soon afterwards and that uterine invo-
ment for the antepartum case,including rolling
lution was rapid. Other surgical features related to
the mare,Vandeplassche and his colleagues (1972)
239
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
recommendlaparotomyandrotationoftheuterus
According to Vandeplassche (1980),this is facili-
by direct taxis,he marebeing tranquillizedin stocks
tated bytheuseofcaudal epiduralanaesthesia,and
and operated on under epidural and field infiltra-
raising themindquarters of the mare.In addition,
tion anaesthesia.A high flank incision is made on
because of its value ini currecting uterine torsion
the sideof thetorsion and a hand ispassed into the
per vaginam in the cow, clenbuterol might be used.
abdominal cavity and under the uterus. By carefully
Rolling is rarely successfiul.If these methods fail,a
grasping the uterus, or the fetus through the uter-
caesarean operation must be performed.
inewall,and using theminimum ofrotational force,
InVandeplassche's series of42cases,60% of the
the uterus is easily restored to its normal position. In
mares and 3o% ofthe foals survived.Skjerven's
cases where the foal isalive and the uterus not too
reviewindicatedafavourableprospect forfertilityin
congested,thereis a good chance of progressiontoa
mares which recovered after torsion.
normal parturition,especiallyifisoxsuprineisgiven
for 24 hours after the operation(Vandeplassche
Sheep and goat
1980).Skjerven(1965)recommendedcorrection
ofthetorsionintherecumbentmareundergeneral
Itisgenerallyassumed thatthefrequencyofuter-
anaesthesia.He incised the flank opposite to the
inetorsionintheewe anddoegoatisverylow,asit
direction of twistandthen inserted ahandinto the
does not appear to be a significant cause of dystocia
abdomen to identify a suitablepart of thefetus in
in any of the published surveys.The lowfrequency
theproximal aspect oftheuterus.To this fetal com-
ofoccurrence has been used to try and explain the
aetiology of thedisorderincattle,sincethe suspen-
traldirectiontorestorethenormalpositionofthe
sory apparatus of the genital tract is similar in all
uterus.By pressingventrally from theproximal side
three ruminant species. One suggestion is that sin-
ratherthanbypullingdorsallyfromthedistalside,
gletons aremuch morecommonin thecowthan in
there is less risk ofrupturing the uterus.Peritoneal
the ewe and doe goat,which if they are distributed
adhesions soon develop(Doyleetal 2002).In the
betweenbothhornswillmaketheuterusmore'sta-
antepartum case,where the foalis dead or theuterus
bleHowever,f thishypothesisis true,henitwoul
severely congested,hysterotomy should be per-
be much more common in those breeds of sheep
formed (Fig.10.2).
that have a large proportion of singletons.One pos-
Whendystociaisduetouterinetorsionan attempt
sible explanationforthe species difference is the
should be made to pass a hand through the cervix
greater athleticism of the sheep and goat in rising to
andiorotaietheuterusbymanipulatingthefetus.
theirfeetfromrecumbency.
The condition closely resembles bovine tor-
sion initsclinicalsignsbutbecauseofthesmaller
sizeofsheep andgoatsitismuchmoredifficult to
inserta hand into theconstrictedvagina.Theewe
ordoeshouldbegivencaudalepiduralanaesthe
sia and,with thehindlimbsheldsothattheanimal
isalmostvertical,arelativelymodestrotatoryforce
onafetalappendageorarotatorymovementofthe
dam'sbody is usually sufficient to correct the tor-
sion.Clenbuterol may be used.If this fails then a
caesarean operation must beperforimed.
Pig
Torsionisrare in sows;therewasno casein200por-
Fig.10.2Uterine torsionina mare,asexposedbymidline
cinedystociasattendedbyJackson(1972).However,
laparotomy.Note the congested uterus(u).Correction by
whereitdoesoccur,itcanbedifficulttodiagnoseand
rotating theuteruswasimpossible,and a dead foal was
frequently this is only done at necropsy.Torsion can
removed afterhysterotomy;thereafter,correction of the
involve onewhole horn or,more frequentlyparof
torsionwaspossible.
onehon,therebytrappingafetusorfetusesproximal
240
Chapter
101
Maternal dystocia: causes and treatment
to the stricture; in time the uterine wall will rupture
Displacement of the gravid uterus
and the fetus or fetuses will become pseudoectopic.
It is one of the differential diagnoses to consider if a
Ventral hernia in the mare,cow and ewe
sow has nol conipleted farrowing, and yet piglets can
Occasionally in all three species,hernia of the gravid
ulerus occurs through a rupture af the prepubic ten-
nal ultrasonography. The only meihod of treatment
don and muscles of abdominal wall (Fig.10.3).
is correction following a laparotomy, or probably a
The accident is one of advanced pregnancy, occur-
hysterotomy.
ring at the 9th month or later in the mare, from the
7th month onwardsin the cow and during the last
Dog and cat
month in the ewe. It is probable that in the majority
of cases a severe blow to the abdominal wall is the
Uterine torsion is unconmumon in the bitch.In a
exciting cause, although many observers have stated
series of 182 dystocias examined at a veterinary
that it may occur without immediate trauma,the
hospital in Stockholm over a 4.5-year period two
abdominal musculature becoming in some way so
cascs ofuterine torsion (1.1%) were diagnnosed
wealened (perhaps by previous unknown trauma)
(Waleti-Darvelid and Linde-Forsberg 1994).One
that it is unable to support the gravid uterus. The
was in a 1-year-old Mastiff, which had two macer-
site of the original ruptureis theventral aspect of the
ated fetusesin which the complex torsion involved
abdomen, a little to one side of the midline (left in
both horns and cervix, and thie other case was in
the case of themare and right in the cow and ewe)
a 4-year-old Giant Schnauzer with 13 pups where
behind the umbilicus. I generally commences as a
there was 180° torsion;it is not clear from ihe
local swelling about the size of a football but rapidly
description whether itinvolved one orboth horns.
Both cases were treated by a caesarean operation.
extending from the pelvic brim to the xiphisternum.
The clinical signs will be of an obstructive dysto-
l is most prominent posteriorly,where it may sink
cia where pups remain in the uterus: however, it is
to the level of the hocks,By this time,practically the
very difficult to determine theprecisecauseof tlie
whole of the uterus and its contents have passed out
obstruction,The use of oxytocin may causeuterine
of the abdomen to accupy a subcutaneous focus.
rupture.
In cattle,the bulk of the swelling is often situated
In pregnant bitches, a few instances have been dis.
between the hind legs, the udder being deflected to
coveredonpostmortein examinationswhere there
one side. Generally, the condition is complicated by
were torsions of up to 180°, while the rare finding
gross oedena of the abdominal wall due to pressure
of encapsulated fetal bones in a bitch's ahdomen
on the veins;in fact this oedema may be so great
may be a legacy of uterine torsion and rupture. If a
uterine torsion is promptly diagnosed, a caesarean
operation should be successful.
In the cat, torsion of 90-180°, involving either
onehorn or the uterine body,innear-full-terin preg-
nancies (Young & Hiscock 1963,Farman 1965） and
a cornual torsion of 36°in a 4-month pregnancy
(Boswood 1963)havebeen describedin association
with sudden illness. As in the bitch, a precise diag-
nosis of uterine torsion as a cause ofan obstructive
dystocia is difficult, even with good-qualiry imag-
ing techniques; often a diagnosis is made only at
or hysterectomy should be perforrmed. Occasional
instances of extrauterinc abdominal fetuses have
been recorded (Bark et al 1980). These probably
result from uterine rupture during pregnancy, possi-
bly associatedwithuterine torsion,ratherthanfrom
Fig. 10.3 Ventral hernia in the ewe.
an ectopicpregnancy.
241
Part
131
Dystocia andotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
thatitisimpossibletopalpateeithertheedgesofthe
maresnearterm inwhich thefoaloccupiedthe
ruptureorthefetus.
maternal pelvis.Per rectum,ii could bepushed for-
As a rule,gestation is uninterrupted but thecondi-
wardsintotheabdomen,although thismanipula-
tionbecomesgraveforbothmother andfetuswhent
tion provoled renewed colic, and the fetus soon
parturition commences,particularlyin thecase of
regained theintrapelvicposition.Itwas found thai
themare,althoughthere arerecordsofaffectedcows
theinjectionatintervalsofthemusclerelaxant isox-
calving normally.Nevertheless, it is important to
suprinelactateindosesof200mgrelieved thecolic
consider whetherit isin theinterests ofthe dam's
andallowed thefoaltomoveforwardsinfrontofthe
welfare ihat the pregnancy should continue, or
pelvis.Normal parturition followed indue course.
whetheritmightbepreferableforeuthanasia tobe
performed.In themare,ifthefoal is tobesaved,iis
Inguinal hernia in the bitch
essential that aid shall be forthcoming the moment
the expulsive forces of labour conmence.Delivery
Acquiredinguinal herniaiscommonin thebitch and
of the foal by traction despite the downwards devi-
notinfrequentlytheincarcerateduterusbecomesthe
ation ofthe uterus is possible;however,cases can
focus of pregnancy; it can also occur in the cat butis
bevisualized inwhichdisplacementoftheuterus
rarein thisspecies.Thehernia isgenerallyunilateral
places thefetusbeyondreach,In these,itis advised
andmaycontainoneorbothuterinecornua.
thatthemareis anaesthetizedandplacedin dorsal
Oftenthehistoryisthat an inguinalswellingthe
recumbency and thehernia is reduced by pressure.
size of a hen's egg has been recognized for months,
Attemptsatdeliveryshouldbemadewiththeani-
but that during the last few weeks it hasrapidly
malin thisposition.Afterparturition and involu-
become larger. In other cases, the recent develop-
tionoftheuterus,theherniawill becomeoccupied
ment ofa progressive swellingis the story.There
by intestine.It is improbable,however,that stran-
mayormaynotbeahistoryofrecentoestrus and
gulationwilloccurandtiemaremaybeableto
mating.
suclle thefoal.Atthe endofthisperiod she should
The lesion is obvious;it is unlikely that it will
be killed.
be confusedwith amammaryneoplasm ora local
Cows and ewes may give birth spontaneously
abscess if careful examination is made.The con-
despite severe ventral hernia but affected animals
dition is painless and there is no systemic distur-
should be closely watched during labour in case arti
bance.Althoughit istense and irreduciblethere is
ficialaid isneeded.
littletendencyforstrangulationprovided intestine
is not involved.Thelatter complication is rare.In
Downward deviation of the porcine uterus
probablybepossibletodetectfetusesonpalpation,
Downwarddeviationoftheuterushasbeendescribed
whichcanbeconfirmedbytransabdominalB-mode
bylackson(1972)as thecauseof19of200casesof
ultrasonography.
porcine dystocia.Affectedanimals strainedvigor-
The course ofthe condition depends primar-
ily on the degreeof tension inthe sacandthiswill
15-22cm in frontof the pelvic brim the uterus devi-
beinfluencedbyitssizeandthenumberoffetuses
atedsharplyin adownwards andbackwardsdirec-
involved.Sometimes,the fetuses will develop nor
tion.It was very difficult to extract the obstruicted
mally up to a certain point and then die,probably
pigletmanually,and insertionofthe armupto the
becauseofimpairedbloodsupplytotheherniated
shoulder was necessary sothattlie obstetrician's
parts of the horns,and then undergoresorption.The
elbow could be flexed within the sow's abdomen.
majority ofcases will bepresentedwhen pregnancy
Affected sows were deep-bodied and pregnant with
has advanced about 30 days and each fetal unit is
largelitters.
aboutthesizeofagolfball,forbythistimethesize
of the swelling is becoming alarming to the owner
Retroflexion of the mare's uterus
（Fig.10.4）.It is very unlikely,but not impossible,
forsuch a pregnancytogoto term,with subsequent
During the previous 10years at the GhentVeterinary
dystocia.
Clinic,Vandeplassche(1980)reported that he and
If an inguinal hernia is diagnosed in a pregnant
his colleagues had seen 18 cases of severe colic in
bitch,thefollowing options shouldbeconsidered:
242
Chapter
101
Maternal dystocia: causes and treatment
thebifurcation to draw this horn into the her
nia and remove it. As a rule it is nut possible to
draw the ovaries through the inguinal ring.This
is the operation most often performed. It pres-
ents no particular difficulties and cure of the her-
nia is certain.
·In those cases in which fetal development is at or
approaching term, it may be decided to proceed
as described above but,instead of anputating he
involved horn, to perform hysterotomy and extract
the fetuses with their membranes.In the one case
in which Ihave performedthis operation it was
possible to return the uterus to the abdomen after
extraction of the fetus.
Expulsive deficiency
'The expulsiveforce of labouris due to a combination
of myometrial contractions, and straining induced
Fig.10.4Inguinal metrocele in abitch gravid with three
by the contraction of the abdominal muscles with
embryos of about 30 days.
a closed glottis.Because the abdominal muscles do
not come intoplay until the myometriumhas forced
the ferus and fetal membranes into the pelviccanal
Reduce the hernia,obliterate the sacand allow
andstirmulatedthepelvic sensory nervereceptors,
pregnancy to take its normal course. In the great
it is logical to consider first the expulsive deficien-
majority of cases it will not be possible to reduce
cies that may arise in the myometrium; these may
the hernia by simplemeans.
occur spontaneously or dependently,and are called,
respectively, primary and secondary uterine inertia.
·Enlarge the hernial ring by incision of the abdomi-
nal wall and later close by suture after reduiction of
the hernia. Oblierate the sac; allow the pregnancy
Primary uterine inertia
to continue.From the stricily ethicalviewpoint
Before proceeding further, thereaderis advised torefer
this is the operation to select.Pregnancy is unin-
back to Chapter 6, in particular the sections entitled
terrupted and the animal's full breeding powers
‘Myometrial contractions' (p. 169), ‘Effects of proges-
are conserved. It presents, however, several tech-
terone and oestrogens on myometrial activity’ and
nical difficulties: precise incision of the abdomi-
Role of prostaglandins and oxytocin. Primary uterine
nal wall forwards from the inguinal orifice is not
inertia implies an original deficiency in the contrac-
casy owing to thepresence of the large and tensely
tile potential of the myomeurium, thereby removing
filled sac.Moreover,effective closure of the neck
or reducing this component of the expulsive force and
ofthe sacmay be difficult after incision of the
delaying or preventing the completion of the second
parietal peritoneum. At the same time cases will
stage of parturition. Ii is a common cause of dysto-
be encountered in which,after assessment of all
cia in polytocous species, wliere it has been shown to
the individual factors, this operation is selected.
be responsible for 37% of dystocias in sows (Jackson
·Dissect out the hernial sac; incise its apex and
1972), 48.9% in bitches (Linde-Forsherg & Eneroth
expose the herniated uterus. Amputate the horn
1998) and 36.8% in queen cais (Linde-Forsberg &
involved.Obliterate the hernial sac.If it happens
Eneroth 1998). Not infrequently, it occurs in the cow,
that the animal is also pregnant in an abdomi-
where it is usually due to hypocalcaemia/hypomag-
nally situated horn this should not be interfered
nesaemia,as well as being a likely cause of incom-
with.lf,however,an abdominally situated horn
plete cervical dilatation (see above).
is empty and it is desired that the bitch shall be
The following factors may be involved in the cause
sterilized,it is an easy matter after location of
of primary uterine inertia:
243
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
·The progesterone:oestrogen ratio is important
manifestations, coupled with restlessness due to
as it influences uterine contractility in a number
abdominal discomfort,will have indicated that the
of ways. These are discussed in detail in Chapter
first stage haspassed.Theremay have been a few fee-
6;however,it is appropriate tomention them
ble abdoninal contractions but no progress has been
here. Oestrogen increases the synthesis of con-
madeor,in thepolytocousspecies,afteranadequate
tractile protein; the number of agonist recep-
beginningofsecond-stagelabourallfurtheractivity
torsforoxytocin andprostaglandins;the activity
has ceased.Linde-Forsberg&Eneroth (1998)refer to
ofmyosin light-chain kinase(MLCK)which is
this asprimary partial uterineinertia'to differentiate
involved in the phosphorylation of myosin and
it from'primary complete inertia'where second stage
hence the biochemical changes involved in con-
fails to commence at all. It is difficult io distinguish
traction;calmodulin synthesis,which increases
this from secondaryinertiawichisalwaysa sequel
MLCK activity, and the number of gap junctions.
tosome otherfactorsuch as anobstructive dystocia.
Progesterone has the opposite effects, thereby
Examination ofthebirth canal in thelargeranimals
reducing myometrial contracility. The changes
reveals apatentcervix,beyondwhicha fetus cannr
in the progesterone:oestrogen ratio will be deter-
mallybepalpated,contained within its membranes.
minedbytheendocrine cascadethat initiatespar-
In thebitch and cat,itislikely thatno fetus ormem-
turition (seeFig.6.3)
braneswill befelt.
·Oxytocinandprostaglandinsareinvolveddirecily
Itis essential that treatment should be atteimpted
and indirectly in myometrial contractions.Any
as soon as possible,once other causes of dystocia
deficiencies in these hormones,or their receptors
havebeen eliminatedasbeingresponsibleIn the
through which they exert their action,will prevent
large monotocous species, treatment is generally
orreducemyonetrial contractions.
simple.Byvaginal manipulation themembranes are
ruptured and,if the fetus isin normal disposition,
·Calcium and related inorganic ions such as mag-
itshouldbedelivered immediatelybytraction.In
nesium have a criticalrolein smoothmuscle
cows,calciumborogluconateshould begiven evenif
contractions.Any deficiency will impair these
there is no clinical evidence of hypocalcaemia.In the
contractions,causinguterine inertia.This isa par-
sow, there is evidence that hypocalcaemia is associ-
ticular problem in dairy cows,particularly those
atedwith somecasesofuterineinertia(Framstadet
atpasture,since most cows experiencea transient
al 1989) but it is difficult to administer large vol-
decline in foodintake around the time of calving
umes ofcalciumborogluconateas canbe donein
whichwill result in reduced calcium intake.Itis
cattle.Treatmentinvolves a combinationofmanual
important to control feeding carefully during this
removal of anypiglets that can be palpated in the
transitional period since not only will hypocal-
vagina oruterus,together with theuseofrepeated
caemia cause uterineinertia,resulting in dystocia,
but also there is evidence that it can have a pro-
doses of oxytocin.It is important to stress that oxy-
tocin is a potent ecbolic,and doses of 1o1u i.m.or
foundinfluenceonfeed intakewellintolactation,
51U i.v. should be used initially.Large doses tend
thereby depressing fertility(see Ch.22).
to causemyometrial spasm,rather than peristaltic
Overstreiching ofthemyoinetrium,due to the
contractions;inaddition,themyometrium becomes
presence ofalargelitter orexcess fetalfluids
refractory to repeated dosing so itis important to
(hydrallantois),orunderstretching,due toa small
provide an opportunity for an incremental dose
litter in polytocous species, can cause reduced
regimen.
uterine activity.
For thebitch and queen cat,whereprimary uterine
·Thereis anecdotalevidencethatfattyinfiltration
inertia is themain cause of dystocia,Linde-Forsber
betweenthelayersofthemyometriumcanreduce
&Eneroth(1998) suggest the following treatment
its contractile efficiency.
regimen:
The diagnosis ofprimary uterine inertia is made
from the history and by an examination ofthe
Vigorous exercise of the dam will sometimes stim-
birth canal and presenting fetus. The dam is at or
ulateuterinecontractions
near term,as denoted by mammary changes and
·Digital stimulation of the vagina (feathering) will
ligamentous relaxation in the pelvis(where this
stimulate endogenous oxytocin release,and nay
is normally apparent), while the psychological
induceuterinecontractions
244
Chapter
101
Maternal dystocia:causesand treatment
Slouwly inject10% calciumborogluconate solu-
Table 10.1Classification of272canine dystocias
tioni.v.(0.5-1.5ml/kgbody weight).Thisis in
(after Freak1962)
response to the long-held belief that subclini-
Dystocia
No. of cases
calhypocalcaemia isa common cause ofiner-
tia (Freak 1962), although a more recent study
Obstructive dystocias,fetal
has failed to support thishypothesis（Kraus&
Relative oversizeof oneormore fetuses
77
Schwab1990)
Absoluteoversize
15
Leave the bitch for 30 minutes; if straining com-
mences then repeat the calcium borogluconate
Fetal monstrosityorgrossabnormality
2
treatment.Ifnot,administer oxytocin at a dose
Malpresentation o:herthanposterior
12
rate of 0.5-5iu i.v.or 1-10lu i.m.in thebitch,
Posteriorpresentationoffirstfetus
35
depending on size,and 0.51U i.v.or i.m.in the
Obstructive dystocias,maternal
queen
·Perform a vaginal examination andremove any
Abnormalityof maternal softstructures
4
pups or kittens by gentle traction
Abnormality of maternal pelvs(accidental)
1
Slackness of abdominal wall
3
Oxytocin treatment canberepeated,particularly if
Inertias
small numbersofthelitterremain
If calcium or oxytocin therapy is not successful,or
Primary inertia
41
if the litter is very large or small a single pup or
Secondary inertia
44
kitten), then a caesarean operation is indicated.
Nervousvoluntary inhibitionof labour
17
Slowinitiationof labour(queryhormonalin
Nervousvoluntaryinhibition
origin)
1
oflabour
Slow initiation of labour(due to subclinical
eclampsia)
7
In 17of 272 canine dystocia cases （Table 10.1)
recorded by Freak(1962),labour did not begin or,
Abortionnear totermofdeadfetuses
2
having begun, did not proceed.The factor com-
Deathofsomefetusespriortoparturition
10
mon to alltheaffectedbitcheswastheprovision
Coincidental illness
1
ofa special parturition environment towhichthe
bitch was unaccustomed.When the bitches were
Secondary inertia
returned to their accustomed quarters,ihey pro-
ceeded to whelp.Occasionally, bitches appear
This isthe inertia ofexhaustion and is essentiallya
tobefrightenedbylabourpainsandvoluntarily
result,ratherthanacause,ofdystociaduetosomeother
inhibit straining: tranquillizing drugs are helpful
cause,usually of an obstructive nature.Nevertheless,
in such cases.
in polytocous species,prolonged unsuccessful efforts
todeliveronefeiusmayresultindystociafrominertia
withregard to theremainder.Secondary inertiais fre-
Hysteria
quentlyfollowedbyretentionofthefetalmembranes
In the study of200 porcine dystocias previously
andretardedinvolutionof theuterus,factors thatpre-
referred io（Jackson 1972）,there were six cases
dispose topuerperal metritis.
in which the sows were so excitable and aggres-
Secondaryinertia occurs in all species and,speak-
sive that they were apparently unable to continue
ing generally, is a preventable condition.Its preven-
normal parturition.The use of the sedative azap-
tiondependson the earlyrecognition that labour has
eronewasfollowedbyaresumptionofnormal
ceased tobenormal, and theapplication of the appro-
farrowing. This is also recognized to be a greater
priate assistance.Sometimes,inthebitchand queen
problem in gilts;thus if a large number are sched-
cat,
normal parturition will commence but,after
uledtobein thefarrowinghouse ataparticular
expulsion of a fewpupsor kittens,it will thencease,
time it is customary to include some older farrow
even though there is no obstruction.Linde-Forsberg
ingsows atthesametime,astheyseemtoexert a
&Eneroth(1998)refer to this as‘primary partial
calmingeffect.
inertia’andidentifyitas a major causeof dystocia,
245
Part
 Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
responsible for about 23% of the cases in bothi spe-
Challis JRG, Lye SI 1994 In: Knohil E, Neill JD (ed),
cies in their study. lt is very similar to the classical
literine inertia associated with largelitters,and I fnd
New Yorkpfr018
Day FT1972EquineVet J4:131
it difficult to distinguish beiween the two. If there
Doyle Al,Freeman DE, Sauberli DS et al 2002 Am Vet Med
hias been ani obstructive dystocia that has been cor-
Assoc220:349
rected,and normal parturition has failed to resume,
Farman RS 1965 Vet Rec 77: 610
then this is clearly sccondary uterine inertia.
Framstad T,Krovel A,Okenhaug Het al 1989Norsk Vet
In the monotocous species, correction of the
Tidsskrift 101:579
Frazer GS,Perkins NR,Consiable PD 1996Theriogenology
cause of the dystocia that provoled the inertia is the
46:739
essential feature of treatment.If this involves cor-
Freak MJ 1962Vet Rec74: 1323
rection of faulty disposition, then the fetus should
Ginther OJ, Williams D 1996J Equine Sci 16:159
beremoved immediately by traction.In thepolyto-
HindsonIC1961 Vet Rec73:S5
cous species, management of the case will depend
Hindson IC, Schofield BM,Turner CB 1967 Res Vet Sci 8:353
on the duration of labour,the number of fetuses
Hindson IC,Turner CB 1972 Vet Rec90:100
still unborni and their condition.In an early case,
[acksonPCG1972Personal communication
delivery of the fetus causing the primary dystocia
Kloss S,Wehrend A,Failing K.Bosiedt H 2002 Berl Munch
may be followed, after a few hours, by the return
Tierarzil 115:247
Kraus A,Schwab A 1990 Tierirzt Praxis 18:641
ofuterine contractions and parturition may pro-
Leidl W,StollaR,Schmid G1993Tierarztl Umschau 48:408
ceed without further hindrance. Such is often the
Linde-Forsberg C,Eneroth A 1998 In:England G,Harvey
case in the sow and occasionally in ihe bitch and
M (ed) Manual of small animal reproduction and neo-
cat. When the case is of longer duration and there
natology.British Small Animal Veterinary Associatinn,
are still several young to be born, it is best to pro-
Cheltenham, Glos, p 132
ceed with the delivery of the remainder. In the
Menard L1994CanVeu]35:289
Mitchell MD,Flint APE1978Endocrinology76:108
sow, it is often possible to do this with the hand
MortonDH,Cox JE 1968Ve1Rec82:530
inserted into the uterus per vaginam. In the bitch
Murray RD, Cartwright TA,Downham DY et al 2002 Reprud
itimaybedecided toattemptforcepsdeliverybut
Domest Anim 37: 71
the protracted use of forceps when three or four
Pearson H 1971 Vei Rec 89:597
fetusesremain unborn hasvery littleto comimend
Roheris Sj 1972 Veterinary obstetrics and genital discases.
it.Calcium borogluconate and oxytocin therapy,as
Roberts,Woodstock,VI
Schafer W1946Schweiz ArchTierheilkS8:44
recommended for the treatment of primary uterine
Schulz S,Bosiedt H 1995 Tierarzil Praxis 23:139
inertia,should alsbe tried,despite thecauseofhe
Sell F,Eulenberger KSchulz1990 MonatshVeterinarmed
inertia apparently being due to'myometrial exhaus-
45:413
tion. This is because there may be other underlying
Skjerven O 1965NordVet Med 17:377
factors involved of which we are unaware. Since the
Sobiraj A 1994 Disch Tierarztl Wochenschr 101: 471
fetuses will soon die, or may already be dead, an
Thomas JO 1990 Vet Rec 127:574
early decision on performing a caesarean operation
TulJH 1944Vet]10D:182
VandeplasschrM 1980 EqineVet J 12:45
Or hysterectomy is important.
Vandeplassche M, Spincemaille I. Houters R,Bonte P 1972
Equine Vet J4: 105
References
WalelL-Daivelid A,Linde-Forsberg C1994 J Small AnimPract
35:402
Wichtel II.Reinertson EL,ClarkTL1988 J AmVetMed Asscc
Auld WC 1947 Vet Rec 59:287
193:337
Bark H,Sekeles B,Marcus R 1980 Feline Pract 10:44
WilliamsWL1943Veterinary Obstetrics NewYork:Williams
&Wilkins
Blackmore DK 1960 Vet Rec72:631
Boswood B 1963Vet Rec 75: 1044
 
Caufield W 1960 Vet Rec72: 673
Young RO,iscork RH 1963Ve Rec75:72
246
11
Chapter
David Noakes
Fetal dystocia: aetiology, incidence
and prevention
The twobroad divisions of fetal dystocia are fetoma-
not surprising that there is a very extensive literature
ternal disproportion and faulty fetal disposition (see
on the subject extending over many years.Despite
Fig. 8.1). Traditionally,the former type of dystocia
having dismissed theuse of thetraditional divisions
was referred to as fetal oversize, with relative over-
of fetal oversize in favour of the all-embracing con-
sizebeingconsidered to occur when thefetus was
cept of feiomaternal disproportion, in discussing the
of noimal size for the species/breed but the birth
aetiology of the disorder we will first conisider those
canal was inadequate,and absolute oversize when
factors ihat are associated with the development of
the fetus was excessively large, including some fetal
a larger-than-normal fetus and second those factors
monsters (see Ch. 4). The reason for the change is
that influence the ability of thie dam togivebirth to
that sometimes it is difficult to differentiate between
a'normal-size'fetus.
the two categories of oversize, or the dystocia is due
to a combination of both.
Calfbirth weight
In a fundamental consideration of fetal develop-
Fetomaternal disproportion
ment, it must be remembered thar the fetus grows
by both hyperplasia and hypertrophy of its con-
Fetomaternal disproportion is a common cause of
stituent tissues.Prior&Laster(1979)haveshown
dystocia that is highly specics-and breed-related.
that, in catle, growth by hyperplasia is more
In Chapter 8,under the section entitled ‘Types of
important in early gestation but decreases rapidly
dystocia within species',you will have seen that,
towards the end ofpregnancy,whereas growth by
while fetomaternal disproportion is a major cause
hypertrophy continues to increase with advancing
of dystocia in cattle and to a lesser extent the dog
gestation. Retardation of growth at any stage of
and cat,neverthelessit can occur in all species if the
circumstances are right. Simplistically, fetomater-
natal development but,because the relative pro-
nal disproportion occurs if the fetus is larger than
portionofgrowthbyhyperplasiagets smaller as
fetal age increases, retardation of growth in late
normal-itmight sinplybe one ofincreased mass
or conformation -or thepelvic canal is too small or
gestation has less effect on subsequentpostnatal
of incorrect shape.
development.Actually,thegrowth by hyperplasia
that does occur in late gestation is mainly in mus-
cle. The growth of the fetus follows an exponential
Cattle
growth curve, with the greatest absolute increase
Since fetomaternal disproportion is the commonest
in body weight occurring in the last trimester but
causeofdystocia incattle,particularlyinheifers,its
the greatest relaiive growth occurring in the first
247
Part
3
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
(Hickson etal 2006).Prior&Laster(1979)and
12
Eley etal (1978) found that bovine fetal growth
10-
cal
8-
wasfastest at232daysofgestation,but the two
ficult
6-
research groups' findings differed in the amount
4-
Diffi
of the daily increase, 331g and 200g, respectively.
2
0.951.000.85
0.380.510.69
Bytheendofgestation,theincreaseinfetalweight
0-
Good
Average
Poor
had declined to 200g daily.The first group also
ascertained that, when pregnant heifers were fed
A
Calf size
varying diets to produce low,medium and high
6.63
maternal weight gains, there was no resultant dif
5.61
ference in felal birth weights among the three
calv
categories.
1.551.45
1.67
Calfbirthweight isthe singlemosiimportant
Diffi
0.90
1.221.76
factor affecting the incidence of dystocia in heif-
%
Good
Average
ers (Meijering 1984,Morrison et al 1985,Johnson
Poor
et al 1988).Linearestimates have shown thateach
B
Calf conformation
kilogram increase of birth weightincreases therate
Limousin
ofdystociabybetween 1.63%and2.30%(Lasler
Hereford
et al 1973).However,other studieshave shown a
Charolais
non-linearrelationshipbetween birth weightand
dystocia,with the incidence of dystocia increas-
Fig.11.1 The relationship between the incidence of difficult
calvings and (A)calf size and(B)calf conformation,for calves
ingly significantly after the birth weight reached a
siredbyLimousin,Hereford and Cnarolaisbulls(fromMcGuirk
certain threshold (Meijering 1984,Rice1994).The
et al 1998b)
threshold will beinfluenced bybreed,parity and
how dystociais defined(Meijering1984),however
examples are 3lkg for Angus heifers(Berger et al
Table 11.1 Degreeof dystocian220 2-year-old Hereford
1992),45.5kg and50kg,for bull and heifer calves
Feifersccording tyearlingpelvicareacalfbihweightand
respectively,in Charolais heifers.Thelarger thecalf
pelvic area:birth weight (from Deutscher1985)
the greater the chance of a difficult calving (Fig
Degree of calving difficulty*
11.1,Table ll.1).The inter-relationship between
breed,parity,sex and calf birth weight is shown in
1
2
3
4
5
the study ofEriksson et al (2004),in which the inci-
Yearling heifer pelvic
146
141
138
142
132
denceofdystociaataparticularbirthweightwas
area(cm2)
greater inHereford than Charolais heifersandwas
Calf birth weight (kg)
31.4
32.7
34.1
37.7
36.8
greaterinheifers thanparousanimalsofthesame
Pelvic area:birth
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
breed (Fig.11.2,Table 11.2)
weight
One of the disadvantages of using sires that have
an estimated breeding value (EBV) for low birth
Calvngdiclty cring sstm1assistan2,sgtassista
weightisthat theyoftenhaveundesirablegenotypes
3,moderate,4,much assistance;5,caesarean operation.
for growth and carcase traits (Hickson et al 2006).
Yearling pelvic area dividedbycalf birthweightequalsratio
A number offactorshavebeen shown to affectcalf
birth weighit;they are asfollows:
classical studiesreported nearly50years ago.Ingen-
1. Breed of sire. In breeding early from heifers of
eralithasbeen found that,when theparents are of
beefbreeds（at15ratherthan27monthsofage;see
disparate size,e.g.Friesian bull andJersey cow,the
Hickson etal 2006),in Holstein-Friesian dairy heif
birthweightofthecross-bredFriesian-Jerseycalfis
ers at 15 months of age, as well as in cross-breeding
near the mean of thebody weight for the purebred
programmes where beef sires are used on dairy heif
Friesian andpurebred Jerseycalves.When therecip-
ers and cows, the selection of the most appropri-
rocal crosses are made,however,itcan beseen that
ate sirebreed isimportant forease ofcalving and
the dam exerts an influence towards her own birth
low calfmortality rates.There are some interesting
weight.Hilder&Fohrman(1949)demonstrated
effects ofcross-breeding thatare shown in some
thisinfluenceoncalfbirthweightforFriesian-Jersey
248
Chapter
11
Fetal dystocia: aetiology, incidence and prevention
50
First parityHerel.
Table 11.3 Influence of parent onbirthweight (afterJoubert
Firsl parity Char.
&Hammond1958)
40
-Later panities Herel.
Later pariliesChiar.
Parent
Calf weight (kg)
30-
Purebred SouthDevon
45.4
Purebred Dexter
23.7
20
Diffi
Calculatedmean
34.5
10-
DexterbullxSouthDevon cow
33.2
SouthDevcnbull xDexter cow
26.7
25
30
35404550
55
09
65
70
Birth weighl(kg)
Table 11.4Actualincidenceof difficult calvings according to
Fig.11.2Phenotypicrelationshipsbetweencalvingdifficulty
breedof sire andparityofdairycowsandheifers(afterMcGuirk
etal 1998b)
weightintervals(where intervals arewiderat endpoints due to
Sire breed
%Incidence
fewobservationsof extremes).Mean birthweightsare marked
as:=firsi-parity Herefords(Heref.),O=later parity Herefords,
=fist-parity Charolais(Char),and=latter parity Charolais
Heifers
Cows
(Redrawnwith permissionfromErikssonel al2004).
Aberdeen Angus
3.5
2.8
Belgian Blue
1.1*
3.1
Blonde d'Aquitaine
8.1
Table 11.2Influence ofparent onbirth weight(after
Charolais
5.8*
3.8
Hilder&Fohrman 1949)
Hereford
5.0
1.3
Parent
Female
Male
Limcusin
6.3
2.1
calves
calves
Piedmontese
10.2
2.8
(kg)
(kg)
Simmental
E'8
Purebred Friesian
43.4
Mean
6.0
2.9
Purebred Jersey
25.0
*Relatively small number of data
Calculatedmean birth weight
34.2
Observed FriesianbullxJerseycow
33.9
34.5
in heiferswere theBelgian Blue andAberdeen Angus,
and themost difficult were the Blonde d'Aquitaine,
Observed Jerseybuil xFriesian cow
34.7
37.1
Simmental and Piedmontese,whereas for cows
the easiest were the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus
and themost difficultweretheBlonde d'Aquitaine,
crosses （Table 1l.3)and Joubert &Hammond
Simmental and Charolais (Table 1l.5).The results in
(1958)demonstrated it for South Devon-Dexter
heifersfor theBelgianBluesireswasvery surprising
crosses (Table 11.4). Some more recent examples are
sincemuscularhypertrophyor'doublemuscling’is
cited below.
commonly seen in this breed;however,thenumber
In theUSA,Laster et al （1973)surveyed dystocia
of sires from this breed were small, and perhaps the
rates and subsequent fertility following the mat-
dams were selected for good size.For practical ani-
ing of 1889 Hereford and Angus cows to bulls of
mal breeding one would neverrecommend the use
the Angus,Charolais,Hereford,ersey,Limousin,
ofa sireofthisbreedonheifers.Inthis inherited
Simmental and South Devon breeds. Calves sired
anomaly,there is excessive development ofmus-
by the Simmental, South Devon,Charolais and
cles,particularlyof thehindquartersbutalso of the
Limousin bulls caused significantly more dystocia-
loins and forequarters;the skin is thin and the limb
32.66,32.34,30.9 and 30.78%,respectively-than
bones tend tobe shorter.Itis of varying severity,and
calves sired by Hereford, Angus and Jersey bulls,
is favourably regarded by both farmers and butchers
15.78, 9.9 and 6.46%, respectively. In the study by
because of the greatly increased proportion of meat
McGuirk et al(1999),the easiest-calving sirebreeds
in thecarcase.Howevet,whenmuscularhypertrophy
249
Part
131
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
Table 11.5Average birth weights(kg)of variousbreedsof cattle(after Legault &Touchberry1962)
Ayrshire
BrownSwiss
Guernsey
Holstein
Jersey
Number
213
163
154
587
117
Average
36.4
46.4
32.5
42.9
24.7
Males
38.2
48.4
34.4
44.4
25.7
Females
34.6
44.2
30.6
41.6
23.4
First calving
35.2
44.2
31.7
40.7
22.6
Second calving
36.6
48.3
32.5
44.2
25.7
Third calving
38.1
47.7
31.6
44.6
25.9
Fourth andsubsequent calvings
38.1
48.1
EE
43.2
24.8
Average weights forAberdeenAngus,Charolais and Herefordcalves are27.1,47:5and32.6kg,respectively
is substantial,it is the causeof severedystocia,par-
deviation of calves born to first-parity animals
ticularly in heifers.Muscular hypertrophy has been
was37.9±4.4kg,compared with 39.7±5.8kg for
described intheSouthDevonbreed byMacKellar
second-parity animals;otherbodydimensionswere
(1960) and it is well known in the Belgian Blue,
also lower(Table11.7)
Charolais,Piedmontese andWhiteFlandersbreeds.
3.Sex of calf.Many studies have shown,irrespective
Mason (1963) has described it in the grandsons of
ofbreed,that thebirth weights ofmale calves are
aFriesianbullimportedintoBritain.Vandeplassche
greater than female calves(Table11.3).Theincreased
（personal communication,1973)has stated that
birth weightisassociatedwith anincreased inci-
50%of oversizedcalvesinBelgium are due todou-
denceof dystocia andanassociatedincrease incalf
ble muscling and thar the condition is a frequent
mortality (Tables 11.2, 11.8).
indicationforthe caesarean operation in Holland,
4.Seasonaland climaticfactors.Several studies have
Belgium and France.
shown theinfluenceofseasonofyearandenvi-
2.Parity of dam.A very simplerule is:the bigger
ronmental factors,such as mean air temperature,
the dam,the bigger the calf.This is very apparent
onbirth weightsand hencetheincidenceofdys-
betweenbreedsbut it alsooccurswithinbreedswith
tocia. In a retrospective study over 3 consecutive
heifers giving birth to smaller calves than parous
years involving cross-bred heifers,Colburn et al
cows (Table 11.6).This is well illustrated in a study
(1997) found that themean spring birth weights of
by Sieber etal（1989),involving Hlolsteins over
calvesborn afterawarmer-than-normalwinterwere
an 18-yearperiod,in which themean± standard
4.5kglowerthanthosefollowingacoldwinter;the
Table 11.5Theeffectofparity oncalfbirthweightandeaseof calving (afterSieberetal 1989)
Parameter
Parity
1
2
3
4
>5
%ofcases
Body weight of cow (kg)
49.4
53.2
60.8
59.3
62.1
Birth weight of calf (kg)
4.4
5.8
5.3
6.2
5.4
Types of calving assistance
None
48.3
79.9
82.7
82.8
86
Manual
3.4
4.8
4.7
2.7
Manual with chains
42.9
16.5
12.6
11.8
10.7
Mechanical
4.9
0.2
0
0.6
0.7
250
Chapter
11|
Fetal dystocia:aetiology,incidence and prevention
Table11.7Effectofcalfbirthweightandsexon theincidence andseverityof dystocia andcalf mortalityinAmericanAngus
heifers(afterBergeret al 1992)
Dystocial/Mortalityscores*
1
2
1
2
3
Birthweight
Sex
%Dystocia
% Calf mortality
20kg
M
86.4
11.4
2.2
95.7
1.0
3.2
F
92.4
6.5
1.1
97.1
0.7
2.2
21-25kg
M
92.9
6.1
1.0
94.7
0.6
4.8
F
95.5
4.0
0.5
96.6
0.5
2.8
26-30kg
M
E'68
E'6
1.3
96.9
0.4
2.6
F
92.7
6.5
0.7
97.7
E'O
2.0
31-35kg
M
79.9
16.5
3.5
96.9
0.8
2.2
F
86.6
11.2
2.1
97.5
0.6
1.8
36-40kg
M
61.1
28.3
10.6
94.9
2.2
2.9
F
69.0
23.8
7.2
96.2
1.8
2.0
40kg
M
32.4
29.4
87.2
7.7
5.1
F
48.6
30.7
20.7
90.6
5.5
3.8
*Dystociascores:1,no assistance,2,someassistance;3,major difficulty
Mortality scores:1,weanedorsold alive:2,deadwithin24hours;3,deadpreweaning
Table 11.8Frequency of calving difficulty scores and stillbirths in Charolais and Hereford heifers (first parity) andl cows
(>1parity)(data from Eriksscn et al2004)
Parity
Gender
Easy
Normal
Difficult
%totalstillbirth
Charolais
First
M
62.4
28.0
9.6
8.0
F
78.2
18.0
3.8
3.9
Later
M
89.5
9.1
1.5
2.2
F
6.0
0.6
1.3
Hereford
First
M
65.1
26.9
8.0
7.5
F
75.5
20.0
4.6
3.8
Later
M
89.9
8.8
1.4
2.2
F
92.1
7.0
1.0
1.4
correspondinglevelsofcalvingdifficultywere35%
in autumn and earlywinter,which showed some
and58%respectively.Onehypothesisforthis find
correlation with the average calving difficulty score
ing is that,during cold winters,there is increased
and gestation length (Fig.1l.3).A similar trend was
uterine blood flow,which results in an increased
alsoobservedindairyherdswhereHolstein-Friesian
nutrient supply to the fetus.This may explain the
sires wereused(McGuirket al1999)（Fig.11.4).The
resultsofMcGuirketal（1998a),who found,when
reduction in gestation length and increased calving
evaluatingdataontheeffectofbeefsiresondairy
difficulty were slightly out of phase with, and pre
cows,thatcalfsizeandcalfconformationdeclined
ceded, increase in calf size (Figure 11.4).
251
Part
31
Dystociaandotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
1.42
2.00
1.40
1.50
1.38
diffic
1095
1.36
1.00
1.34
bul
1.32
1.30
0.00
1.28
abe
1.26
-0.50
All data
Post-1988dala
1.24
-1.00
g
Ine
8
A
儿
B
Month of calving
M
Monthof calving
6-
1.90
1.76
1.88
1.86
1.74
5
1.84
4
1.72
M
call
4
1.70
tal
1.78
COr
ific
1.76
2
1.68
Seriouslydifficultcalvings
1.74
2
1.72
Calf size
1.66
Calfmortality
1
1.70-
Calfconformation
0-
0
1.68
1.64
司
2
Ded
C
Ma
D
Month of calving
Month of calving
Fig.11.3 Month of calving effects on(A)calving difficulty score;(B)gestation length;(C)the incidence of seriously difficultcalv-
5,Nutritionof the dam.Duringthelast decade,there
birthweightispositivelycorrelatedwithpostnatal
has been considerable interest in all species,includ-
weight gain and with the subsequent achievement
inghumans,concerningthe influence ofmaternal
ofcommerciallydesirableslaughterweightsoffood
nutrition during pregnancy on development and
animals.In theobstetrical context,theconcern over
health after birth,as well as onbirth weight.Much
birth weight is twofold:first, large fetuses contrib-
ofthis is associated with the influence ofunder-
ute to dystociaandsecond,undersizedoffspring are
nutrition duringthe early stages ofgestation when
morepronetoneonatal death and disease.Therefore,
theplacentais developing or,in some studies,even
whileit is reasonable to explore howbirthweight
before or at the time of conception.Since thepla-
maybecontrolledsoastoreducedystocia,anysevere
centa controls the transfer ofnutrienisfrom dam to
reduction infetal birthweight achievedbymanipu-
fetus,anythingthat impairs its function will inevit
lationofthematernal diet,mayplacetheneonatein
ablyresultinreducedfetalgrowthanddevelopment.
jeopardy.In addition, dietary restrictions may also:
There is evidence that in ruminants,for example,
(1)increase the duration of parturition,thus increas-
the conformation of the placentome changes in an
ingthe chanceof stillbirth;(2)reducethe milkyield,
attempttocompensateforlieunder-nutritionand
thusinsucklersreduce calfgrowthrate;(3) delaythe
provide the fetuswith adequate nutrients for normal
return to cyclical ovarian activity post-partum,thus
growth and development(Steyn et al 2001).
increasing the calving interval.Itis perhaps best
Itisdifficult toevaluate the results from the
summarizedinthestatementbyEckles（1919)that
many published studies concerning the effects on
'the weight of the calf at birth is not ordinarily influ-
fetal weight of variations in thematernal nutrition,
enced by the ration received by the dam during ges-
because much of it is contradictory. The motiva-
tation,unless severe nutritional deficiencies exist
tion forthis research is mainly economic,because
Itisonlyduringthelast90daysofgestationthat
252
Chapter
11
Fetal dystocia:aetiology,incidenceandprevention
0.05
ofonesuchstudyis thatofTudor（1972),whofed
0.04
two groups of cows from 180 days of gestation to
me
0.03
overall
term so that one group gained and the other group
0.02
lostweight.Meancalf birthweightswere30.9kg and
0.01
24.1kg for the high-and low-nutrition cow groups.
from
0-
In another experiment, in which cows lost 17.5%
-0.01
-0.02-
oftheirbody weight duringthelastirimester,the
-0.03
birth weight of the calves was on average 12.9% less.
oCalving difficulty
-0.04-
Some other studies have shown an effect on calf
oCalf size
-0.05-
birth weight（Rice&Wiltbank 1972,Laster 1974,
A
Wiltbank&Remmenga1982,Spitzeretal1995),
Feb
口
others have not (Anderson et al 198l,Khadem
0.80-
ct al1996).In addition,the effect on the incidence
0.60-
ofdystocia was unpredictable(Rice &Wiltbank
0.40-
1972,Drennan1979).
0.20-
6.Length of gestation. Certain fetal calf develop-
0.00
0.20-
mental abnormalities, such as hypophyseal and
0.40-
adrenal-cortex hypoplasia or aplasia,have been
viatic
-0.60-
associated with prolonged gestation for reasons
G
-0.80-
ep)
related to the initiation of parturition,as described
-1.00-
-1.20-
in Chapter 6. However even with normal calves,
there are substantial variations in gestation length.
B
6m
Many ofthese are breed-dependent (Table 11.9)
12-
and the influence is also seen when cross-breeding
occurs（Tables 11.10,11.11);the increased gestation
10-
length is associated with higher birth weights and an
8-
increased chance of dystocia.Malecalves,which are
heavier than female calves (see above), are usually
6-
associated with a longer gestation period of a few
days.A mean difference of1.4 days was seen in the
studybyMcGuirketal (199sb)involvingbeef sires
2
OSeriously difficultcalvings
oCalfmortality
0-
C
Table 11.9 Gestation length and birth weights of differert
P
司
breedsof cattle(from Noakes 1997)
Breed
Average
Average birth
Monthof calving
gestation
weight(kg)
Fig.11.4 Month of calving effects cn(A)calving difficulty
length (days)
and calf size scores;(B)gestation length;(C)the incidence
Aberdeen Angus
280
28
ofdifficultcalvingsandcalfmortality(Withpermissionfrom
McGuirk et al 1999).
Ayrshire
279
34
Brown Swiss
286
43.5
severerestriction ofmaternalnutrition,resultingin
Charolais
287
43.5
failureofthedam tomaintainbodyweight,reduces
Holstein-Friesian
279
41
fetal birthweight,thereduction inweight being due
Guernsey
284
OE
to a reduction in fetal musclemass.Studies have
investigated theeffects ofboth energy andprotein
Hereford
286
32
deprivationof thedam,eitheraloneorogetherand
Jersey
280
24.5
havefound theresults 1obevariable,with someevi-
Simmental
288
43
dence of both having aneffect.Energy intakeappears
South Devon
287
44.5
to have a greater influence than protein.An example
253
Part
31
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
Table11.10Gestation length andbirthweightsofcalvesof
Table11.11Variationsingestationlengthinseveral cattle
purebredandreciprocal crosses of Angus and Herefordcattle
breeds(after Gebaughet al 1951)
(afterGerlaughetal 1951)
Breed
No.of
Average
Breed
Gestation
Birth
gestation
gestation
length
weight
periods*
length*
(days)
(kg)
Purebred Angus
101
276.47
CalvesfromAnguscows
Purebred Hereford
100
286.28
Male purebred
277.2
28.3
Hereford bull xAngus cow
94
281.98
282.7
29.8
Male crossbred
Angus bull xHerefordcow
102
283.30
Female purebred
275.7
25.4
*Male and female calves
Female crossbred
281.1
28.4
Calvesfrom Hereford cows
287.5
313
gestationlength andcalving difficulty and calf mor-
Malepurebred
tality is shown in Figure 1l.5. Minimum incidences
Male crossbred
283.1
of difficult calvings occurred in gestations that were
Femalepurebred
285.2
30.7
shorterthan the overall averagebut then increased
Female crossbred
283.5
28.4
with longer gestations.In a similar study involving
Holstein-Friesian sires and dairy dams, longer ges-
tationswere associatedwithlarger calves(negative
anddairy dams.However,when thevalues were
regressioncoefficient-p<0.05)andtheoptimum
examined inrelation to breed of sire,in Aberdeen
gestationlengthfor low calving difficulty was3 days
Angus and Hereford cross-breeds ihe sex differ-
below the overall average.See also Figure 11.6.
encewas0.64and1.04days,respectively,whereas
7.In vitro maturation,fertilization,culture and
in Blonde d'Aquitaine, Limousin, Charolais
and
cloning. The use of in vitro matured (IVM), in vitro
Simmental cross-breeds the differencesexceeded1.5
fertilized (IvF)and somaticcell nuclear transfer
days. In this study gestations were shorter in sum-
(SCNT)-derivedembryos(seeCh.35)hasincreased
merandlongerinwinter.Therelationshipbetween
substantially in recent years,particularly in cattle,
1.7
11%
1.6
10%
1.5
Calving difficuity
ore
aCalfmortality
SCO
%6
ulty
1.4
difficu
8%
buIA
1.3
7%
1.2
1.1
6%
5%
7
1111111111111111111111111111111
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Gestation length
Fig.11.5TherelationshipbetweencalvingdifficultyscoreandcalfmortalitywithgestationlengthThepredictionsforcalf
mortalityhavebeen converted topercentages(Withpermission fromMcGuirketal 1998b)
254
Chapter
1111
Fetal dystocia: aetiology, incidence and prevention
Calf size
the birth weight of the calf (Takahashi et al 2005)
oCalfmortality
In this study,ultrasound-estimated transrectal mea-
lncidence ofseriously dificult calvings
2.50-
-20%
surement of themean metacarpalwidth in thelast
week of gestation were30.2±2.2mm,compared toa
2.00-
-15%
mean measurement afterbirth of30.0±2.1mm;the
1.50
predictedmean birth weights was 50.0±4.7kg com-
pared to the actual meanbirth weightof51.2±5.5kg
(Takahashi et al2005)
-5%
8.Body condition scoreof the dam.There isa direct
0.50-
relationship between body condition score and calf
0.00-
-0%
birth weight (Spitzer et al 1995); this is discussed
-15
-10
15
belowinrelation tomatermal factors.
-5
0
5
10
Gestation length
9.Fetal numbers.Cattleare normally monotocous,
(deviation fromoverallmean-281days)
with twinning occurring in about 1-2% of births,
although in some instances up to s% has been
Fig.11.6The effect of gestation length on calf size,the
recorded.The birth weights of twin calves are on
incidenceofseriouslydifficultcalvings andcalfmortality(With
permission from McGuirket al 1999).
average 10-30% lower than the single-born contem-
poraries,with a greater reduction in thoseborn to
heifers.
with the great advances in this biotechnoloy.
However,one of the disadvantages is that,while
Calfconformation
most of the embryos, placentae, fetuses and off-
springarenormal,a significantproportion arenot.
Many studies have identified the influence of
One of themajor abnormalities is the development
calf birth weight on ease of calving (see above).
of'giant'calves referred to as thelarge offspring or
However,theabilityofacalftobeexpelledunaided
large calf syndrome'orperhaps tocover all abnor-
throughthebirth canal atparturition is dependent
malities the‘abnormal offspring syndrome'(Farin
on its shape or conformation.This is seen in the
etal 2006).There are numerous repors that the
mostextremesituationofsomefetal monsters(see
birth weiglt of calves originating from this source
Chs 4,16),suchasfetal duplication,schistosomes
is greater than those followingnormal artificial
ascitic and anasarcous calves,where the weight of
insemination(Al):for example,51kgversus 36kg
the fetus is low but the conformation prevents nor-
(Behboodietal1995),a4.5kghigherbirh weight
mal expulsion.
(Kruip &den Haas1997）,a 10%increased birth
Attemptshavebeenmadetoassesstlieconfor-
weight(VanWagtendonkdeLeeuwetal199s).Some
mation ofnormalcalves and to correlatethiswith
of the increase appears to be due to a longer gesta-
ease of calving. Such methods have involved asking
tion period:for example,+3 days (Van Wagtendonk
the farmer to assess the conformation of the calf as
de Leeuw et al 1998),+2.3 days (Kruip &den Haas
good,averageorpoorandthen applyinganumerical
1997).Theresultofthisis anincreasein thedystocia
scorefrom1-3toeachsubjectivevalue(McGuirket
rale:for example,+25.2%（Kruip&denHlass 1997)
al1998a).Othershavemade a largenumberoffetal
and62%（Behboodietal1995)comparedwith10%
anatomical measurements,such ashead circumfer-
for Al-derived calves.Associated with theincreased
ence,footcircumferencewidthof shoulders,width
dystociarate was a rise in calf mortalityrate. Others
of hips,depth of chest,body length,cannon bone
have not identified such a problem (Penny et al
length and diameter (Nugent et al 1991, Colburn
1995).Research is in progress to uy and identify the
et al 1997).Using the simple approach,McGuirk et al
embryos thatmay sufferfrom this syndrome before
[1998a)found a statistically significant difference
they aretransferredtotherecipient(Farinet al2004,
betweencalfconformation andincidenceofdifficult
2006). In order to be able to anticipate the prob-
calvings and calf mortality (Fig.1l.1). In summary,
lem and take remedial action toprevent dystocia,
well-muscledcalvesbornfroimabeefsireand dairy
'giantcalves'canbeidentified during the lastmonth
cow or heiferresulted inmore difficult calvings and
of gestation by the transrectal ultrasonographic
increased calf mortality.Recently,in Australia and
measurement of fetal metacarpalwidth,which has
NewZealand, there has been emphasis on advising
been found to be a reliable method of estimating
farmersonconformationwhentheypurchasenew
255
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
was3.8%.Ina studyof345bovine dysiociasin the
USA,95%ofwhichwereinbeef cattle,Adams and
Bishop (196) found that 85% of all the dystocias
were inheifers,and thcy were classifiedas follows:
excessivecalfsize66%,smallmaternalpelvis 15%
and combination of the two 19%.The younger the
heifer,thehigheris the dystocia rate（Lindhe1966).
As would be expected, the stillbirth rate was much
higher in heifer (6.7%) than in cow parturitions
(2.4%).In a survey involving 75000 calvings fol-
lowing theuse of685Holstein-Friesian dairybulls
asAI sires in theUK(McGuirket al1999),the fol-
lowing data were obtained. Calves born to heifers
comparedtothoseborn to cowshadhighercalving
difficulty scores （1.35vs.1.16),a higher incidence
of serious difficult calvings (4.80vs.1.64), shorter
A Smooth shoulders
BProminent shoulders
gestations (280.4 vs.281.3) and higher mortality
(9.5% vs.7.2%). Similarly, when comparisons were
Fig.11.7 Conformation of the shouldersof beef sires and
made between heifers and cows (s8ooo calvings)
easeof calving;(A)desirableand(B)undesirable conforma
whenbeef sireswere used,then themean predicted
tion(Courtesyof Brian Sundstrom,BrianCumming,2002
incidences of seriously difficult calvings were 6.64%
BetterBullBuying toTargetMarketsNSWDeptofPrimary
and2.12%,respectively(McGuirketal1998a).After
Industries,NewSouth Wales,Australia)
the transition from firstto second,thedifferences
between subsequent parities were very small(Sieber
et al 1989),with the percentage ofunassisted calv-
avoidbullsthat arewideatthepoint oftheshoulder
ings 48.3% in heife1s,and 79.9%,82.7%,82.8% and
or have a wide space between the tops of the scapu-
86% in second, third, fourth andfifth or more par-
lae (Fig. 11.7).
ities,respectively (Table 11.8). Similar results were
Using the more sophisticated measurements, the
obtained by Legault and Touchberry (1962 -Table
results have been disappointing and contradictory.
11.6and Eriksson et al (2004-Table11.2).
Meijering (1984)and Morrison et al (i985) found
2.Condition score of the dam.Itis generally accepted
that therewereno differencesintheeffectof calf body
that heifers orcows inavery high condition score are
measurements,independentofbirhweightonease
morelikelyto sufferfromdystocia than thosethat
of calving.Nugent et al (1991), investigating the rela-
aremoderatelopoor,thereasonbeingthatthose in
tionshipbetweencalfshapeandsire expectedprogeny
very good condition will have a substantial amount
difference(EPD)oreaseofcalving,found that at con-
ofretroperitoneal pelvicfat,whichwillreduce the
stantbirthweightcalves from higherbirthweight EPD
sizeofthebirth canal.Studiesin beef heifershave
bulls tended tohavelarger head andcannonbonecir-
shown that body condition scorehadno influence
cumferences.However,atconstant birth weight,body
on the dystocia rate(Spitzer et al 1995). However, in
measurementswerenotassociatedwithcalvingease.
this study, comparisons were made between heifers
In conclusion, they stated that calf shape seemed to
with scoresof4,5and6;given that1=emaciated
addnoinformationforthepredictionof dystocia
and 9=obese,theheifers were all in mid-status and
otherthan thatprovided bybirthweightEPD
thus it is not possible to extrapolate to the extremes.
Maternal factors
Onenoticeablefeature about thisstudy wasthat
conditionscoreatcalvinginfluencedbirthweight,
1.Parity of the dam.This is the most important
although thismight havebeenadirecteffectofnutri-
maternalfactorwhich affectseaseofcalving.Withers
tionalintake;atconditionscores4,5and6themean
(1953), in a British survey,reported that dystocia
±the standard error of themean bodyweightsof
wasalmost threetimesascommoninheifersasin
the heifers were33S±4kg.375±3kg and424±4kg
cows.In6309pregnanciesin cows,difficultyincalv-
and birth weights for the calves were28.9±0.5lg
ingoccurred in1.38%,whereas in2814inheifers it
30.4±0.4kg and32.4±0.7kg,respectively.
256
Chapter
11
Fetal dystocia: aetiology, incidence and prevention
3.Pelvic capacity of the dam.In dystocia due to
study involving Hereford heifers,selection of suit-
fetomaternal disproportion,as well as fetal birth
able animals for breeding was made following the
weight, the other variable is maternal pelvic size,
measurement of pelvic dimensions transrectally
i.e.the area of the pelvic inlet (dorsoventral x
and the calculation of the pelvic area (Deutscher
widest bisiliac dimensions),which was, accord-
1985). Table ll.1 shows the degree of dystocia in
ing to Wiltbank (1961),a much belter param-
220 Hereford heifers in relation to yearling pel
eter for theprediction of dystocia than anyfetal
vic measuremenis, calf birth weight and pelvic
measurement.Pelvic area is moderately to highly
area:birth weight ratio.lf pelvic area measure-
heritable(about 5o%),and thus can besed as
ments are made before service, then those with
a measurement in the genetic selection of breed-
a small pelvic canal can be rejected for breeding
ing stock. There are variations between the breeds
or inseminated with semen from an easy-calving
in respert of the ratio of the calf weight at birth
bull (low EBv for birth weight),while those with
to maternal weight as follows:Friesian 1:12.1,
a larger pelvis can be bred to an average-calving
Ayrshire 1:12.6 and Jersey 1:14.6. When a Friesian
bull.Table 11.12 shows the estimated deliverable
bull was used on Friesian,Ayrshire and Jersey cows
calf birth weight using pelvic measurements.
the ratios of calf weight to maternal weight were
There is also interest in the use of pelvimetry in
Friesian 1:12.1, Ayrshire 1:11.3 and Jersey 1:11.1.
bulls in an attempt to select sires that have a large
Although the Friesian-Jersey calves were larger in
proportion to their dams than purebred Friesian
female progeny. Results cbtained so far have been
calves, the incidence of dystocia with the purebred
equivocal (Crow & Indetie 1994, Kriese et al 1994).
Friesian calves was about three times the incidence
In recent years in the USA, dairy replacement heif
for the Friesian-Jersey calves. These data indicate
ers have been fed growth promoters, which has
that theJersey cow has a more favourablepelvic
increased their pelvic area dimensions.
capacity than the Friesian. Since then, a nunber of
reports have advocated thevalue of measuring the
Prevention ofdystocia duetofetomaternal
pelvicarea as amethod of predictingthe ease of calv
disproportion
ing boti in the shiort term and in relation to genetic
selection(Derivauxetal1964,Rice&Wiltbank1972,
Sincewe are aware of most of hiereasonisfor fetoina
Deutscher 1985).Measuirements are made transrec-
ternal disproportion as a cause of dystocia in cattle,
tally using callipers, which can be difficult in some
good veterinary practice should attempt to prevent it
circumstances. For this reason, the validity of the
occurring. The following guidelines have been pro-
measurements, and hence the whole concept, has
posed by Drew (1986-87) in relation to the breed-
been cricized (Van Donkersgoed et al 1990). In a
ing of Holstein-Friesianheifers in theUK.
Table 11.12 Estimated deliverable calf birth weight using pelvic measurerments (from Deutsche 1985)
Time of
Heifer's age
Heifer's
Pelvicarea
Pelvic area:birth
Estimated calf
measurement
(months)
weight (kg)
(cm)
weightratio
birth weight (kg)
Before breeding
12-14
250-318
120
2.0
27.3
140
2.0
31.8
160
2.0
36.4
At pregnancy detection
18-19
318-386
160
2.5
29.1
180
2.5
32.7
200
2.5
36.4
Before calving
23-24
364-432
200
3.1
29.5
220
3.1
32.3
240
3.1
35.0
257
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
Management at service
·Be a good stockperson. Watch for signs of fear,
abnormal pain or distress andbe ready to assist if
Ensure body weight at the time of service is more
these are nvted or if calving is prolonged.
than260kg
·Ensure that the stockpersons are trained to iden-
·Tale care when selecting the service sire.
tify potentialproblems and know when to call
Ifartificialinseminationbulls:
professional help. If calving aids are used, instruc-
·Select a well-proven bull of high genetic merit
tion should be given as to the correct method of
Select a bull that has been used successfully on
application.
heifers on several farms or, if this is not possible,
· Call professional advice if an unusually high per-
onewith a below average incidence of calving dif-
cenitage of the first heifers to calve require assis-
ficulties (low EBV for birth weight) and gestation
tance - there may be a herd problem, which will
length when used on cows.
affect the whole group.
In the case of cross-breeding or pure-breeding
Ifnaturalservice bulls:
calves for beef production, the same principles
·Avoid bulls of large breeds
apply.Thus:
·Select a bull with a record of easy calvings or, if
With well-grown heifers, when breeding purebred
this is not possible, one with a sire with a good
replacements, select sires on their ease-of-calving
record.
records(low EBVs forbirt weight)and normal
(i.e. not unduly long) gestation lengths for the
Management before calving
particular breed
·In cross-breeding for beef production from dairy
Adjust feed levels to avoid calving in an over-fat
herds: avoid sires of the larger breeds such as
condition.
Simmental and Charolaisfor heiferinseminations
·Restrict energy intake in the last 3 weeks of
and use instead a known‘easy-calving Aberdeen
pregnancy.
Angus or Hereford bull.For second and laterpari
Check iodine and selenium levels if calf mortality
ties choose a bull of a larger breed on his ease-of-
has been high in previous years.
calving record and gestationlength
· Ensure supplementary magnesium is provided.
·In beef production from beef breeds, for heifer
· Ensure that an adequate exercise area is available.
pregnancies use either a sire of a smaller beef
breed or a within-breed sire of good ease-of-
·Observe the heifers at least four or five tines daily
during the last 3 weeks of pregnancy, especially if
calving record and gestation length.For later pari
ties usea bulleitherofthe same orlargerbreed-both
shori-gestation-length bulls are used.
based on the calving ease and gestation length.
·If possible, run as a heifer group or with dry cows.
If fed with the milking cows ensure‘parlour feed
While applying the above principles in the produc
is restricted to the amount required to acquaint
tion of offspring forbeef, whether purebred or cross-
the heifer with her postcalving diet.
bred, it should be noted that the weight of the calf at
birth, assuming equal gestation length, bears a direct
relationship to its weaning weight and to its subse-
Management at calving
quent slaughterweight,on which the profitability of
the enterpriselargely depends.On the other hand,
·Calve grazed heifers in their field or paddock if
possible. Housed heifers should calve in famil-
unduly large calves at birth predispose to calf deaths
iar surroundings. Avoid moving them to a calving
box unless essential for adequate assistance.
yield and infertility. Thus a breeder must consider
how much increase inbirth weightcanbe tolerated
·Ensure the field is well fenced to avoid the pos-
in return for increases in growth rate and weaning
sibility of heifersrolling intopositions where it is
weight.
difficult to assist.
If dystocia due to fetomaternal disproportion is
·Observe hourly (approximately) when calving
anticipated,then gestation can be shortened by the
starts.Too frequent observations(more frequently
premature induction of calving; this is described in
than half-hourly) can delay calving.
Chapter 6.
258
Chapter
111
 Fetal dystocia: aetiology, incidence and prevention
Sheep and goats
Table 11.14 Effect of breed on birth weight(from Hunter
You will have seen in Chapter 8 (Table 8.9) that dys-
1957)
tocia due tofetomaternal disproportion is an inpor-
Ewe
Ram
Weight of lambs (kg)
tant cause of dystocia in sheep. Despite this, there is
Singles
Twins
far less published on the topie in comparison with
cattle; this is probably a reflection of the relative val
BcrderLeicester
Border
Male6.6
les of both dam and newborn offspring. As in cat-
Leicester
Female5.9
Female5.2
tle, fetomaternal disproportion occurs as a result of
Welsh
Male5.2
a large lamb or a small pelvis and sometimes the
Mountain
Female5.9
Female 4.3
simultaneous occurrence of both.
WelshMountain
Border
Male 4.9
Male 4.3
Leicester
Female 4.9
Female 3.8
Lamb birthweight
Welsh
Male3.8
Male4.0
Mountain
Female 3.7
Female 3.4
Similarfactors influencelambbirthweight asthose
described above for cattle.There is a substantial vari-
ation in the birth weights of the different breeds
Welsh Mountain ewes was1.13kg less than thiat of
of sheep; these are shown in Table 11.13. The aver
Border Leicester lambs born to Border Leicester ewes;
age weights (singletons and twins) ranged from
also,thebirth weightofwelshMountainlambsborn
2.9 lg for Welsh Mountain to 5.8 kg for the Border
to Border Leicester ewes was 0.56kg more thian that
Leicester. The effect of cross-breeding is shown in
ofWelshMountainlambsborntoWelshMountain
the study by Hunter (1957). The results he obtained
ewes.Thus the maternal influence can limit the size
by reciprocal crossing between one of the heaviest
ofa genetically larger lamh,as well as increase the
breeds, the Border Leicester, with one of the light-
size of a genetically smaller lamb.Also,the sizelim
est breeds,theWelsh Mountain,are shown in Table
11.14. The influence of the uterine enviroument on
itation imposed on Border Leicester lambs by the
Welsh Mountain maternal environiment was greater
fetal development was shown by means of recipro-
cal transfers of fertilized eggs between sheep breeds
than the sizeincrease produced in Welsh Mountain
lambs by the Border Leicester mateimal influence.
of disparate size. Hunter (1957) and Dickenson
The use of tups of the Welsh Mountain breed as sires
etal (1962) havebeen ableto show therelative influ-
for ewe lambs of breeds suchi as the Texel in their first
enceonbirth weightofprenatalenvironment(pheno-
breeding season can reduce the incidence of dystocia
type) and the genotype of the lamb. In Hunter's work
and at the same time produce a lamb with hybrid
onBorder Leicester and Welsh Mountain breeds,the
vigour andgood survival rates.
mean birth weight ofBorder Leicester lambs born to
In reciprocal crossingbetween the (large) Lincoln
and (small) Welsh Mountain breeds, Dickenson
Table 11.13 Mature ewe and newborn lamb mean body
et al (1962) found that no lambing difficulties
weights of some different breeds of sheep
occurred in Lincoln ewes but,in 13 Welsh ewes
Breed
Mating weight
Birth weight
carrying Lincoln lambs, eight needed assistance at
ofewe (kg)
of lamb*(kg)
birth. In another experiment, fertilized eggs fron
Scottish Blackface
pure Lincoln and from pure Welsh donors were
54
8'E
transferred to Scottish Blackface ewes. Of 36 Lincoln
Welsh Mcuntain
35
2.9
lambs 16 required obstetric assistance, while only
Clun Forest
60
4.3
one of 28 Welsh lambs was associated with dys-
Dorset Horn
72
4.3
tocia. The results of the egg transfer experiments
Romney Marsh
71
4.7
showedthiat:
Border Leicester
83
5.8
●lambs of the same breed (genotype) differed in
Texel
79
5.0
environment (phenotype) was Lincoln orWelsh
Suffclk
8
5.15
·lambs reared in the same uterine environment dif-
Oxford
68
5.6
fered in birth weight according to whether their
*Unweighted averages of single, twin.male end female lambs.
genotype was Lincoln or Welsh
259
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
· both genotype of lamh and maternal environ-
and the fetus grows more rapidly. Russel et al (1981)
ment had significant effects on the birth weight
also found a different response to different dietary
of the lambs
intakes deperrding on the body weights of the ewe
· the genotype influence was three or four times
at the time of mating (Table 11.15). Some interest-
as great as the maternal influence on lamb birth
ing data from a study by Faichney (1981) are shown
weight.
in Table 11.16, in which feed intake was varied dur-
ing pregnancy and the effects on fetal and placental
As in cattle,males are heavier than females,the
weights were studied.
difference being about 5%, and twins are abouit
16% lighter at birth than singletons (Starke
Itis well recognized that ewes kept in tropical
and subtropical environments produce small, weak
et al 1958).The effect of selective breeding, based on
lambs at birth. Continuous daily exposure for 8
line breeding to a particular strain of Romney sheep
hours of ewes to an anmbient temperature of 42°C,
that the owner considered produced lambs of low
followed by 16 hours at 32°C from the 50th day
birth weight with less difficulty at lambing, and the
of gestation, can result in a 40% reduction in birth
culling of ewes that repeatedly suffered from dysto-
weighit. The effect of the high ambient temperature
cia,substantially reduced the incidence of dystocia
is probably due toreduction inplacental weight and
(McSporran et al 1977).UIntil 1970,between 20%
function.
and 31% of ewes required assistance at lambing; this
Some infectious diseases such as Brucella ovis and
fell to 18% in 1971,11% in 1972,3.3% in 1973,and
Toxoplasma gondii can cause reduced birth weight.
4.0% in 1974.
The infuences of dietary restriction of the ewe
weight are variable and the results from studies
Table 11.1s Effect cf ewe live weight and feeding level from
often contradictory.Whereas dietary restriction dur-
cay30 to day98ofgestation cn the birth weight of lambs
ing the last trimester, when fetal growth is greatest,
(from Russel et al 1981)
has been shown to reduce birth weights,particu-
larly if dietary intake falls below that requiredby the
Flock
Mating
Nutrition
Lamb birth
weight (kg)
in mid-
weight (kg)
ewe for maintenance,dietary restriction during the
first and second trimesters has resulted in conflict-
pregnancy*
ing results. These have been summarized by Black
42.5
High
3.83
(1983) as having no effect on birth weight, increas-
Low
3.32
ingit or decreasingit.Thereason is that severe under-
B
54.5
High
4.23
nutrition during early and mid-gestation reduces the
numberofplacentomes,but theyincrease in sizeand
Low
4.95
alter their shape (Steyn et al 2001). Thus if nutrient
*Hig level of nutrition was sufficien tomaintain the conceptus-free
intake is increased in the last trimester, then the pla-
body weightothe ewe,low leveofnutritionesulted innestimae
centa is probably more efficient in nutrient transfer
loss of 5-6kg in eve bcdy weight
Table11.16Effect of varying feedintakeof ewesduring gestation onfetal and placentalweight a:135daysafterfetlization
(from Faichney 1981)
Treatment
Feed intake (g/day)
Fetus weight (kg)
Placenta weight (g)
55-99 days
100-135 days
MM
006
006
3.3
321
MR
006
500
3.3
RM
500
900
3.7
463
RR
500
500
413
significantiy differcnt p<0.05).
Mean placental weights for MMvsMRRM and RR,and RM vsRRwere significantly differentpO.05)
260
Chapter
111
Fetal dystocia: aetiology, incidence and prevention
Pelvic capacity of the dam
that have largelybeen left to theinfluences of natu-
ral selection.
InNewZealand,McSporran&Wyburn(1979)and
McSporran &Fielden(1979)wereable to assess
the pelvic area bymeans ofradiographicpelvim-
Pigs
etry and found that variations inthe incidence of
dystocia between different groups of Romney ewes
Fetomaternal disproportion isnot amajorcause of
wererelated tothepelvicarea.Attempts to corre-
dystocia in pigs.It will be a greater problem in gilts
lateexternal bodilymeasurements with internal
with small litters.
pelvic dimensions have been shown not to be par-
The average birth weight of commercial breeds of
ticularly useful.Because theparticular ovine dys-
pigwithan averagelittersizeof10-1l is about 1 kg:in
tocia studied bythese authorswaslargely due to
the case of somepet'breeds such as theVietnamese
fetomaternal disproportion,they recommended
pot-bellied pig the average birth weight is about
selectivebreedingofewesandramsforfreedom
0.5kgwithan averagelitter size ofabout four to
from dystocia.
six.Ithasbeenknownfor some time thatwhen the
In the cow, attempts have been made to corre-
numbersofpiglets perhorn ismore han five there
lateexternalpelvicdimensionswith thepelvicarea
isa decreasein pigle birth weight,with thosein he
(Hindson 1978).Ina study in shieep,external pel-
middle of the horns being smaller becauseof compe-
vicdimensionsweremeasuredinalargenumberof
titionforplacental space,thoseat thetipofthehorn
different breeds,including several rare breeds;the
beingthelargestatbirth.Variousstudieshaveshown
latterhavenotbeensubjectedtoselectionpressures
that the amount ofuterine horn spacefor optimal
for growth traits and carcase quality (Robalo Silva
fetalgrowthisbetween35cmand45cm.
&Noakes 1984).Table 11.17 shows thewide vari-
Thereisasubstantial literatureontheinfluence of
ation in pelvic size,with breeds such as the Soay,
nutrition on ovulationrates,embryo survivalrates
North Ronaldsay and Shetland having small pelvic
and other reproductive parameters, which are dis-
dimensions,whereas the Scottish Blackface,Clun
cussed in Chapter 27.However, there is little infor
Forest and Suffolk have larger pelvic dimensions.
mation on the direct effert ofnutrition on fetal
However,when the pelvic dimensions are compared
size,otherthan thefactthiatlower ovulationrates
withthebodyweightsoftheewesforthedifferent
will result in smaller litters and thus larger piglets.
breeds,itis noticeable that theformer breeds have
In varying the diets of pregnant sows,Pike & Boaz
relatively larger pelves than the latter group (Table
(1972) have shown that variable feeding from con-
11.18).Sincefetalweight isbetween6% and8%of
ception to70 days'gestationexertednoeffectand
maternalbody weight,then therelatively smaller
onlyinthelast 45daysdidmaternalnutritioninflu-
pelves of those breeds that have been subject to
ence birth weight.The latter finding corresponds
geneticselection toproducelargelambs atbirth,are
withtheobservationthatthereisatenfoldincrease
morelikelyto havedystocia than therarebreeds,
in porcine fetal weight during thelast45 days.
Table11.17Mean external pelvicdinmensionsandbodyweightsofmature ewesof diferent breeds(fromRobaloSilvaand
Noakes 1984)
Breed
() )
MTI(cm)
RL(cm)
Weight (kg)
Soay
13.08
11.3
5.6
17.4
21.7
North Ronaldsay
15.1
12.4
6.3
18.6
24.8
Shetland
16.6
12.7
6.4
19.5
34.6
ScottishBlackface
21.0
16.9
9.0
23.4
66.4
Clun Forest X
26.4
16.5
8.8
23.6
61.6
Suffolk
22.1
18.3
8.8
25.5
79.5
TC.Intertubercoxal dimension;TCI,lateralintertuberischial dimensionMmedialintertuberischial dimension;RL,rump length
261
Part
3
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
Table11.18Ratioof pelvic dimensions:bodyweight ofadult
pelvis,whereas intheBostonTerrieritwas duetoa
ewes of different breeds(from RcbalcSilva and Noakes 1984)
combinationof the samepelvicdeformity and the
circumference of the head;there was a strong posi-
Breed
MTI:body
Sum of pelvic
tivecorrelation(r=0.743)berweenbodyweightand
weight
measurements:
headcircumferencein theBostonTerrier.Thisstudy
body weight
demonstrated the value of radiographic pelvimetry
Soay
1.0
1.0
asa means ofpredicting dystocia and intheselec-
North Ronaldsay
0.953
tion of bitchesforbreedingtogetherwith a critical
0.984
Shetland
0.717
0.720
evaluationofpupconformationin theselection of
both sire and dam.
Scottish Blackface
0.525
0.478
Clun Forest X
0.554
0.507
Faulty fetal disposition
Suffolk
0.429
0.426
MTl,medal intertuberischial dimension
In describing the disposition of the fetus at birth it
is important to use the terminology first described
by Benesch and outlined on pages 216 and217.
Dog and cat
Frequently,incorrect terminology is used,particu
The incidences and causes of dystocia in the dog
larly the word‘presentation'which has a precise
and cat havebeen discussed inChapter S.In the
obstetricalmeaning inrelation tothe disposition of
bitch the overall level is about 5%but it is recog-
the fetus.During pregnancy, the fetus assumes a dis-
nized that in certainbreeds that haveboth achon-
position that occupies as littleuterine space aspos-
droplasia andbrachycephaly it may approach 100%
sible;however,during parturition i must assume a
(Enerothetal1999)
disposition that enables it tobe expelled through
Puppy and kitten size is dependent ona number
the birth canal.Since these dispositions are incom
of factors, particularly breed and litter size; there
patible, changes must occur during the first siage of
appears to be no information on the influence of
labour; you might like to read Chapter 6 in which
nutrition during pregnancy.In the larger breeds of
these aredescribed.
dogpups are 1-2% of the bitch's weight,whereas
in smaller breeds thefigure is 4-g%,with normal
Presentation
whelping occurring if the pups are 4-5%of the
dam'sweight(Larsen1946).In thestudybyEneroth
About99%offoalsand95%ofcalvesarepresented
etal（1999),theBostonTerrierpups'mean weights
anteriorly,whensheep areparturient with singletons
were 2.5%and 3.1%fornormal whelpings and dys-
theyshowasimilarpercentageofanteriorpresenta-
tociasrespectively,and thecorrespondingfiguresfor
tions to cattle,but with twins there is a consider-
ScottishTerrierswere2.1% and2.5%.
ableproportionofposteriorlypresentedlambs.The
In some achondroplastic breeds, such as the
polytocous sow and bitch deliver 30-40% of fetuses
Scottish Terrier,Sealyham and Pelinese(Freak1962,
in posterior presentation.In posterior presentation,
1975),the dorsoventralor sacral-pubic dimension
thehindlimbsmaybeextendedorflexedbeneath
issmall,therebyreducingthe sizeofthepelvicinlet
thefetalbody.When thehindlimbs areextended
and causingobstructive dystocia duetofetomater-
inpolytocousbirths,dystocia is only slightly more
naldisproportion.Inan interesting studyinvolving
common than with anterior presentation;however,
the Boston and Scottish Terriers,datawerecollected
when the hindlimbs are flexed （breech presenta-
fombreedersonlittersie,pupsweightsheigh
tion)inpolytocousbirthstheincidence of dystocia
head,breadth ofhead andbreadthof shouldersfor
is increasedIn the monotocous species serious dys-
groups thatwhelpednormally andforthosethat
tociaalways occurswithposteriorpresentationif the
had dystocia due to fetomaternal disproportion.
hindlimbs are flexed;even when they are extended
All thebitchesinthe studywereradiographed in
there is a greater likelihoodof difficult birththan
dorsoventral and lateral projections(Eneroth et al
with anteriorpresentation.Becauseof therelatively
1999).Fetomaternal disproportion in the Scottish
longlimbs ofthe fetuses ofmonotocous species,
Terrier was due to dorsoventral flattening ofthe
and thelargespacerequiredforhindlimbextension,
262
Chapter
111
Fetal dystocia:aetiology,incidence andprevention
thereisobviouslyahighprobability thata fetuspre-
Fetal movements are often felt during rectal pal-
sentedposieriorlyinlategestationwill failtoextend
pation of the uterus.The preponderance ofposte-
itshindlimbs before second-stage labour begins. ln
rior presentations in early gestation would be the
ovine twin births, breech presentation causes dys-
expected result of suspending an inert body with
tocia,although thetwin lambis smaller than the
the same centreofgravityasthefetalcalf.withthe
singleton.
development of thefetal nervous system,and a con
Thereisa consensusofopinion thatboth dystocia
sequentappreciationofgravity,thefetalcalfwould
andstillbirtharemuchmorelikelytooccurifthecalf
beginto executerightingreflexesthatwould tendto
ispresentedposteriorlyratherthan anteriorly.Ben-
bringup theheadfromthedependentpart ofthe
David (1961) found that 47% of posterior presenta-
uterus. If these assumptions are true, then poste-
tions in Holsteins were accompanied by dystocia.Also
rior presentation,rather than being regarded as an
the likelihood of dystocia inequine posterior presen-
obsteic accident,could be caused either by a sub-
tationsisexceptionallyhigh.Itisthereforeimportant
normallydeveloped fetusorbya uterusdeficientin
toenquireintothefactorsthatdeterminefetalpolar-
tone.Obviously size of fetus anduterine spacemust
ity.Abusineina(1963) madepostmortem studies on
influence the ease with which a fetus can change its
thisproblemincattle,whileVandeplassche(1957)
polarity in utero;there isamuch higherpercent
has carried out similarinvestigationsinhorses.With
age of posterior presentations in bovine twin births,
respect to cattle, during the first 2 months of gesta-
while an above average percentage of posterior pre-
tion no definite polarity was evident but during the
sentations occurs witlh excessively large fetuses.
3rdmonththerewereequalnumbersofanterior
With foals,9s% assume an anterior longitudinal
andposteriorpresentations.From thento theendof
presentation between 6/and 8/months of ges-
gestation,there were only three transverse presenta-
tation (Vandeplassche 1957）.A small proportion
tions outof 363 pregnancies.Throughout the 4th,
oftheremaining2%-possiblyabout 0.1%-are
5thandfirsthalfofthe6thmonthsamajorityof
transverse presentations,nwhich the extremities of
fetuseswereinposterior presentationbut duringthe
thefetus occupy the uterine cornua while theuter-
6thmonth the situation began to change so that, at
inebody is largely empty.This presentation causes
the end of that month, anterior and posterior pre-
the most serious ofall equine dystocias.It probably
sentalionfrequencieswereequal.Bythemiddleof
arisesat about70 daysofgestation,when theuterus
the7th month,themajority of fetuses were in ante-
normallychangesfroma transversetoalongitudinal
riorpresentation.Beyond the seventh month,only
direction in front of thematernal pelvis as a resultof
oneof17 fetuses was posteriorly disposed,a situa-
theallantochorion passing from thepregnant horn
tion closely similar tothat observed at term.Toreca-
into the uterinebody.In the abnormal situation,
pitulate:betwcen5/and6/monthsofgestation
cithertheallantochorion doesnotintrudeintothe
the polarity of the bovine ferus becomes reversed and
uterine body or themajor,rather than the normally
by theend of the7thmonth thefinal birthpresenta-
minor,branchofthe allantochorionpassesintothe
tion is adopted.Attempts,using postmortem preg-
non-pregnant horn and is followed by the amnion,
nant uteri,toalterthepresentationbeyond the7th
containinga fetalextremity.Normallyneither the
monthwereunsuccessfulbecausebythat time the
amnion nor the fetuspasses into the non-pregnant
fetalbody length greatly exceeds the width of the
horn.Other,less seriousequine transverse presenta
amnion, while successful efforts to change the pre-
tions occuracross theuterinebody;itisnotlnown
sentationbetween5/and61monthsrequireddefi-
when they occur, but they could occur during birth.
nitemanipulativeforce.Similar attempts carried out
Transverse presentations are very uncomrnon in
under paravertebral anaesthesia on the standing cow
cattle and sheep but in the polylocous species a fetus
were successful with a 6/-month fetus,but unsuc-
isnotuncommonlyfoundtobedisposedacrossthe
cessful with an 8-month calf.
entrance to thematernalpelvis;such presentations
The natural forces that bring about these changes
undoubtedly ariseduringbirth.
in polarity arenotundersiood,butpresumablyreflex
The lack of a marked difference in frequency
fetal movements occur in responsetochanges in the
between anterior and posterior presentations in
intrauterine pressure due tonyometrial contrac
pigs and dogs maybe due to the horizontal disposi-
tions, to movements of adjacent abdominal viscera
tion of the long uterine horns as compared with the
or to contraction ofthe abdominal musculature.
sloping uteri of the monotocous species.
263
Part
131
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithpartuirition
Position
Lateral deviationof theheadis apostural abnor-
As regards position of thefetus,thenatural tendency
tothe samefactors as thosenoted above,butlack
is forit toliewith itsdorsum against thegreatercur-
vature of theuterus soas to occupyaslittle space as
arise during late gestation rather than during birth.
possible; thus the equine fetus is upside down and
A congenital deformityknown as urynecl,inwhich
thebovinefetus is upright during late gestation.The
theheadandneckarefixed inflexionbecauseof
latter maintains this relationship during birth,but
ankylosis of the cervical vertebrae,arises during the
inthemare thefetuschangesfrom aventral toa dor-
peculiar bicornual gestation of solipeds(Williams
sal position duringthe course of labour.Therefore,
1940).In 27 difficult equine dystocias treated by
as might be expected, ventral as well as lateral posi-
Vandeplassche[1957),the majority ofwhichwere
tionsaremuchcommonerinequinethaninbovine
associatedwith bicornual gestation,10 of thefoals
dystocias;they arise duringbirth.
wereaffectedwithadegreeofwryneck.
In the monotocous species, the dimensions of
Posture
normal full-term fetus to negotiate the birth canal;
Asregards posture,the arrangement of thebovine
any fetal disposition other than anteriorpresenta-
fetusduringthefinal2monthsofgestationis one
tion,dorsal position,extended posture is likely to
ofanteriorpresentationanddorsalpositionwith
result in dystocia.In thepolytocous species thefeto
flexion of all joints of the movable appendages.The
maternal relationship isnotsoexact,with theresult
appendages of the equine fetus are similarly flexed
thatthe disposition of thecomparativelysmall fetal
on the inverted fetus.This postural disposition of
limbs is less important and many piglets,puppies
universalflexion'achievesthemaximumeconomy
andkittensaredeliverednormallywiththeirlimbs
ofspace.Thefascinatingandunsolvedproblem is
inposturesthatwould havecauseddystociain the
thenatureoftheparturient mechanism whereby the
foaland calf.However,ifa femaleofapolytocous
occipitoatlantalandcervicaljointsbecomeextended,
species is parturient with an abnormally low num-
whiletheforelimbsbecomestraightened infront
beroffetuses thereis likelytobesomedegree of
ofthefetus.The extended forelimb postureneces-
fetomaternal disproportion and inthese circum-
saryfornormal birthincatleis themoreremark-
stancesmalpostureofthelimbsmaycausedystocia.
Fromtheaboveaccount,thecausesof faultyfetal
post-natally.In his studies of thefirst stage oflabour
disposition might appear to be due more to chance;
in cattleAbusineina(1963)noticed that theflexed
however, there are some indications that there
knees of the calf first occupied thedilating cervix;30
may be an inherited predisposition.For example,
minuteslater thedigitswerefeltinthecervix.Itcan
Woodward&Clark（1959)foundthataparticular
bepostulated thatthelimbextension occurswhile
Hereford sire,when used on an inbred line ofcat-
the fetus ispractisingrightingreflexes inits attempt
tle produced a high incidence of posterior presen
to‘stand up in uteroNo doubt such active fetal
tations,while Uwland (1976)reported ranges of
movementsare provoked by the myometrial con-
between2%and9.7%ofposteriorpresentations
tractions of first-stage labour.In this connection,the
intheprogeny ofdifferentbulls;these observations
observation by Jochle et al (1972) that progesterone
suggest that a hereditary factor may affect the inci-
given toparturientcowscausedahighincidenceof
dence of posterior presentation.More recently,in
postural dystocia could be due to it maintaining the
a study of 3873 calvings over a 20-year period at
‘progesterone block'on the myometrium (see Ch.6）
Colorado State University, of which 155were dys-
therebyreducingthestimulationofthefetalcalfto
tociaswithi 72.8%inposteriorpresentationand
initiateitsrightingreflexes.Itis alsowellknown
dorsal position,posterior presentation heritability
that there areincreased frequencies of postural aber-
estimates for Hlereford and Angusbreeds were 0.173
rations inpremature births,where uterine inertia is
and O.orespectively.Alsoofinterest inthis study
moreprevalent,andwithtwins,wherethereis also
wasthat other non-hheritable factors such asyear,
an increased likelihood ofuterineinertiabutalso
sex ofcalfsireofcalfwithinbreed,andageofdam
reduced space,therebyinterfering withthe ability of
influenced theincidence of posterior presentations
thelimbstoextend.
(Hollandetal1993).
264
Chapter
111
Fetal dystocia: aetiology, incidence and prevention
References
Khadem AA,Morris ST,Purchas RWet al 1996NZJAgric Res
39:271
KrieseLA,vanVleck LD,Gregory KEetal 1994 JAnim
AbusineinaMEA 1963ThesisUniversity ofLondon
Sci 72:1954
AdamsJWE,Bishop CHR1963JSAfVetMedAss0c34:91
KruipTAM,denDaas 1HC1997Theriogenology47:43
Anderson WI.Pleasanis AB,Barton RA 1981 NZIAgricRes
Larsen E1946MaanedsskrDyrlacg53:471(abstr)
24:269
LasterDB1974IAnimSci38:496
Behboodi E,Anderson GB,Bondurant RH etal 1995
LasterDBGlimpACundiffeoryE973n
Theriogenology44:227
Sci 36:695
Ben-DavidB1961RefuahVet 19:152
Legault CR,TouchberryRW1962J Dairy Sci 45:1226
BergerP),Cubas AC,KoehlerKI,Healey HH 1992Anim Sci
LindheB 1966World RevAnimProd2:53
70:1775
MackellarJC1960VetRec72:507
Black IL1983 Growth and development of lambs.In
McGuirk B).GoingI.GilmourAR1998aAnim SciG6:35
HaresignW(ed) Sheep production.Easter School
McGuirk Bl.Going1,Gilmour AR1998bAnim Sci 66:47
Proceedings,Nottingham 35:21
McGuirk Bl,GoingI,GilmourAR1999AnimSci68:413
Colburn DI,Deutscher GH,Nielson MK,Adams DC1997
McSporranKD,FieldenED 1979 NZVetJ27:75
IAnim Sci75:1452
McSporranKD,Wyburn RS1979NZVel]27:64
CrowGHl,IndetieD 1994In:Proccedingsof5th World
McSporranKD,BuchananR,Fielden ED 1977NZVet 1
Congress on Genetics applied toLivestockProduction,
25:247
Guelph,ntario,Canada,vol17,p206
Mason IL1963Ve1Rec76:28
Derivaux),FagotV,Huet R1964AnnMedVet 108:335
MeijeringA 1984Livestock Prod Sci11:143
DeutscherCH 1985Agri-Practice16:751
Morrison DG,Humes PE,KeithNK,Godke RA 1985Anim
DickensonAG,Hancock]l,Hovell GjRetal 1962AnimProd
Sci 60:608
5:87
Nugent RA.NotterDR,Beal WE 1991 1Anim Sci 69:2413
Drennan M 1979 In:Hoffman B,MasonH,Schmidt I(ed)
Penny CD,LowmanBG,ScotNA et al 1995Vet ec
Calvingproblems and earlyviability of the calf.Martinus
163:506
Nijhoff,The Hague,p429-443
PikeIH,BoazTG1972Anim Prod 15:147
Drew B1986-1987ProcBCVA:143
PriorRL,LasterDB1979IAnimSci48:1456
Eckles CH 1919 Cited by Holland MD,Odde KG 1992
Rice LE 1994Vet Clin NoriAn FoodAnim Pract10:53
Theriogenology38:769
RiceLE,Wiltbank IN 1972] Am VetMed Assoc161: 1348
Eley RM,ThaicherWM,Bazeret al1978JDairySci 61:467
Robalo Silva J, Noakes DE 1984Vet Rec115:242
EnerotALinde-ForsbergC,Uhlhon M,Hall M1999
Russel AIF,Foot IZ,WhiteIR,Davies GI1981 I Agric Sci
JSmall Anim Pract 40:257
Camb 97:723
Eriksson S,NasholmA.JohanssonK,Philipsson2004
SieberM,FreemanAE,Kelley DH 1989 J Dairy Sci72:2402
JAnim Sci 82:375
SpitzerJC,MorrisonDG,Welemann RP,FaullnerLC1995
Faichney GJ 1981 ProcNutr SocAust 6:48
1Anim Sci73:1251
Farin CE,Farin PW,Piedrahita IA 2004 IAnim Sci 82(Suppl):
StarkeIS,SmithIB,Joubert DM 1958Sci Bull DeptAgric For
E53
UnSAfr382
FarinPW,PiedrahitaJA,FarinCE2006Theriogenology
Steyn C,HawkinsP,SaitoTetal 2001 Eur1Obstet Gynaecol
65:178
ReprodBiol98:165
FreakMJ1962VetRec74:1323
Takahashi M,GotoT,Tsuchiya H etal 2005Vet Med Sci
FreakM11975VetRec96:303
67:807
Gerlaugh P,Kunkle LE,RifeDC1951 OhioAgric lExp Stn Res
Tudor GD1972Aust] Agr Res23:389
Bull703
Uwland 」1976TijdschrDiergeneesk101:421
ickson RE,MorrisST,KenyonPR,Lopez-VillalobosN2006
VanDonkersgoed J,Ribble CS.Townsend HGG,Jansen ED
NZVet]54:256
1990Can Vet |31190
Hilder RA,FohrmanMH 1949 JAgr Res 78:457
Van Wagtendonkde LeeuwAM,Aerts B]G,denDaas HG
Hindson JC 1978 Vet Rec 102:327
1998 Theriogenology 49:883
Holland MD,SpeerNC,LaevreDGet al 1993
VandeplasscheM1957BijrVlaamsDiergeneeskTijdschr
Theriogenology 39:899
26:68
HunterGL1957IAgrSci Camb48:36
WilliamsWL1940Veterinaryobstetrics.Williams&Wikins,
JochleW,Esparza H.GimenezTHidalgoMA 1972IReprod
NewYork
Feril28:407
WiltbankJN1961 Neb Exp StnQ,Summer
Johnson SK,Deutscher GH,ParkhurstA1988Anim Sci
Wiltbank JN,Remmenga EE1982Theriogenology 17:587
66:1081
WihersIW1953BrVet]109:122
JoubertDM,Hammond1958AgrSci Camb51:325
WoodwardRR,ClarkRT1959AnimSci 18:85
265
12
Chapter
David Noakes
Manipulative delivery per vaginam in farm
animals and horses
General considerations
allantoic fluid,although non-sterile clean water
is perfectly satisfactory. In the cow and mare, vol-
umes of up to 14 litres, instilled into the uterus
·Vaginal obstetrical procedures should be per-
by gravity using a soft rubber or plastic tube
formed as cleanly as possible; it is impossible to
(a stomach tube is satisfactory) and funnel,greatly
perform them aseptically, since inevitably there
increase the mohiliry of the fetus in utero. For
will be some contamination.It is important to
actual vaginal delivery, a lubricant substitute for
sterilize or disinfect instruments and equipment
the amniotic fluid is required, and this may be in
between animals to prevent the spread of infec
the form of a water-soluble cellulose-based obstet-
tion. Gentleness is of prime importance, so as to
rical lubricant. In the absence of this, a substitute
reducethe amount of trauna to the dam'sgenital
such as soap, particularly soap flakes, or lard or
tract and also to the newborn.
petroleum jelly (Vaseline) are well tried and effec-
·The prevention of pain and discomfort should be
tive. The value of fetal fluid supplements cannot
of paramount importance, so that caudal epidu
be too strongly emphasized.
ral anaesthesia, sedation or general anaesthesia
·After diagnosing the cause of dystocia and decid-
should always be considered.
ing on a plan of action,the obstetrician should
·In monotocous species the aim of any manip-
consider whether the facilities are appropriate,
ulative procedures must always be to ensure
whether there is sufficientprofessional and other
that the fetus is in normal disposition before
help available,and whether the equipment is
attempting traction. In polytocous species
adequate to carry out the treatment successfully.
(and in sheep or goats with small multiple
In severe forms of dystocia,more especially in
fetuses), it is possible for per vaginam delivery
mares, the veterinarian should always seek the
to occur with some slight postural abnormality.
assistance of a professional colleague and con-
Correction of defects of presentation, position
sider whether it might be appropriate to trans-
and posture can be achieved only by intrauter-
port the animal to somewhere with hospital
ine manipulation of the fetus.Thus an essential
facilitiesprovided that theanimal is in a fit state
prerequisite to treatment is retropulsion of the
to travel.
fetus. This is greatly facilitated by caudal epidu-
·After the successful delivery of the fetus or fetuses,
ral anaesthesia.
the dam's genital tract should always be exam
·In cases of prolonged dystocia, where fetal fluids
ined for the presence of others; remember that
have been lost, delivery is expedited by their sub-
monotocous species can have twins and, rarely,
stitution.Sterile water is the best substitute for
more.
266
Chapter
|12
 Manipulative delivery per vaginam in farm animals and horses
·The dam's genital tract should be examined for
described in Ch. 20). With the availability of better
signs of injury, and appropriate treatment admin-
sedatives and anaesthetic agents, and improved
istered (see Ch.17).
methods for the caesarean operation, many of the
· The fetus(es) should be examined to see if resus-
long-established items of obstetrical instrumenta-
citation is necessary, if there is evidence of respira-
tion have become obsolete and veterinarians have
lost the skills to use them effectively. Despite this,
tory acidosiswhich shouldbe treated andifthere
are injuries. A list of equipment for foals is listed
many of them can be very helpful at times and for
in Table 12.1.
completeness some of the more useful ones in cat-
tle, and to a very much lesser extent in horses, are
shown in Figure 12.1. These include:
Obstetrical equipment
·Obstetric snares, i.e. 1m lengths, with loops, of
cotton rope (clothes line), nylon cord or webbing
(A,B, C)-a finer cord for snaring the mandible is
The aim should be topossess the minimum ofessen
essential - and traction bars (D). These items are
tial equipment and to be thoroughly conversant with
essential and it is advisable to have at least two
its use.It cannot be stated too often that the best
sets; they can he sterilized
instruments are the clean andgentle hands and arms
of the obstetrician. Simple instrurnents that are easy
·As an alternative to snares one may use Moore's
to handle and convenient to sterilize are best.More
obstetric chains (E) with handles (F). Many veteri-
complex equipment is orcasionally required and the
nariansfind these easier to use than rope snares.
Their main advantage is that they are heavier and
important considerationistoknowwhen theuseof
such complicated instruments is indicated. For the
do not move so readily when they are repositioned
veterinarian doing ambulatory visits to farms, studs
during intrauterine or intravaginal manipulation
and other livestock units where parturient animals
·A snare introducer (G) is also illustrated. This can
arekept, it is advisable to have a dedicated collection
be used with ropes as well as chains; I have found
ofinstruments and other equipment that is always
that a bull ring is an effective substirute
available in an emergency: in addition, a dedicated
Obstetrical hooksincludeKrey-Schottler double
caesarean operation kit is also important (this will be
jointed hooks (Hl). Obermeyer's anal hook (1),
Harms's sharp (l) or blunt (L) paired hooks on a
fine (farrowing) chain (K), and Blanchard’s long
Table 12.1 Resuscitation equipment for newborn foals (after
McGaddery 2001)
forming fetotomy to enable traction to be applied
Endotracheal tubes 7-12mm diameter
to various fetal segments
Oxygen cylinder and requlator
·Additional instruments are Cammerer's torsion
'Ambu' bag Mark 3 adult human resuscitator
fork (N) with canvas cuffs (O) and Kuhn's obstet-
Doxaprem
rical crutch (P)
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
· Traction may be applied using a block and tackle,
Atropine
4.2% sodium bicarbonate
calving jack (Fig. 12.2).
5%dextrose saline
Diazepam
Obstetricmanoeuvres
Dexamethasone phosphate
Lidocaine
The manoeuvres which are practised on the fetus in
Intraveniouscatheters
manipulative obstetrics are asfollows.
Drip set
Enteral feeding tubes
Retropulsion
Needles, syringes and blood collecticn tubes
Retropulsion means pushing the fetus cranially
Glucose meter
from the vagina (and the bony pelvic canal) towards
e uterus. It is fundamental to all intrauterine
267
Fig.12.1 Instrumentsfor manipulative delivery(see textforkey)
Fig.12.2(A)Vink calvingjack.(B)Vink calving jack in use to apply traction tc calf in anterior longitudinal presentation with
snare attached tobothforelimbs.(C)HKcalfpuller.
268
Chapter
121
 Manipulative delivery per vaginam in farm animals and horses
measures that may berequired torectify defects of
and up over the poll and behind the ears or, alterna
presentation, position and posture, since there will
tively,the centre of a single rope may be pushed up
be inadequate space to perform even the simplest
over thepoll and behind both ears, leaving both ends
manipulations. It is effected by pressure with the
of the rope protruding from the vagina.For replare-
hand on the presenting bull of the fetus; in some
ment of the laterally deviated head, where the opera-
cases it is convenient for an assistant to repel the
tor's hand is insufficient, a thin rope snare applied to
fetus while the obstetrician otherwise manipulates
the mandible is essential. However, this must only
it, while in others retropulsion is applied by means
be used to correct the postural defect; other trac-
of a crutch (Fig. 12.1). As far as possible, the repel-
tion which might be used to effect delivery must be
ling force shonld be exerted in the intervals between
applied using a conventional Benesch head snare.
bouts of straining.Alternatively, epidural anaesthe-
A very important consideration is the magni-
tude of the supplementary force that miay be used,
however,it has no effect on myometrial contrac-
since excessive force inappropriately applied can
tions, which can be suppressed by the use of a spas-
cause severe traiima to dam and fetus. In the cow,
molytic such as clenbuterol.
it is felt that the well-coordinated pull of four aver-
age persons should be the limit. Figure 12.3 shows
Lraction being applied to a calf by two persons with
Extension
rope snares; note the positioning of the loops of the
Extension refers to the extension of flexed joints when
snares proximal to the fetlocl joint and the direc-
postural defects are present. It is carried out by apply-
tion of the pull, which is along the normal path that
ing a tangential force to the end of the displaced
the calf would take in a normal unassisted calving.
extremity so thatitis brought through an arc of a circle
Mechanical devices are now used extensively to apply
to the entrance of the pelvis.The force is applied pref-
traction; they must always be used carefully and
erably by hand or, failing that, by snare or hook(s)
sympathetically since they can cause severe trauma if
used inappropriately. Table 12.2 gives some interest-
Traction
ing data compiled by Hindson (1978), comparing
the magnitude of the forces used to apply traction
Traction means the application of force to the pre-
using a hydraulic drawbar dynamometer. This shows
sentingparts ofthefetus inorder tosupplement,orn
that pulley blocks or calving jacks or pullers generate
some cases to replace,thematernal forces.Such force
over 5 or 6 times the force associatedwith a natural
is applied by hand or through the medium of snares
calving. However, for the stock person or veterinary
or hooks.Limb-snares are fixed above the fetlocks,
surgeon with little or no help the pulley block and
and the head snaremaybe applied by theBenesch
tackle, or a calving aid such as the HK calf puller
method, in which the loop is placed in the mouth
or Vink calving jack [Fig. 12.2), are invaluable.
Fig. 12.3A, B Traction by two persons using rope snares to relieve dystocia in a cow
269
3
Dystocia and otherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
Table12.2Measurementofmaximum tractiveeffort as
shownandrecordedonahydraulicdrawbardynamometer
(afterHindson 1978)
Originofforce
Tractive effort (kg)
Cow at natural calving
70
Tractionbyoneperson
75
Tractionbytwopersons
115
Tractionby three persons
155
Calving jack
400
Pocket pulley blocks
445
Tractor
5000+
Themostimportant aspect ofapplyingeffectivetrac-
tion is tocoordinate the supplementary forcewith
the straining effort of the dam.In the case of the
cow,the slackin the calving snares is‘taken up，as
shestrains,sopreventing thecalffromreturningto
its original sitewithin thebirth canal.
In the mare, the use of snares with several per-
sonsproviding manual assistance is usually suffi-
cient（Fig.12.4) In the ewe and doe goat, traction
can be appliedusing simplefine cord snares or a
fixed plastic head snare (Fig.12.5）.In the sow, trac-
Fig.12.4Tractionby(A) two and (B)three persons torelieve
dystocia in a mare.
tionisnearlyalways appliedusingtliehandbutfine
cord snares and theplastic lambing snare previously
described (Fig.12.5) are sometimes very useful.
In the dog and cat, the most appropriate obstetrical
instruments arethefingers;whelpingforceps areuse-
fulbuttheyneedtobeusedwith theutmostcaresince
they can cause trauma to both dam and offspring.
Amuchneglectedinstrumentisthevectis;thisisshown
in use inFigure13.4.I havefound it tobeavery effec
tive method of applying traction whilevirtually ensur-
ingthatneither damnoroffspringareinjured.
Rotation
Rotationentails alterationofthepositionofafetus
by movingit around itslongitudinal axis,forexam
ple from theventral to dorsalposition.lt is more
Fig.12.5 Plastic head snare for use in ewes and sows.
oftenrequiredin horses thanin cattle andis much
more easily effected on the responsive live fetus,
indicated-rotational force may be exerted on the
crossedextendedlimbsbyhandormechanically
on the eyeballs, protected by the lids; this causes a
throughthemedium of Cammerer's torsionfork or
convulsivereaction,and slightrotational force then
Kinn's crutch.Alternatively,by repelling the fetus,
completesthemanoeuvre.Ifthis fails-and in the
crossing thelimbs towhichthesnares are attached
caseofdeadfetusesfetalfluid supplements are
and thenapplying traction,the traction force will
270
Chapter
121
Manipulative delivery per vaginam in farm animals and horses
tend to rotate the fetus about its long axis. By cause the anaesthetist some concern. General
repeating the process several times it is ofte possible
anaesthesia is useful for obstetric procedures in
to rotate it about 180°.
dogs and cats.
Version
Epidural anaesthesia
Version means alteration of transverse orvertical to
For an excellent deiailed account ofall aspecis of
longitudinal presentation.
epidural andoher local andregional anaesthetic
techniques, the reader should consult Skarda 1996.
Sedation and anaesthesia for
vaginal delivery
Cattle
In cattle, epidural anaesthesia is ideal for obstet-
In order to correct many dystocias more easily
ric purposes. Its merits were first demonstrated to
and humanely, sedation and the induction of
the veterinary profession by Benesch (1927). It
local or general anaesthesia of the dam should be
isa form ofmultiple spinal nerve block in which,
considered.
by means of a single injection of local anaesthetic
solution into the epidural space, the coccygeal and
posterior sacral nerves are affected, thus produc-
Sedation
ing anaesthesia of the anus, perineum, vulva and
Although most sedative drugs are not specifically
vagina.As a result, painless birth is possible, but an
licensed for use in pregnant mares, they can be par-
outstanding additional advantage of epidural anaes-
ticularly useful when dealingwith a fractious ani-
thesia to the veterinary surgeon is that, by abolish-
mal. While acepromazine has little or no effect on
ing pelvic sensation, reflex abdominal contraction
fetal cardiovascular function, it may not be very
('straining’) is prevented. Thusintravaginal manip-
effectivein sedating the mare.While detomidine
uilations are facilitated,retropulsion is made easier,
and xylazine will effectively sedate the mare, they
fetal fluid supplements areretained and defaecation
affect fetal cardiovascular function and may reduce
is suspended.The patient stands more quietly and,
placentablood flow,with the obvious adverse con-
ifrecumbent initially, often gets up when relieved
sequences. In many cases of dystocia this will be of
of painful pelvic sensations;this again makes the
no consequence, since the fetus will already be dead.
obstetrician's task easier and cleaner. This form of
Xylazine may be the better of the two, since it has a
anaesthesia is usefulwhenever straining is trouble-
shorter duration of action (McGladdery 2001).
soe,asin rolapse of theuterusvagina,rectum 
bladder. It is also indicated for episiotomy and for
General anaesthesia
suturing the vulva or perineum.
Provided that the epidural injection is made with
General anaesthesia is better suited to ihe tem-
due regard to asepsis and that an excessive volume
perament of many mares than local analgesia,
of anaesthetic is not injected (thus causing the ani-
although in well chosen cases epidural anaes-
mal tobecome recumbent),the method is free from
thesia may be combined with sedatives. Where a
risk. lt should be clearly understood that epidural
complicated correction or fetotomy is required, it
anaesthesia does not inhibit myometrial contrac-
is best to use general anaesthesia, preferably in a
tions; it has no effect on the third stage of labour or
veterinary liospital. Using hobbles and a hoist, it
uterine involution.
is relatively easy toplace the mare in dorsal or lat-
Technique of epidural injection.The site of injection
eral recumbency. Such a change of position may
is the middle of the first intercoccygeal space, This
greatly expedite obsietric manoeuvres; in addi-
is located by raising the tail 'pump-handle' fashion
tion,elevation ofthehindquarterswill allow the
to identify the first obvious articulation behind the
foal to fall back into the uterus in the abdomen
sacruni. The sacrococcygeal space can also be used;
under the influence of gravity,thereby provid-
however, it is smaller than the first coccygeal space
ing more space for any manipulative procedures.and in some older cows becomes ossified.Thespinal
 d as n  ae s p i  s e a nsd  a
271
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
spinal canal containing only the coccygeal nerves,
fora distance of2-4cm untilit strikesthefloor of
the thinphylum terminale,vasculature andepidural
theepiduralspace;itisthenveryslighitlywithdrawn
fat andconnective tissue.
(Fig.12.7).Genfirmation that theneedle is correctly
The area is clipped, thoroughly washed with an
placed is obtained by attaching to it the syringe and
antiseptic solution or surgicalscrub and dressed
making a trial injection;if there is no resistance to
with surgical spirit.Some injecta small volume of
injection,theneedlepoint isin theepidural space
local anaesthetic using a fine needle to desensitize
Alternatively, the hub of the epidural needle can
the skin over the injection site;others do not.The
befilledwith anaesthetic solution.As the needleis
epidural needle, which is 18 gauge and 5 cm long, is
advanced into the epidural space, the anaesthetic
inserted into the middle of the space at right angles
solution will be sucked in asa result of the slight
tothenormal contourofthe tail-head exactlyin the
negative pressure thatexists there.Within 2minutes
midline anddirected downwards in themidsagit
oftheinjection the tail becomes limp,but it takes a
talplane(Fig.12.6);it is easier to ensure that this
slightlylonger timeinterval(10-20min)before the
occursby standingdirectlybehind thecowwhilean
perineum is desensitized and the strainingreflex is
assistantpumps thetail.Somefind it easierto direct
completely abolished.
theneedleslightlycranially atanangleofabout10°
Adoserateof1.0ml/100kgof2%lidocaine
from thevertical.Theneedleispassed downwards
hydrochlorideinjected at arate of 1ml per second
willproduce obstetric anaesthesialastingabout
30-150 minutes(Skarda 1996);thusheifers and
small cowsrequireavolumeof5mland largecows
7-10ml.The addition to thelocalanaesthetic of
2% of adrenaline prolongs the period of anaesthe-
sia.Recently,the simultaneous injection of xylazine
into the epidural space at a dose rate of 0.05 mg/kg
diluted to avolumeof5mlcanprolongthedura-
tion of anaesthesia for up to 3hours.Some adverse
side-effects frequently occur, which can be con-
trolled by the intravenous injection of tolazoline, an -
adrenoceptor antagonist, at a dose rate of 0.3mg/kg
(Skarda1996).
Sheep and goat
Fig.12.6Siteforepidural anaesthesiain thecow.Arrow
Caudal epidural anaesthesia is a very useful, if
pointstohypodermicneedlein situbeforeinjectionof local
somewhatunder-utilizedtechniqueinovineand
anaesthetic.
caprine obstetrics,because,although in both spe-
cies there will be straining, the relative forces are
much less thanin thecow,and the ewe or doe can
First
口
always be suspended by her hindlimbs.Hlowever,
Endof sacrumcaudal vertebra
Second caudal vertebra
the uterus of both species appears to be more sus-
ceptibletorupturewhen manipulativeprocedures
areperformed.For thiisreason,andin theinterests
ofwelfare,anaesthesia should be used as a rou-
tine for all but the simplest of vaginal anduterine
manipulations.
Theinjectioncanbemadeinto either thesacro-
coccygeal or the first coccygeal interspace with a
Epiduralspacefilledwithfat
3.5cm 20 gauge needle using2% lidocaine hydro-
chloride with adrenaline (epinephrine)at a dose
Fig.12.7Longitudinal section through thecaudal vertebrae
of the cow.
rateof1ml/50kgbodyweight.Whenamixture of
1.75ml2%lidocainehydrochlorideand0.25ml
272
Chapter
|121
 Manipulative delivery per vaginam in farm animals and horses
0.25% xylazine is injected into the epidural space at
a dose rate of 1ml/5okg.the duration ofeffectcan
be as long as 36 hours, and this can be extended by
repeated doses (Sargison & Scott 1994).
Horse
The technique of epidural injection in the mare is the
same but, because the root of the tail is well covered
by muscle and fat, the spines ofall coccygeal vertebrae
are not so easy to locate; the first coccygeal interspace
is the preferred site. This can be located by fexing the
tail, sinceit is at the most angular portion of thebend
of the tail and is usually about 5 cm cranial to the ori-
gin of the tail hairs. It is important to ensure that the
mare is adequately restrained. After the site has been
clipped and thoroughly cleaned, a small bleb of local
anaesthetic should be injected subcutaneously and
into the surrounding tissue over the site.With the
mare standing squarely and symmetrically, a 4-8cm
18 gauge needle (note that it needs to be longer than
in the cow) should be inserted ai about i0° from
thevertical,and directed cranially until it strikes the
floorof the spinal canal; it should then be withdrawn
0.5 cm before the injection is made (Fig. 12.8).
Traditionally,2% lidocaine hydrochloride is effec-
live, using a volume of 6-8ml in a light hunter-
  u psn a pors sna n 
Fig. 12.8 Site for epidural anaesthesia in the mare. Arrow
smaller animals respectively. It is important to err
points to hypedernic needle in situ before injection cf local
anaesthetic.
on the side of caution, since too large a volume will
cause ataxia, which is of much greater concern in
horses than in cattle,berause of their different tem
peraments; if the needle is capped and left in place,
an additional volume can be given. It also takes lon-
ger to take effect in the horse than the cow. Other
operation. The site of injection is the lumbosacral
local anaesthetic agents can be used (in different vol-
space, which can be located as follows. The wings of
umes), as well as o-adrenoceptor agonists such as
the ilia are joined by an imaginary transverse line;
xylazine (0.17mg/kg) and detomidine (60μg/kg) in
where this crosses the middorsal line, the needle is
10ml 0.9% saline; the latter is used either alone or in
inserted at an angle 20° caudal to the perpendicu-
combination with local anaesthetics. Using a combi-
lar until it strikes the floor of the veriebral canal.
nation of2% solutionsoflidocainehydrochloride
The needlleis then withdrawn slightly and the injec
(0.22 mg/kg) and xylazine (0.17 mg/kg), rapid-onset
tion made. The size of the needle varies depending
(5.3 minutes) and long-lasting (330 minutes) caudal
on the size of the gilt or sow but over 100kg body
epidural anaesthesia was obtained (Skarda 1996)
weight a 10-15 cm 18 gauge needle is satisfactory.
The sow or gilt needs to be adequately restrained,
Pig
preferably in a crate to prevent lateral movement,
which in my experience can be the most difficult
Epidural anaesthesia is rarely used for obsteuric pur-
aspect of the technique and can make the differ-
poses in swine other than for replacing prolapses of
ence between suiccess and failure.For anaesthesia
the vagina and uterus;it can be used for a caesarean
caudal to the uimbilicus, a dose rate of 1.0ml of 2%
273
Part
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
lidocaine hydrochloride per 4.5 kg body weight
References
injected at 1.0ml per 2-3 seconds should achieve
anaesthesia by 10 minutes and lastfor about 120
minutes(Skarda 1996).Injection at this site affects
BeneschF1927CuuellVet14:227
thenervesofthelumbosacralplexus andproduces
Hindson JC1978Vet Rec102:327
posterior paralysis.
McGladderyA2001In Praci23:74
SargisoND,ScottPR1994ProcSheepVetSoc103-106
Skarda RT 1996In:Thurmon JC,TranquilliWJ,Benson GI (ed)
Veterinary anaesthesia.Williams &Wilkins,Baltimore,
P426-515
274
13
Chapter
David Noakes
Vaginal manipulations and delivery
in the bitch and queen cat
With the advent of improved anaestheric techniques
in the ventral position this form of assistance is also
resulting in low mortality rates in both dam and off-
often effective. In breech presentation, it is gener.
spring, there has been an understandableincrease in
ally possible to hook the fingers around the retained
the use of the caesarean operation to relieve dysto-
limbs and draw them upwards and backwards into
cia in the bitch and queen. Despite this, there is sill
the maternal pelvis. In vertex posture it is usually a
an important place for manipulative obstetrical pro-
relatively simple matter lo insert the finger beneath
cedures to treat dystocia, particularly simple ones
the fetal chin and,by drawing it upwards, direct
that, when implemented, can be followed by nor-
the muzzle in line with the birth canal (Figs. 13.2,
lnal expulsion of the reinainderof thelitter or, if the
13.3). During all these manipulations, in small or
affected fetus is the last one of the litter to be born,
medium-sized bitches, it is helpful to fix the posi-
the preceding ones having been expelled unaided
tion of the fetus in the uterus by gripping it with
the other hand through the abdominal wall, and to
Digital manipulations
direct thefetus towardsthepelvicinlet.
The use of instruments
Before resorting to instrumental assistance the use
of fingers should be fully exploited, since they are
When parts of the fetus have already traversed the
instruments. When parts of the fetus have already
pelvic inlet and occupy the vagina, Hobday's vec-
passed through the pelvic inlet, for insiance, it is
tis is a useful instrument. The vectis is passed into
often possibleby inserting the index or middle fin-
the vagina and, according to the presentation, over
ger over the occiput, into the intermaxillary space or
the dorsal aspect of the fetal head or pelvis and by
in front of the fetal pelvis in posterior presentation,
pressure downwards engaged behind the occiput or
to apply sufficient traction to draw these parts into
tuber coxae.The index finger is then introduced, and
thievulva.Alternativelymuchgrealer traction can be
pressed upwards into the intermaxillary space or in
applied by using the flexed index and middle fin-
front of the fetal pelvis; between the opposing grips
ger as a forceps, grasping the head either side of
of the vectis above and the finger beneath it is often
the occiput if the puppy or kitten is in anterior pre-
possible to apply sufficienttraction to the fetus to
sentation (Fig. 13.1), or cranial to the tuber coxae
deliver it without injury (Fig. 13.4). The method
in posterior presentation. Straining on the part of may even be successful in cases in which the fore-
the bitch is of great assistance to one's efforts. Once limbs are retained and the correction of which is
parts of thefetus are in thievulva, traction delivery is difficult because of the presence of the head in the
generally simple. In cases of posterior presentation,
vagina.
275
Part
3
 Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
Fig.13.1 Puppy is innormal disposition but traction is applied
by tignty grasping the head between the index and middle
fingers.
Fig.13.4 Traction appled to a puppy's head using lhe vectis
and finger.
In cases of fetomaternal disproportion in anterior
presentation, in which the fetus is entirely in the
uterus and obstruction is caused by the size of
the cranium, Roberts's snare forceps are of value,
particularly in small bitches and cats.Such cases
may alsobe associatedwith retention of tliefore-
limbs. Should the latter be the case, it is better to
aitempt delivery with the posture uncorrected,for
the forelegs will cause no greater obstruction lying
alongside the chest than they would if extended;
moreover, the subsequent traction, applied as it is
to the head only,may cause the elbows alongside
the head to become impacted at the pelvic inlet.
Fig. 13.2 Vertex posture (butt' presentation) with bilateral
Snare forceps are used as follows. While fixing
shoulderflexion.
the fetus at the pelvic brim by holding it through
the abdominal wall, the closed forceps carrying the
snare are passed into the uterus and over the fetal
head until they lie above the neck.The jaws are
tlien opened as widely as possible and depressed
downwards until they lie ventral to the neck and
then closed. In this way an encircling noose has
been applied.By traction on the free ends of the
snare the nooseis drawn tight and it is held in posi-
tion by the forceps.lraction is then applied to the
forceps and the free ends of the snare (Fig. 13.5).
Freak (1948) recommends Rampley's sponge
holding forceps for the application of uaction to
the living fetus in cases similar to those previously
outlined. Using the index finger as a guide to their
application,the forceps are lightlyfixed to the upper
or lower jaw,or even thewhole snout.In the case
of posterior presentation they may be applied to a
Fig. 13.3 Correction of the vertex posture with the
finger.
hindlimbuntil thefetalpelvisisdrawnintothemiater-
nal inlet and then a more secure hold is obtained.
276
Chapter
13
Vaginal manipulations and delivery in the bitch and queen cat
Fig.13.5 Roberts's snare forceps applied to the fetal neck
PointsmadebyFreakinfavour of Rampley's forceps
over those of the Hlobday type, in relatively simple
cases, are that: (1) they can be applied and fixed by
means of the ratchet to comparatively small parts
of the fetus and thus do not increase the total size
of the obstructing part when drawing it through the
Fig.13.6Latera deviation of the head (shoulderpresentation).
maternalinlet;(2) consequent on the lightness with
which it is possible to apply them, the fetus can be
delivered uninjured,although care should be exer-
cised in the use of ratchet forceps, since there is a
of downward and lateral deviation of thehead.It is
great temptation to close the forceps completely.
proposed to quote her excellent description:
Rampley's forceps without a ratchet are preferable.
Breast-head posture: The forceps are of great assistanre
Lateral deviation of the head and nape posture are
(to diagnosis) since a light grip may be obtained on
abnormalities thar require special consideration, for
ne foelefresetrnhenek,aisinghefeus
thediagnosis maybe difficult and attempts to deliver
sufficiently close into the pelvicinletfor a morecom-
fetuses so presented withiout correction,even with
plete examination to be made with thefinger,when
severe forceps traction, are generally futile, at any rate
fetalears may be recognized lying jusi below ihe
pelvic brim.To correct lhe posiure a light grip should
inthehealthyfetus.Inlateral deviation,theforelimb
be taken on the skin over the occipui and the fetus
on the side opposite to the neck flexionhas generally
slighily repelled. Forceps may be left in siu, sup-
passed through the pelvic inlet (Fig. 13.6). Thus, the
ported by the finger and thumb, while an attempt is
presence of a single forelimb in the anterior vagina
made with the othier hand on the maternal abdomi-
indicates a likelihood of the condition.To verify the
nal wall to raise the fetal head above the pelvic brim.
diagnosis and also to ascertain the side to which the
Sometimes the forceps grip and repulsion of the felus
head is deviated,the fetus must first be repelled cra-
are alone sufficient to bring this about, and the fin-
ger can then be insered into the mouth to hold it in
nially. The finger is then directed laterally towards
position while the forceps are reapplied on the upper
the iliacshaft in order to detect the fetal occiput or
jaw.Frequently correction has to be done in stages,
ears. In the small bitch or normal-size queen, this
obtaining a grip a litle lower an the forehead after
may not be difficult, but in the large one the length
eachrepulsion.
of thematernal pelvis and of the fetal neck are often
Lateral deviaion:Forceps aieused to assistinthediag
such that it is impossible to make an accurate diag
nosis of the pusture and the side to which the fhead
nosis, let alone correct the condition. In a protracted
isdeflected.The shoulder of the opposite side may be
case it may be impossible to obtain the space in front
recognized by the finger, or again, the position of the
of the pelvis necessary for exploration with the fin-
earsmay assist.When this is decided a grip is taken on
ger. The fetal fluids have been lost and the uterus has
that side of the head or neck prescnted and the fetus
contracted firmly on the fetus, the latter often being
isrepelleddiagonally away from the side to which the
enlarged by putrefactive emphysema.
to be replaced, and again, particularly in a small bich.
Freak (1948) recomimends Rampley's forceps
great asstance is derived from extermal manipulation
both as an aid to diagnosis and to the correction
assisted by guidance fiom the finger in the vagina.
277
Part
31
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
beneath.The jaws of the forceps are now opened as
Delivery by traction
Onclosingthremitbecomesclearfromtheextentto
Tractionmaybeemployedincasesoffetomaternal
whichthehandles areaparthat thewholewidth
disproportion when the less drastic methods previ-
ofa fetal head or pelvis has been gripped. On no
ously outlined fail.It is used particularly in the case
account should tractionbeapplieduntiltheopera-
ofdeadandemphysematousfetuses.Themethod
tor is satisfied that he or she has a firm grip on the
shouldalwaysbe avoidedin thecaseofalivingfetus,
cranium or pelvis(Fig.13.8).
for the grip of theforceps generally causesit severe
Working in the dark,as the method entails,the
injury.Hobday'sforceps are generally employed.
operator is always fearful lest the uterine wall hias
Itshould alwaysberemembered thatacaesarean
beenpicked upinaddition to thefetus.Fortunately.
operation or,in the case of putrid fetuseshysterec-
if the forceps are appliedwithin the uterus in the
tomy,will carry a better prognosis for thebitch or
method described,there islittle tendency to injury
queen than prolonged attempts at forceps delivery.
of thematernal soft parts in so doing;nevertheless,
In casesrequiring traction,thewhole ofthefetus,
as soon as the secured part has been drawn back to a
with thepossibleexceptionofthelimbs,liesin the
point thatcanbereachedwithafinger,theoperator
uterus.Occasionally,in cases ofposterior presenta-
will ensurebeforeproceedingthatitisthefetusonly
tion (Figure 13.7),the pelvis and hindlimbs have
that is involved.
passed into the pelvic inlet.In these it isbest 10
Steady tractionis applied in the upwards and back
Tepel these parts into the uterusbefore attempting
wards direction until the secured part has passed
to applythe forceps.
through the pelvic inlet.From this point, delivery
The aim is to obtain a secure grip across the fetal
isrelatively easy. l will be appreciated that there
cranium orpelvis so thatconsiderable traction can
isalimit to the amount of forcethatcan safelybe
beapplied.The application of the forceps to a limb
applied,forseverepullingmaycauseruptureofthe
or thelowerrupperjawisgenerallyfutilebecaue
vaginaat the pelvicbrim.Inneglectedcases,inwhich
the force that is necessary to apply causes either the
the fetuses are putrid, the application of raction
forceps to slip or the parts to be torn away.
often results in breakage of the fetus, a head or
Theprocedureshouldbecarriedoutundergeneral
hind paris being torn away.Often in posterior
anaesthesiawith thebitchorqueeninbreastrecum-
presentation,thefetal trunkis torn away and the
bency.Theposition of thepresentedfetus isfixed by
head remains in the uterus.
gripping it through the abdominal wall. The closed
forcepsareintroducedintothevulvaanddirected
atfirstupwardsuntil theyhavereachedthepelvic
floor,thenhorizontallyforwards through thepelvic
canal,and finally slightly downwardsand forwards
intotheuterus.Hereihefetalextremitywillbefelt
Fig.13.8Delivery of apuppy withretention of the forelimbs
usingHobday'sforceps.While theposition of thefetusis
fixedthroughtheabdominalwallwith theleft hand,the
Fig.13.7 Bilateral hip flexion posture (breech presentation).
forceps are applied to the skull with theright.
278
Chapter
131
 Vaginal manipulations and delivery in the bitch and queen cat
Again in protrarted cases, in which complete iner-
Reference
tia has supervened, attempts must not be made to
extract fetuses from the conua with the forceps, for
it is highly probable that by so doing the uterus will
Freak MJ 1948 Vet Rec 60:295
be torn.Forceps delivery is only applicableto fetuses
the extremity of which has passed into the uterine
body.
279
14
Chapter
David Noakes
Dystocia due to fetomaternal
disproportion: treatment
Fetomaternal disproportion
·The diameter of the vulval opening may be
in cattle
increased by episiotomy
·The fetus may be removed by a caesarean operation
As has been discussed earlier in the book, fetomater-
·The volume of the ferus may be reduced by feto-
nal disproportion is a major cause of dystocia in cattle,
tomy (originally referred to as embryotomy), i.e.
with a considerable variation in the degree;it can be
dismemberment of its body within the uterus and
marginal or severe, the latter being associated with a
vagina and its removal in several parts.Nowadays,
very immature heifer or pathological enlargement of
fetotomy is applied only when the ferus is already
thefetus.Thelatter occurs withfetal giantism (the large
dead.
offspring syndrome), which can occur in embryos
As a guide to deciding which of the foregoing meth-
derived from in vitro maturation,in vitro fertilization
ods touse in acase of fetomaternal dispropor-
Or nuclear transfer (see Ch. 35), or prolonged gesta-
tion theveterinarian should be influenced by the
tion, or muscular hypertrophy (double muscling).
obstetrician's ideal,which is to render the abnor-
or fetal monsters such as conjoined twins; these are
mal birth as near to the physiological as possible,
described in Chapter 4 and 16.
ensuring both the welfare and survival of dam and
Sometimes, in cases of dystocia due to fetomater-
fetus while preserving the dam's subsequent ferlil-
nal disproportion, it may not always be obvious to
ity. In the case of a group of aninmals where dystocia
the ohstetrician whether the fetus is too large or the
is being caused by fetomaternal disproportion, con-
pelvis too small. However, the clinical signs based
sideration should be given to inducing early parturi-
on clinical history and examination are the same,
tion in the remainder of the group (see Ch. 6).
namely that the dam has been straining unproduc-
This is probably the commonest type of bovine
Lively for a time in excess of the normal duration
dystocia. Modest disproportion is often success
of the second stage of parturition for that species,
fully treated by the stockperson. It occurs in all
with the fetus in the normal disposition for birth. In
breeds, particularly in immature heifers and those
addition, the approach to the case and the technique
where there is a tendency for muscular hypertrophy.
for the treatmentofthedystocia anddeliveryof
Although it is much commoner in heifers, many
the fetus are the same. It may be overcome in one
cases occur in mature cows, particularly when there
of the following ways:
has been a long delay in rendering obstetric aid,
· The normal expulsive forces may be supplemenied
with resultant fetal enlargement due to emphysema
by external traction on the fetus.This method is
tous decomposition. Unforunately, this occurs all
frequently employed successfully by stockpersons
1o0 frequently. Often, when the veterinarian arrives.
and shepherds
ihe animal has been in second-stage labour for at
280
Chapter
14
Dystociaduetofetomaternaldisproportion:treatment
least2hoursandthereisameasureofsecondary
cars,leavingbothendsof thesnareoutsidethevulva
uterineinertia.Theallantochorionhasrupturedand
A goodaxial pull,which also tends to depress the
[wo forefeet are visible as well as, occasionally,the
calf'spoll ventrally,can be achieved by simultaneous
fetalnose.Difficulty seemstobeassociatedwith the
tractiononbothendsofthe snare.Eachoftheother
birth of thefetal head.Inheifersthiscanbedueto
snaresisplaced abovetheforefetlockofthecalf.At
a failure oftheposteriorvaginaandvulva todilate;
first,with theheadopeheldtaut,tactionisapplid
in adult cows it is often associated with too great a
toonefoot snarewithaviewto advancingoneshoul-
bulk of fetal chest and shoulders at the entrance to
der at a time through the pelvic entrance (Fig. 14.1).
the maternal pelvis.
Then theother leg is advanced.All threeropes are then
Once the head is expelled,theremainder of the
pulled on. Ai all times traction should be synchronous
calf can usuallybe delivered,except in the case of
with the expulsive efforts of the cow and, as far as prac-
calves with muscular hypertrophy,which have dis-
ticable,theinitial pulling should beupwards; once the
proportionatelylargeshouldersandparticularly
head engages hevulva,owever,the direction of ac-
large hindquarters.In these cases, the head, and
tionshouldbeobliquelydownward.Aftereachbout
perhaps the chest,may emergewithrelatively little
of surainingand with each small advance of thefetus,
effortbutthecalf'shipswill notpassintothemater-
theveterinarianshouldascertainbyfurtherexamina-
nal pelvis.At the initial examination,itis often dif
tion that delivery is proceeding satisfactorily.Frequent
ficulttobesureof thedegreeofdisproportionand
applications of lubricant to the vagina and to thefetal
thereforetodecidewhichofthetreatmentoptions
occiput areindicated andtheveterinarian should be
should be tried.With increasing experience,and if
satisfied with very gradlual progress.
thedegree ofdisproportionis severe,theveterinary
Ifitis obvious that thevulvaisrelatively small as is
surgeon may be able to make this judgement with
commonly thecase in Holstein-Friesian heifers)and
considerableaccuracy;however,in many cases itcan
thatfurther uraction on thecalfwill causerupture of
onlybemadefollowingattempted traction.Auseful
the vulva andperineum (with subsequent infertility).
guideis toapply tractionusingtwopersonsorwith
episiotomy should beperformed.Freiermuth (1948)
a calving jack or calf puller（seeFig.12.3),and if it
suggested incising,in the shape of an arch and in a
ispossibletobringtheheadand theelbows of the
dorsolateral direction, the vulval labium in its upper
twoforelimbscaudal tothebrimofthepelvisthen
third.Cuttingdirectlyupwardsinto theperinealraphe
it is likely that traction will be successful. f it can-
iscontraindicated because,once started,furtherbirth
not be achieved,then an alternative surategy must
ofthecalfwillcausea traumaticupwardextension
be considered sinceprolonged unsuccessful traction
towards,and sometines into,the anus andrectum,
willresultinahighcalfmortalityrateandpossible
creatinga third-degreeperineal laceration(see Ch.17)
traumatothecoworheifer.
It is preferableto cut both labia in themanneradvised
by Freiermuth; the requisite depth of the vulvar inci-
Deliveryby traction
sionscanbedecidedonlybyurialonhebasisofthe
The vast majority of cases ofmoderate fetomater-
nal disproportion are successfully treated by the
application ofmanual traction to the presenting
feet,but birth is greatly expedited byfirst applying
a headsnaresothat an axial pull may beput on the
fetus.For vaginal delivery,three snares arerequired,
althoughitisimportanttostressthiatonlyminimal
traction shouldbe applied totheheadsnare.
The animal is suitablyrestrained.A loop is made in
the head snare and this is carried into thevulva where
part of the loop is placed in thecalf's nouth and the
remainderpushedupovertheforeheadandbehind
Fig.14.1Disposition of the calf:anterior presentation,dorsal
theears.A simpler altermative,which is easier to apply
position,extended posture;fetomaternal disproportion.
andlessstressfl tothecalf,istopushhecentrepoint
Delivery by traction.Alternate tractionisfirst applied to the
forelimbs.NoteBenesch'shead snare for axial traction.
ofaropesnareovertheforeheadandbehindthe
281
Part
[3]
Dystocia andotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
minimum amount toallow delivery.By gentletrac-
hindquarterscan then beremoved with care,which
tion on the fetal head so as tocause firm engagement
sometimescanbe difficuli without theuse ofobstet-
ofthe occiput inhevulvar orifice,itiseasyto ascer-
rical hooks(seeFig.12.1).
tain the necessary depth of the incisions. Local infil-
At all stages of traction it isimportant that thevet-
tration,rather than epidural anaesthesia,should be
erinarian shoulddetermine that thedisposition of
usedsoasnot tointerferewiththematernalexpulsive
thecalf continues to remain normal,as well as its
efforts.Immediatelyafterdeliverythewoundsshould
progressthrough thebirthcanalbyvaginal examina
be sutured,thesuture material beingpassed through
tion;theimportanceofensuringthat there isplenty
all the tissues of the wound except thevulvar mucosa.
oflubrication cannotbestressedenough.
Birthof thehead is facilitated and ruptureof
Wherepossible,traction should coincidewith the
theperineumislesslikelytooccurif,whiledown-
abdominal contractions of the cow,and theveteri
ward traction is maintained on the head snare,the
nary surgeon should be satisfied with very gradual
obstetricianinsertsbothhands,'cups'them over the
progress. lt is not unusual for a cow to go down
occiputandpressesvigorouslydownwards.Whenthe
when heavy traction is applied; this is not necessarily
fetal head isborn,all threeropes may bepulled on
a disadvantage,provided that she does not fall awk-
as thiecowstrains and tiedirection oftractionshould
wardly and injureherself.Infact,with the patient
progressively approachthevertical.Obstructionsome-
in lateralrecumbency,traction may be applied to
times occurs as the fetal pelvis engages the pelvic inlet;
better advantageparticularly if manual orbymeans
this is sometimes referred to aship-lockand is due to
of a pulley block.In the case of some calving jacks
thegreatertrochantersofthefemurs andtheoverlying
it can be an inconvenience.As you mayhave noted
muscle of the calf impinging on the shafts of the ilia of
in Chapter 12, the tractive forces exerted by calving
the dam.At this stage,slight retropulsion and rotation
aids andpulleyblocks aremuchgreater than those
of the calf through an angleof45°oreven90° isvery
associatedwithnaturalcalvings and theuseofpeo-
helpful;this isbecause the sacral-pubic dimension is
ple.Despitetheirobvious advantagesthere are some
greater than that between the twoilia (remember the
important disadvantages:
pelvic opening is oval in shape).The direction of trac-
·the amount of force that can be applied in
tionshouldnowbeverticallydownwardsuntilbirth
unslilledhands
iscompleted.The calf is attended to so as to free its
·the fact that the pull is continuous and ungiving.
nostrilsof amnionormucus,andrespirationis stimu
lated.Thegenital tract of thecoworheiferis explored
which may lead to damage of matermal soft tissues
firstlyin orderto ascertain that anothercalfisnotpres-
（innatural birth thecalfwouldbeadvanced some
ent and secondly tomake sure that ithas sustainedno
way with each contraction and thengo back a little
beforethenextcontractionpushesitevenfurther)
trauma.
1n the case of impacted ‘hip-lockby a dead fetus
·thefact thatthe direction ofpull has tobe at least
whereitisfoundimpossibletorepel androtatethe
slightlydown towardstheudder.Ifitishorizontal
calf, Graham (1979) has suggested a method of
orawayfrom theudder then therumpbarmerely
reducingthefetaldiametersothattractionmaysuc-
slipsdowntheperineumawayfromthevulva
ceed. 1e uses a long-handled (75 cm) blunt hook,
when traction is applied. This means it is very dif-
which ispassed intothefetalabdomenthrough
ficult to apply force in the same direction as the
an incision made just behind the xiphisternum.
expulsion forcesof the cow.Ideally,force should
The hook is advanced to engage the fetal pelvis
beappliedinaslightlyupwarddirectionuntil the
and abrupt traction on it then fractures the pelvic
calfs head is within the pelvis, then in a horizon-
girdle.One ortworepetitionsof thisprocedure to
tal direction until the calf's head and chest have
causefurtherfracturesand to ensurepelviccollapse
been deliveredand,nally,ina progressivelymre
may befollowed by easy traction delivery.Another
downward direction until thecalf'shipshavebeen
method of treating hip-lock in a dead fetus is to
born. This has been overcome in a more recent
makea tranisversebisectionofthecalfinthethora-
designof thecalfpuller,theVinkcalving jack(see
columbarregion and then to divide thehindquar-
Fig. 12.3). This has a rump frame that fits around
ters bymeansofavertical cut,bothcusbeingmade
the tail head andvulva of the cow, allowing trac-
by means of ihe wire-saw fetotome(see Ch.19).
tiontobeappliedin thedirectionchosenbythe
When this has been completed,each‘half ofthe
obstetrician.
282
Chapter
141
Dystocia due to fetomatermal disproportion: treatment
If after 5 minutes of judicious traction no progress is
between 2.3 and 2.5 traction is likely tobe success-
made, the veterinary surgeon must resort to a caesar
ful; between 2.1 and 2.3 substantial traction may
ean operation (see Ch.20) ifthe calfis alive or dead,
berequired which may not be successful; 2.1 or less
or fetotomy(see Ch. 19) if the calfis dead.There are
the method of treatment should be by caesarean
cases where it is difficult to assess whether a calf is
operation.In my experience,it has some value as
alive or deadfthere is any question, he calf should
a predictive method but, since there are othier vari-
be given the benefit of the doubt. If there is certainty
ables such as the degree of uterine inertia or the
of success by the employment of limited fetotomy,
dryness of the birth canal, for example, it needs 1o
such as the removal of a forelimb, or a forelimb
be used with caution.Looking to the future,vet-
together with the head and neck, this would be the
erinarians should be attempting to use technology
method of choice; unforiunately, not infrequently,
fo improve the welfare of parturient heifers and
having embarked on fetotomy, the obstetricianfinds
to lesser exlent cowsbypredicting thelikeliliood
that total dismemberment will be necessary to effect
of dystocia due to fetomaternal disproportion.
delivery. Because of the difficulty in assessing the
In Chapter ll, the uise of sire and dam selection
at the time of breeding to try and prevent dysto-
that total fetotomy can be a tedious and arduous
cia due to fetomaternal disproportion from occur-
task, there is an increasing tendency for veterinary
ring is discussed. In the case of the selection of
surgeons to resort to a caesarean operation in cases
'easy calving' sires, based on low estimated breed-
of disproportion where the fetus cannot be delivered
ing values (EBvs) for calf birth weight is generally
by reasonable traction.
successful;however, attempting to select heifers for
Assessment of the likely suiccess of traction to relieve
breeding using pelvimetry has been less effective
dystocia due to fetomatermal disproportion is very
(Van Donkersgoed et al 1990). The main problem
muchbased on trialand error.Several attempts hiave
is that thepelvic dimensions atthe timeofbreeding
been made to developpredictive methods of the likely
maynotbewellcorrelatedwith thoseat the timeof
success of traction or whether a caesarean operation
calving:in addition,accurate internal pelvimetry is
should beperformed,thieobjectivebeing to prevent
invasive and requires caudalepidural anaesthesia.
the sequence:attempted traction-failure-caesarean
More recently,in a study by Murray et al (2002)
operation-dead calf (Hindson 1978). In any predic-
involvingtheBelgianBluebreed,in whichfetoma-
tivemethod thetwofactorswhich have tobeconsid
ternal disproportion is a reason for routine elective
ered arehesizeof thecalf and the size of thepelvis.
caesarian operations,the authors foundagoodcor-
Hindson (1978) found a good correlation between
relation between internal and external pelvicmea-
the digital diameter of the calf (as measured ar the
surements.Measurements forinternal pelvicheight
level of the fetlock) and its body weight. Since at the
and internal pelvic width can be calculated using
tine of dystocia it is likely to be difficult,if not impos
the following formulae,respectively:
sible,to measure the size of the pelvic inlet directly.
aitempis have been made to correlate it with exiernal
10.57+0.0004 Age (months)+0.15 TeTi
pelvic measurements.Hindson (1978) found agood
correlation between the medial interischial tuberos-
and
ity distance and both the vertical and horizontal pelvic
8.3 +0.0006 Age（monihs)+0.15 TeTi,
diameters.As a result of this, and a study involving 60
selected calvings, he devised a formula to obtain a fig-
in which TeTi is the external measurement of the
ure for the traction ratio (TR). lt is as follows:
distance between the cranial surface ofthe tuber
coxae and the caudal point of the tuber ischium, on
Interischial distanceP1
one sideof the cow.If this is coupledwith the esti-
TR=
mation of calf birthweightbased on themeasure-
ment of the mean metacarpal width,ither directly
where P, = the party factor of 0.95 for heifers: P, = a
al parturition or transrectally using ultrasonogra-
correction factor of 1.05forposteriorpresentation;
phy in the last week of gestation (Takahashi et al
E = a factor for breeds with muscular hypertrophy.
2005), then a more reasoned approach to treating
Traction ratios greater than 2.5 are unlikely to
dystociaduetofetomaternaldisproportionmight
have dystocia due to fetomalernal disproportion;
be possible.
283
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
The techniqueof fetotomyfor severefetal oversize
thefetalpelvisbecomesjammed’in thebirth canal,
in extended anterior presentation is described in
thecalfshouldberepelledalittle,rotated through45°
Chapter 19. The method used involves the removal
and again puhed on.This latter manipulation,which
of one or sometimes two forelinbs, with a view to
bringsthe greater diameterof thefetusinto he largest
reducing the circumference of the fetal chest.
pelvicdimension,isoftensuccessful;itmaybeaccom
Fetomaternal disproportion:
and usingthemas leversina rotarymanner.Thereisa
misunderstanding particularly among some stockper-
posterior presentation
sons,that calvesin posterior presentation need to be
The capacity of the fetus to survive obstructive
pulled outveryrapidly,otherwise theywill die.One
dystocia is diminished if it is in posterior presen-
must remember that the calfs life will not be compro-
tation; such cases therefore require prompt aiten-
mised until its umbilical cord becomes trapped against
tion. Because of the abruptly presenting buttocks
the maternal pelvis.In practical terms,therefore,trac
and contrary direction of the fetal lhair, a poste-
tion should beslow and controlled until such time as
riorly presented fetus ismore difficult to deliver
the calfs tail-head and anus begin to emerge from the
than acomparableonepresentedanteriorly.The
cow'svulva.Once thispoint is reached,delay should
retroverted tail mayalsobeanimpediment.
beavoided.if thehindquarters canbedeliveredthe
Whenconfrontedwithsuchadystocia,theobste-
forequartersusually follow,but there are exceptions
trician should first altempt to assess the degree of
and theywill beconsideredwhendiscussingtotal feto-
disparity between the fetus and birth canal.Where
lomy in posterior presentation (see Ch.19).
oversizeisslight,deliverybytractionshouldfirstbe
Incasesofposteriorpresentation where substan-
tried.
tialjudicious traction has not succeeded,thefetus
mustberemovedbycaesareanoperationifthecalf
Deliveryby traction
is alive,orif dead by caesarean or fetotomy.In the
case ofanimmovable, dead felus there isa choice
Thehind feet are usuallyvisible at thevulva,and to
about which it is difficult to generalize,but if there
them snares are applied above the fetlock joints.
is obviously gross oversize a laparotomy is prefer-
Itshouldbe ascertainedthatthefetaltailisnotret
able.In many instances ofmedium oversized and
roverted;in delayedcases fetal fluid supplements
dead fetuses,however, it may be easier to remove
are essential.With one legrepelled as far as possible
one limb,for this relatively simple operation often
(Fig.14.2),theother ispulledonsoastobringits sti
makes birth possible (see Ch.19).
fleoverthepelvicbrim.Therepelledlimbissimilarly
dealt with.In this way a smaller fetal diameter is pre-
sentedatthepelvicinletand,withthissimplemanoeu-
Fetomaternal disproportion
vre, traction may succeed.A simple way of assessing
In other species
thelikely success of traction canusuallybepredictedif
both stifle joints canbebrought into the pelvisfollow-
Horse
ingamoderateamountoftraction.Ifduringtraction
Disproportion as acauseofdystociaisuncommon
in horses.Apart from being more urgent, the occa-
sional case ofrelative oversizeis treated on similar
lines to the bovine case,with the exception that,
becauseof thelateosseousunion ofthefetalskull,
only limited traction should be applied to thefetal
head.Although the length of gestation is very vari-
able in thenare,in some cases exceeding365 days,
excessivelylargefetusesarerareinhorses.Whenthe
fetus is alive,thecaesarean operation（see Ch.20）is
Fig.14.2Dispositionof thecalf:posterior presentation,dorsal
thefirstconsiderationand,withheincreasingexpe
position,extendedposture;fetomaternal disproportion.Delivery
rience ofrecentyears,itis now preferred tootal
by traction onalternatehindllimbs.
fetotomyforadeadfetus.
284
Chapter
141
Dystocia due to fetomaternal disproportion: treatment
Sheep and goat
Pig
Oversize is a common cause of dystocia in ewes car-
Dystocia due to fetomaternal disproportion may
rying single lambs. Ewes of the smaller breeds are
occurinimmatureprimigravidgiltsespeciallywhen
often mated tolarger rams and,although thefetal
pregnant with a small litter.In suchcases,it can be
sizeis controlled toa large extent bythedam,bulky
treated by traction using a hand, snare or forceps
body features derived from theram,such as large
fails, then a caesarean operation is indicated; feto-
headandcoarsenessofshoulders andbuttocks,ofien
tomy isnot an option.
causetrouble.Mostcases aresuccessfully overcome
by the shepherd applying traction to the forelegs.
References
More severe casesmaybebroughtto theveterinary
surgery,where they may be conveniently treated as
described for the cow.Where judicious traction-
Freiermuth G 1948|AmVet MedAssoc113:231
using fine snares, copious lubricants and a high
GrahamJA1979]AmVet MedAssoc174:169
standard of cleanliness -does not succeed,a cae-
Hindson JC 1978VetRec102:327
sarean operation (see Ch.20) or fetotomy (see Ch.
Murray RD,CartwrightTA,DownhamDYet al2002Reprod
Domest Anim 37:1
19)may be employed.Where thefetusis dead,and
Takahashi M,GotoT,Tsuchiya H,Kawahata K2005 JVetMed
this is frequently so in cases seen by theveterinary
Sci 67:807
surgeon,fetotomy isoftenindicated.In this species
Van Donkersgoed J,Ribbel CS,Townsend HGG,Iansen ED
the subcutaneous methods of limb removal are very
1990CanVet I31:190
easily carried out but the percutaneous technique,
usingthewire-sawprotectedbyGlattli'sspiral tubes
（see Ch.19),is quite practicable.
285
115
Chapter
David Noakes
Dystocia due to postural defects: treatment
Postural defects of anterior
Carpal flexion posture
presentation in cattle
One or both forelimbs may be affecied.In the
unilateral case the flexed carpus is engaged at the
Faulty disposition due topostural defects,of which
pelvic inlet; the other forefoot may be visible at
thecommonest are carpal flexion and lateral devia-
the vulva.The simple recent case requires retro-
tion of the head, are a frequent cause of dystocia
pulsion at the fetal head or shoulder;the retained
in ruminant species. Generally, postural defects are
foot is then grasped and, as the carpus is pushed
readilyrectifiedbymanipulationif treatedearly in
upwards,the foot is carried outwards and finally
second-stage labour. But in neglected cases asso-
brought forwards in an arc over the pelvic brim
ciated with secondary uterine inertia,loss of fetal
and extended alongside the other limb (Fig.15.1).
fluids and a dead, einphysematous fetus, tightly
More difficult cases require a snare attached to
enclosed by the uterus, very serious dystocia may
the retained fetlock to help extend the limb (Fig.
occur,forwhichfetotomy or acaesarean operation
15.2).The fetal foot should always be carried over
may be required,
the pelvic brirn in the cupped hand of the obstetri-
The mechanics of the correction of postural
cian (Fig. 15.3). An obstinate case may require the
defects are extremely simple; the secret of suc-
introduction of copious warm water with obstetri-
cess lies in an appreciation of the value of
cal lubricant to help mobilize the calf.Rarely,in
retropulsion.Exceptfordystociaofshort duration,
very protracted dystocia and cases of ankylosis,
this means that epidural anaesthesia is needed,
the limb cannot be extended and then it must be
particularly for the inexperienced veterinarian.
cut through at the carpus by means of the wire-
Hence, once the posture has been corrected, the
sawfetotome.
cow must then be delivered by traction, since she
will not strain to aid expulsion. The obstetrician
Incomplete extension of the elbow(s)
with relatively thin arms may have a significant
advantage in correcting postural defects,in that it
This case is diagnosed on vaginal examination, with
is often possible for both arms to be used simul-
the digits emerging at the same level as the fetal muz-
taneously inside the cow - one to push and the
zle instead of being well advanced beyond it. Usually,
other to pull.
without the need of epidural anaesthesiahehead
Abnormalities ofposture will be considered in
series - beginning with the simple and proceeding
obliquely upward direction so as to lift the olecra-
1o the complicated - in each example.
non proress over the maternal pelvic brim. Delivery
286
Chapter
151
Dystocia due to postural defects: treatment
is accomplished by traction on the head and both
forelimbs,as already described in Chapter 14.
Shoulderflexionposture;complete
retention of the forelimb(s)
This typeofdystociamaybeunilateral orbilateral.
Thediagnosisofbilateral retentionisusuallyobvi-
ousbyobservingthattheheadpartlyorcompletely
protrudes from thevulva,but in the absence of the
forelimbs.(Inbilateral carpal flexiontheheadcan-
not be advancedso far.)Ina'roomy'cow,with a
small full-term or prematurecalf,the dystocia may
be overcome by traction in the abnormal posture; in
Fig.15.1Disposition of the calf:anterior presentation,dorsal
such cases,unless there has been much delay, cor-
position,unilateral carpal flexionposture.Correction using
rectionoftheabnormalpostureisusuallyeasyand
the hand and a crutch.
alwaysshould beresortedto.
Retropulsion is a very obvious necessity and, if
theextrudedhead is very swollen and the calfis
dead,iu should be amputated outsidethe vulva
To this end,Krey's hooks are placed in the orbits
and traction is applied or,if downward pressure is
applied to the head, the head can be forced beyond
thevulvatoallowdisarticulation attheoccipitoat-
lantaljointusing a sharpknife orscalpel.Following
thisas the fetus is repelled,the retained forelimbs
tendto comeforwards;thecalfsradius and ulna
arethengraspedandthedefectiseasilyconverted
into carpal flexion posture andrelieved accordingly
(Figs.15.4,15.5).
Inthemoredifficultcase,thelimbmustbesnared,
Fig.15.2Disposition:as in Figure15.1.Correction using the
atfirstproximallyandthenthenoosepasseddown
hand and a digital snare.
until it lies above the fetlock,the shank being
Fig.15.4Disposition of thecalf:anteriorpresentation,dorsal
Fig.15.3 Disposition:as in Figure 15.1.Correction by hand
position,unilateral shoulder fliexion posture (ccmplete
alone.Note the method of grasping the foot.
retention of the forelimb).First stage ofcorrection by hand.
287
Part
31
Dystociaand other disordersassociatedwithparturition
Fig.15.5 Disposition of the calf:as inFigure 15.4. Second
stage of correctionbyhand
placedfrombeforebackwardsbetweentheclawsso
as to flex thefetlock andpastern when traction is
applied toit.Thedigits areheld inthecupped hand
Fig.15.6Disposition of calf:anteriorpresentation,dorsal
and the carpus is forced upwards while an assistant,
position,lateral deviation of the ead.Correctionby hand
pullingon thesnare,helps theoperator tobringthe
foot over the pelvic brim.In a delayed case,such
a manoeuvre may be impossible and then feto-
tomy of thelimbisundertakenby thepercutaneous
fetotomy (see Ch.19).
Lateral deviation of the head
The head may be displaced to either side,and
this constitutes one of the commonest types of
ruminant dystocia.When treated in early second-
stage labour,it is easily corrected by hand without
recourse to epiduralanaesthesia.Thelubricated
hand isintroduced and,when theprovokedstrain-
ing has ceased, the fetus is repelled by pressing
forwards at thebase ofits neck.Thehand is then
quicklytransferredtothemuzzleofthecalfwhich
Fig.15.7Disposition of the calf:as inFigure 15.6.Preliminary
isfirmly grasped andbroughi round through an
hooking'of the commissure cf the mouth,prior to grasping
arc until thenoseis inlinewith thebirth canal
the muzzle of the calf.
(Fig.15.6).In a more inaccessible case,the muz-
zle may bereached afterpreliminary traction on
thecommissure of themouth（Fig.15.7)or onthe
indicated,followedbyheinstillationoffetal fluid
mandible (Fig.15.8).A head snare and forelimb
substitute; this renders the calf more buoyant.A spe
snares arenowaffixed and traction,synchronously
cial headcord,of smaller calibrethan thoseusedon
appliedwiththecow'sexpulsiveefforts,leadsto
thelimbsiscarried inasarunningnooseand slipped
delivery.
over themandible ofhe calf,whereit is tightened,
Inmore protracted cases of dystocia due to head
and theshankof thesnareishanded toan assistant
displacement,withgreater lossoffetal fluid andwith
(Fig.15.8).The operator reintroduces a hand,grasps
theuteruscontractedonthecalf,itismoredifficult
thecalfsmuzzle and,as itis manipulatedtoextend
torectifytheposture.Caudal epiduralanaesthesia is
the neck,the assistant is directed to apply gentle
288
Chapter
15/
Dystociaduetopostural defects:treatment
Fig.15.9 Disposition of the calf:anterior presentation,
dorsal posture,downward displacementof thehead(vertex
Fig.15.8Disposition of thecalf:as in Figure 15.6.Application
posture')
of themandibular snare.
fuid supplemen.The calf is repelled by applying
traction.ltisobviouslyimportantthatthisheadsnare
pressure to the forehead by means of a thumb while
shouldbepassedaroundthegreatercurvatureofthe
lifting the mandible over thepelvic brim with he
neckto themandible.Shouldthesnareinadvertently
fingers.
bepassed across the concavityof the neck curvature
More severe degrees ofdownward displacement
to themandiblepullingonitwill accentuaterather
of the head are treated in a similar way but, if dif
thanrelieve,thedisplacement.Whichevermethod is
ficulty is experienced,one of the forelimbs should
used ocorrect thismalposture,it is mportant opo
be replaced into the uterus.This gives room for the
tect the tubular genital tract,as theneck is extended,
head to be first rotated laterally and then brought
from the possibility of cuts by thesharp lowerincisor
upwards and forwards over the pelvic brim.The
teethofthe calf;this isbest done by the obstetrician
leg is then extended and the ferus removed by trac-
cupping his/her hands over the mouth.
tion.Invery difficult cases,it maybeadvantageous
The correction ofthispostural defect can also be
toreplace both forelimbs into the uterus. Casting
facilitatedbycasting the cow in lateral recumbency
the cow and placing her in dorsal recumbency may
onthesideoppositetothedirectionoftheneckflex-
greatlyfacilitateextensionofthefetalhead.Another
ion;this allows thegraviduterusto sinkslightlyto
alternativeistorotate thefetusbymeansofaforce
one side,thereby providing more space to correct
appliedtoitslegs,intoatemporaryventralposition
the deviation.
from which the head may be more easily extended.
Indifficultcasesofdownward deviation inwhich
the calf is still alive,a caesarean operation should
Downwarddisplacementofthehead
be considered.If the calfis dead,then percutaneous
This is an uncommon type of dystocia in cattle.It
fetotomy should be attempted.
usually takes the form of'vertexposture'in which
the calfs nose abuts on the pubic brim and the
Postural defects of anterior
brow is directed into the pelvis (Fig. 15.9). The
presentation in horses
moreseverevarietiesofdownwarddeviation of the
head,namely‘nape presentation’andbreast-head
posture-in which the head is flexed vertically
Although showinga lower incidenceinhorses than
betweenthe forelimbs-arerare in cattle;when
incattle,defects of limb posture cause more seri-
present, they have usually been caused by traction
ous dystocia in mares than in cows.This is due to
onthelimbsbeforetheheadhadextended.
the severe pelvicimpaction that is consequent upon
Provided sufficientretropulsion canbeachieved,
the mare's very strong expulsive efforts,and to the
vertex posture is easily overcome.Neglected cases
longer limbs of foals.In order to prevent rupture of
may require caudal epidural anaesthesia and fetal
the uterus or vagina, correction of posture must
289
Part
31
Dystocia andotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
be donewith the utmost care.Where impaction isleg through the carpal joint.The firstalternative will
severe,it maybepossibletorepel hiefetus;traction
betriedonaliyefoalandwhen theflexedcarpusis
withoutcorrectionofposturemaythenbeattempted
well advaneedinto thematernal pelvis.In addition
since ithasa betterchance of success thian in the
tosnaresontheheadand the other extendedlimb,
cow.The obstetrician is ever mindful of the urgency
traction is applied to a snare placedaround the
ofequinedystocia,butif at the outset an impacted
flexed carpus.Fetotomy for irreducible carpal flex-
fetus is found to be already dead, the advantage of
ion is easily effectedby means of the wire-sawfeto-
anaesthetizingthemareandplacingherinlateralor
tome,section beingmadethroughthecarpal joint
dorsal recumbency should beconsidered
(see Ch.19).A snare is then placed above the carpus
and thefetus is removed by pulling on this,as well
as on theotherlimbandhiead.
Carpal flexion posture
In the case of irreducible bilateral carpal flexion,
Theprinciplesofcorrectionarethesameasforthe
affectinganormallydeveloped full-term foal,trac
cow.Adequateretropulsion ofthe fetus,inorderto
tion shouldnotbeattempted.Itisunlikelythatthe
makesufficientroom for theextension ofthelon-
foalwill stillbe alivesothatfetotomyisindicated
ger limbs of the foal,is most essential,and a foot
one or two of the carpal joints being sectioned as
snare is a great aid to manual extension of the limb.
required.
During the final extension of the carpus,the birth
canal must be protected from injury by holding the
Incomplete extension of the elbow
fetal foot in the cupped hand.
There is a tendency for a foal in carpal flexion pos-
Thisis uncommon.The treatment is that described
ture to become impacted in the maternal pelvis (Fig.
forthesamecondition in cattle.
15.10); the procedure required will depend on the
degreeofimpaction,ontherelativesizes ofthefetus
Shoulder flexionposture
and birth canal,andon the durationof second-stage
labour.Retropulsionof thefetus,followedbyexten-
One or both forelimbs may be retained,The more
sion of the carpus,should always be attempted.
slender head and longer neck of the foal give more
Where there is obviously insufficient room for
roominthematernalpelvisforthehand and armof
extension,the flexed carpus may be pushed for-
the obstetrician thanis availablein thesame type of
wardsintotheuterusso thattheretainedlimblies
bovine dystocia but theretained limb is further away
under thefetal abdomen.Moderate tractionapplied
anditisconsequentlymore difficulttopassa snare
to theother limband to thefetalheadthenoften
around theradius andulna.Copiousfetal fluid sup
succeeds without injury to the mare.Where itis
plementshouldbeinfusedandvigorousretropul-
found impossible torelieve theimpaction,there are
sion applied.Once the radius and ulna have been
two alternativesfor theveterinary surgeon: either 10
snareditshouldbepossibletoadvancethelimband
attempttractionwithoutcorrectionortosectionthe
toconvertthepostureintooneofcarpalflexion and
then toproceed accordingly.
When it is found tobe impossibleto extendthe
limb,traction may be tried.This often succeeds but
thefoal isusually dead.Ratherthan useinordinate
force,itispreferabletoremovetheretainedforelimb
bymeans of thewire-sawfetotome as describedfor
the cow.Whenboth forelimbs areretainedand
attempts atcorrectionfail,tractionmaybetried,but
itisprobablybetterfirsttotrytoremoveonelimb
by means of the wire-saw(see Ch.19).
Foot-nape posture
Fig.15.10Disposition of the foal:anterior presentation
dorsalposition,unilateral carpal flexionposturein the mare.
Thisdeviation ofposturecomprisesupward displace-
Note the tendency to impactionin this malposture.
mentofoneorbothextendedforelimbssothatthey
290
Chapter
151
Dystocia due to postural defects: treatment
come to lie above the extended head in the vagina. 1t
stifle joint instead of on the middle ribs,as in the
isaposturaldefectpeculiartothehorsethatismade
calf （Fig.15.11).Thus,except in ponies,the dis-
possible by themore slender head and longer limbs
placed head is beyond thereach of the obstetrician's
ofthefoal.It isverylikelytolead toseriousimpac
hand. Special instruments are herefore required to
tionandcarriesagreatdangerofpenetrationof the
helpprocure thehead,andthreesuch are available:
vaginalroofbythefootofthefoal.Theuppermost
Kuhn's crutch,Blanchard’slongflexiblehookand the
limb is recognized and, as the foal's muzzle is vig-
Krey-Schottlerdoublehook.Their userequirescon-
orouslyrepelledin acranialandupwarddirection
siderableslill,andwith the availability of safergen
the fetal foot is raised and then pushed,or pulled,
eral anaestheticmethodsthey arerarelyusednow.
to the appropriate side.The other foot is similarly
In cases ofwryneck, where it is quite impossible to
manipulated and,finally,the head is again raised
extend theneck,thehead andneckmustbeamputated
and each foreleg placed underneath it. Traction is
by means of the wire-saw fetotome (see Ch. 19), or a
then applied to the head and both forelimbs.
caesarean operation must be performed(see Ch.20).
if penetration of thevaginal roof lias occurred,epi-
dural anaesthesia or generalanaesthesia should be
Downward deviation of the head
induced.Repositionisfirstattemptedand,ifitisnot
possible,amputation ofhe fetal head or he upper
Downward deviation of thehead isnol sorare in
limb-whicheveriseasier-should beperformed.The
horses asin cattle;nape posture is the most likely to
upperlimb is sectioned through theradius by means of
be encountered.The methods of correction are the
thewire-saw,and itshould thenbepossibletoreplace
sameasfor thecow.Extensionoftheheadrequires
theotherlimbunder thehead;hestumpoftheradius
the applicationofamandibular snare and,while
must be carefully controlled during the final delivery.
firmpressureisplacedupon thefetal browwith one
Whereonefootisalreadyprotrudingfromthe
hand,the snare is pulled upwards and backwards by
ruptured perineum, orrectum,it may be necessary
an assistant.If the operator can apply rotational as
to incise theperineum,extract the fetus and then
well asrepellentforcetothefetal head,lateralmove-
repair both the lacerated and the incised tissue.
ment of the head - which is a necessary preliminary
to its forward extension-is promoted.If this sim
plemethoddoesnotsoonsucceedthemareshould
Lateraldeviation ofthehead
be anaesthetized,placed in dorsalrecumbency and
Thisis a moreseriousmalpostureinhorses thancat-
the hindquarters raised.Retropulsion of the fetus
ilebecause,owing to the greater length of theneck
andcorrectionoftheheadposturearenowgreatly
and head,the foal's nose liesfurther awaynear the
facilitated.
Fig.15.11Disposition of thefoal:anteriorpresentation,dorsalposition,lateral deviationof thehead in themare.Thefetalnose
maylieevenfurtherforwardon thefoal'sstifle.
291
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
In view of the fact that spontaneous delivery of a
Genileness of manipulation within the ovinegen-
foal in nape posture has been observed,it has been
ital tract is mosf essential;otherwise serious contu-
suggesied that, where the head has projected so far
sion or laceration of the vagina, cervix and uterus
intothevagina tliat theears arevisible atthevulva,
may result and is especially liable to befollowed by
successfil traction without reposition has occurred,
fatal shock or infection.The wool should be clipped
but it is not advisable.
from around theperineum and tail base,and his
In obstinate cases of nape posture with impaction
area should be thoroughly washed.Except for the
at the pelvic brim, fetotomy is indicated. However,
simplest manipulative procedure, caudal epidural
the introduction and correct placing of the wire
anaesthesia should always be used.The ewe should
between the markedly flexed head and the neck
then be placed on a bale orif possiblea tablein lat-
would appear to be very difficult.
eral or dorsal recumbency (if appropriate), with the
If the headis completely displaced berween the fore-
hindquarters overhanging one end.Alrernatively,the
limbs, so that it coines to lie under he chest or abdo
ewe may be gently restrained while standing orheld
men of the foal, reposition should be attempted by
by an assistant, so that its head and neck rest on the
means of retropulsion and the application of Krey's
floor while the hindquarters are raised by grasping
hooks to the neck;tractionis then applied with a view
thehind legs above the hocks.The assistant strad-
to raising the head to within reach of thehand.If this
dles the ewe and maintains her in the supine posi
fails, a foreleg will have to be removed, preferably by
tion with the hindquarters ata convenient height for
the subcutaneous method,in order to give space for
the operator. Fetal fluid supplements,particularly
raising the head.
the cellulose-based obstelrical lubricants as substi-
tutes for amniotic fluid,should be infused.With
Postural defects of anterior
the advantages provided by raising the ewe's hind-
presentation in sheep and goats
quarters and instillingfluid,themajority ofpostural
defects will be readily overcome. The principles of
reposition adopted for the several varieties of pos-
Postural defects are common causes of ovine and
tural aberration are the same as those used for the
caprine dystocia, the methods of correction are
cow. Many cases can be rectified by the lhand alone
virtually identical in the two species, excepi that
but snares are frequently useful. Instruments are sel-
goats tend to resent physical restraint more. When
dom required, although forceps are occasionally
affected sheep and goats are promptly treated, cor-
employed in very small ewes or does, as is the sim
rection is relatively simple and in many cases is
ple head snare referred to in Chapter 12.
successfully carried out by the shepherd or herd-
sperson. In the description of the procedures in the
Carpal flexion posture
following section,whenreference ismadeto sheep
or ewe,readers can assume that it is the same for
With thie eweheld aspreviously described,andwith
doe goats unless otherwise stated.Manipulation
theinstillationoffluid indelayed cases,retropulsion
is more difficult in the case of large singletons,
is easily achieved. The retained foot may then be
but delay inrendering obstetrical aid is the most
grasped and gently brought into the pelvic entrance
frequent cause of difficulty. Repeated ineffectual
whenceit is extended into the vagina.The eweis then
maternal expulsive efforts cause expulsion of the
lowered on to her side and gentle traction is applied
fetal fluids, impaction of the fetus and close envel-
each time she strains.After delivery of the fetus,the
opment of the fetus by the uterus. Secondary uter-
uterus is searched for another lamb. Owing to uter-
ine inertia supervenes,and in protracted cases the
ine inertia,a second (or third) lamb may fail to be
lamb dies and undergoes emphysematous decom-
advanced to the pelvic brim.Theobstetrician should
position. Thus even a simple postural defect in
therefore bring the fore or hind cxtremity into the
pelvis; expulsive efforts will recommence and gentle
The veterinary surgeon is likely to see the more
traction is then applied to help delivery.
seriousinstances ofpostural abnormaliryin which
Where there has been gross delay and it is found
there has been considerable delay and in which
to be impossible to extend theleg of an eimphysema
unskilful attempts at correction mayhave caused
tous fetus,tliecarpus should besawn thirough with
damage to the ewe.
fetotomy wire.Copiouslubrication isindicated and
292
Chapter
151
Dystociaduetoposturaldefects:treatment
fuirther fetotomy may be requiredas described for
correctionwillbe simple and,in anycase,nordinate
fetomaternal disproportion.As an alternative; unre-
forceshould not beused.
lieved carpal flexion maybedealt with by thecaesar-
ean operation(see Chs 19 and 20).
Lateraldeviationofthehead
(Fig. 15.13)
Incomplete extension of the elbow
Thisisavery common cause ofovinedystocia.The
Retropulsion of the fetus,followed by gentle exten-
methods used for correcting it are those described
sion of each limb in turn, is easily achieved. Gentle
for cattle.Lnder caudal epidural anaesthesia,with
traction is then applied to thehead andforelimbs.
thehindquartersraisedandwiththeinstillation of
lubricant fluid, retropulsion and manual reposi-
tion are possibleinmost instances.Wherethere has
Shoulder flexion posture （Fig.15.12)
been delay,a mandibular snaremay be used togood
With adequateretropulsion,andfetal fluidsupple-
effect.Wherethereisinsufficientroomtocorrect the
ment in delayed cases,it isusually possible to reach
deviation, the displaced head of an emphysematous
theforearm and toconvert thedefecttocarpal flexion
lambmaybe amputatedwith awirefetotome,buta
posture andthentoproceedaspreviouslydescribed.
caesarean operation maybepreferred.
In the case of a grossly oversized fetus,where it is
found o be impossible to advance the leg,a caesar-
Postural defects ofposterior
eanoperationmaybenecessary;wherethe fetus is
presentation
emphysematous theretained limb may be amputated
by means of the wire-saw fetotome.Following the
removalofonelimbitisusuallypossibletodeliver
Faultyposture of theposterior limbs ismore difficult
the fetus.In view of the fact that spontaneous deliv-
tocorrectthan abnormmalitiesoftheanteriorlimbs,
eryhasbeenseentooccurdespitecompletereten-
particularly in horses.The defects now tobe consid
tion of a forelimb,it would seem proper where the
eredconcernlackofextensionofthehock and hip
ewe'spelvisislargeandthelambofsmallormod
joints,which may affectoneorbothlimbs.Also,occa
erate size loattempt deliverywithoutrectification
sionallyincalvesitisfound thattheumbilical cord
ofposture.In such a case,however,itis likely that
runsbetween thehindlimbsandovertheposterior
Fig.15.12Disposition of thelamb:anteriorpresentaticn,
Fig.15.13Disposition of thelamb:anteriorpresentation,dor-
dorsalposition,bilateral shoulder flexionposture.(From a
salposition,lateral deviationof the head.(From a paperby H.
paper byH.Leeney inTransactions of theHighland
Leeneyin Transactionsof the Highland Agricultural Society,C.
Agricultural Society, c.1890.)
1890.)
293
Part
Dystocia andother disorders associatedwithparturition
aspectof one or other.In this case itisnecessary lo
sufficient spacefor this tobedone.In earlycases,with
createahockflexioninordertoreplacethecordin
orwithoutepiduralanaesthesia,theposturemay be
itscorrectposition.Failuretodo thismayresultinits
corrected byhand.The fetus is first repelled by pressing
occlusion,ending indeath of ie calf.Owing tothe
forward in is perineum, and thehand then grasps the
difficultyofextendingtheretainedlimbs,duetolack
fetal foot.Asthefootis drawn backthrough anarc,the
ofspace in front of thepelvis,hereare three essen-
hockisfirmlyflexcd andretropulsionismaintained as
tialrequirermentsinattemptingtocorrect the causeof
faraspossible;eventually,with thepoints of thedigits
the dystocia:namely,epiduralanaesthesia,fetalfluid
inthecupped hand,thefoot is lifted over thepelvic
supplementation and retropulsion,All manipula-
brim and thelimbis extended in thevagina.In cases in
tions shouldbeconductedvery carefully andgently
whichit is found to be impossible to extend the hock
for the danger of accidental perforation of the uterus
owing to the lack of space, an assistant is directed to
is a real one.The variable factor exerting the greatest
pass in an arm and to press forwards and upwards on
influenceontherelativedifficulty ofthecorrective
the point ofthe hock while the operator again tries,as
procedure-aswellasontheoutcomeoftheopera-
before,to bring thefoot into he pelvic canal.An alter-
tion -is the duration of dystocia prior to treatment.
nativemethodistosupplementmanualextensionby
Cases attended in early second-stage labourmay be
tractiononasnarefixedtotheretainedfootinthefol
deliveredquite easilybutwheretherehasbeen con-
lowingway.One endofanobstetric snare-towhich
siderable delay,with consequent loss offetalfluid,
maybe attachedSchriever'sintroducer-ispassed into
uterinecontraction and death of thefetus,amost
thebirth canal,around thehockflexure,broughtout
difficult andprotractedfetotomyoracaesareansec-
andpassed through theloop attheother end;therun-
tion may be necessary.There is a large proportion of
ning noose thus formed is applied to the metatarsus.
stillbirths among fetuses presented posteriorly.
Thenooseis thenmanipulated down thelimbuntil it
liesinthepastern,theshankofthenoosebeingplaced
Hockflexionposture
betweenthe digits,sothatwhen tractionisapplied to
Cattle
it the fetlock and pastern joints are flexed (Fig.15.15).
After again repelling the fetus the obstetrician grasps
The condition is usually bilateral (Fig. 15.14). The
the foot and,as the assistant pulls on the snare, the
pointsofthehockmaybefeltinfrontafthepelvicbrim
extremityisliftedoverihepelvicbrim.Castinglhecow
ormaybefirmlyengagedin thematernal birthcanal.An
andplacingherindorsalrecumbencycan alsoprovide
estimatewill bemadeof the likely degreeof difficulty
morespacefor themanipulation.
in correction,and a decision made onwhetherepidu-
In the occasional case where it is impossible to
ralanaesthesia and/orfetalfuidreplacementswill be
extend the hock and the calf is dead,simple feto
needed.The aim of the manipulative procedureis to
tomy may beperformed (see Ch.19).If thecalfis
extend thehockjoint(s);thedifficulty isinprocuring
alive, then a caesarean operation will be necessary.
Fig.15.14Dispositionof the calf:posteriorpresentation,dorsalposition,bilateralhockflexionposture.
294
Chapter
151
Dystocia due to postuiral defects: treatment
Fig.15.15 Disposition of the calf:as in Figure 15.14.Correction using the hand and a digital snare
Horses
Themethods used are those described for cattle but,
owing to the longer limbs of the foal, the procedure
is much more difficult and more frequent recourse to
fetotomy or a caesarean operation will be required.
If the foal should survive the initial unsuccessful
manipulative attempt at correction it is worthwhile
anaesthetizing the mare and again irying to extend
the limb with her in dorsal recumbency, preferably
with the hind end raised.
Hip flexion posture
Cattle
When both hind legs are retained in the uterus - a
Fig.15.16 Disposition of the calf: posterior presentation,
commoner condition than unilateral retention
dorsal position, bilateral h p flexion posture (breech
presentation).
the case is describedasbreechh presentation';
where much delay has occurred before correction
is attempted, this constitutes one of the most diffi-
view to bringing the retained limbs within reach,
cult types of dystocia deall with by veterinary obste-
when the leg may be grasped as near to the hock as
tricians.Usually, on vaginal examination,the calf's
possible. Traction on the limb converts the posture
tail is recognized (Fig. 15.16).The degree of engage-
into hockflexion,from which point the previously
ment of the fetus in thematernal pelvis varies, and
describedprocedure is carried out.Ifit isimpossible
in some cases the hand cannoi be passed to the
to bring the hock within reach, and the calf is dead.
hocks of the calf.The aim of the treatment is tocon-
then fetotomy may be performed (see Ch. 19).
vert the condition into one of hock flexionposture
Although it is somewhat cumbersome procedure,
and then proceed accordingly. Again, the need for
and in most cases is not necessary when epidural
epidural anaesthesia and fetalfluid supplement will
anaesthesia is employed,there is little doubr that,
be primary considerations. In recent cases neither
where difficulty is experienced in extending the legs
will be needed but in a protracted case both will be
of a breech presentation, casting the cow and plac
invaluable. The manipulative procedure is 1o repel
ing her in dorsal recumbency, preferably with the
the calf'sperineum forwards andupwards witha
hindquarters raised, can be of tremendous help.
295
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
In the case ofan impacted breech presentation ofa
dead fetus,an alternative proceduretopercutaneous
fetotomy, suggested by Graham (1979), is to cause
fracture and collapse of the fetal pelvis by introduc-
ing a long-handled hook through an incision in the
fetal perineum. The 75 cm blunt hook engages (he
pelvic brim and the fetal pelvis is fractured by abrupt
backward traction. The procedure is repeated once
or twice so as to ensure sufficient pelvic collapse.
Traction on the unextended,lubricated breech,with
the aid of Krey's hooks, may then succeed
Horses
Occasionally, a mare will foal unaided despite
complete retention of the hindlimbs. However,
to extend the limbs, as described for cattle. Much
Fig.15.18 Diagnosis:pcsterior presentation,dorsal position,
greater difficulty will be experienced because of the
bilateral hip flexion posture (breech presentation).(From a
longer limbsofhefoal,and tereis a very real dan
ger of rupture of the uterus by the fetal foot.Serious
Society,c. 1890.)
consideration shouldbe given to anaesthetizing the
mare andplacingherin dorsal recumbency with the
lindquarters elevated (Fig.15.17)
If. after a proper effort, attempts to extend the
Hock flexion posture and hip flexion
hindlimbs are unsuccessful and the foal is still alive,
posture in the ewe and doe goat
no time should be lost before resorting to a caesarean
A considerable proportion of twin lambs are pre-
operalion. lf, as is more lilkely, the foal is dead, then
under general anaesthesia and following amputation
sented posteriorly and,because of lack of uterine
space, especially where both lambs occupy one uter-
of one hindlimb by means of the wire-saw tubular
ine horn,one orboth hindlegs may fail to extend
fetotome,it should bepossible to deliver thefoal by
inio the vagina (Fig.15.18).Thus, in locks with a
traction as described for cattle in Chapter 19.
high proportion of twins, hock flexion and hip lex-
ion postures will be common causes of dystocia.
These malpostures may be corrected in the man-
ner described for cattle butbecause twin lambs are
smaller than singles and since it is a simple mat-
ter to raise the ewe's hindquarters, the requisite
manoeuvres are much more easily performed than
in cattle.In all delayed cases,fetal fluid supple
ment is indicated. The manipulation of the fetus,
including its retropulsion, should be very gently
performed.
In cases ofirreducible malposture in dead lambs
appropriate fetotomy or a caesarean operation can
be performed.
Reference
Fig. 15.17 Disposifion of the foal: bilateral hip flexion posture
in the mare (breech presentation).
Graham JA 1979 J Am Ve1 Med Assoc 174:169
296
16
Chapter
David Noakes
Dystocia due to faulty position and presentation,
twins and fetal monsters
Such rotation is easier to perform with the patient
Faulty position
standing.In obstinatecases epidural anaesthesia is
extremely useful.
Faulty position (malpresentation)of the fetus is
encounteredmore frequently in horses than in cat-
Anterior presentation,lateral
le.This is considered tobe dueto the fact that,in
position (horse and cattle)
lategestation orfirst-stage labourin horses(but not
in catle),a physiological rotation of the fetus from
In the case of a live calf or foal,the obstetrician
theventral to thedorsalposition occurs,andocca
passes his/her hand to thefetal head and,by means
sionally this fails.The fetus then presents longitu-
of thethumbandmiddlefinger,pressesonthefetal
dinally-usuallyanteriorly,butsometimesposteriorly-
eyeballs,the latter being protected by the eyelids.
eitherwith itsvertebral column appliedtoone side
Firm pressurecauses a convulsivereflexresponsein
of the uterus(right or left lateral position)or facing
the fetus and,by applying arotational forcein the
thefloor of the birth canal(ventral position).The
appropriatedirection,itis easy toturnthefetusinto
process wherebythe bovine or ovine fetus some-
the dorsal position.The fetal nose and forelimbs
timescomes to liein ventral position isnotunder-
arethen advanced into the maternalpelvis and the
stood.It ishardly likely to be a gestational position;
maternal expulsive efforrs are assisted by grasping
more probably it arises during the first stage of
both forelimbs and gently pulling on them,and at
labour,when the uterine peristaltic force generates
the same time applying a rotational force Should
a vigorousreflexresponse inihe fetusthat causes
this method fail,then snares are attached to the
it torotate about itslongitudinalaxis.The mecha-
limbs andpossibly caudal epidural anaestlesia is
nismwouldseem tobesimilar,oridentical,tothat
induced;rotation is performed mechanically,firstly
which causes torsion ofthe uterus.Presumably the
by repelling the fetus as far cranially as possible,
fetusmoveswith the amnion,thefetus and amnion
crossing the snares in the appropriate direction and
revolving within the allantochorion.The greater
then by applying traction. Such a force tends to
freedomoftheamnionwithintheallantoisofthe
result in the snares becoming more or less parallel,
mare,as compared with thecow,would facilitate
whichcanonlyoccur if thefetusrotates aboutits
this change of position.
longitudinal axis.It is important to ensure that the
In ordertomakebirth possible,fetusesinlateral
snares are crossed in the right direction so that rota-
orventralpositionmustberotatedintothenormal
tion of the fetus is not increased.Uinless the degree
(dorsal) upright position. This can be achieved by
of faulty disposition is onlymodest,theprocedure
first repelling the fetus and then rotating it by appro-
will require to berepeated many times before the
priate force applied to the presenting extremity.
defect is fully corrected,and birth can be completed
297
Part
LE
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
by traction.For all of the meihods described to be
effective, it is critical that there should be plenty of
fetal fluid supplementation.
Anteriorpresentation,ventral
position (horse and cattle)
The same methods as described for the correction
ofa lateralposition defect can be used,although
the procedures will usually need to be repeated sev-
eral times. Placing the dam in dorsal recumbency
with the hindquarters raised will faciliiate the
procedure.
If thecalf or foal should rest on its back with the
head and limbs fexed on to its neck and thorax,the
fetus must first berepelledsothat thehead and fore-
Fig.16.1 Disposition of the foal:posterior presentation,ventral
limbs canbe extended.Rotation is then carried out.
position,extended posture; penetration of thercofof the
vagina and floor' of the vagina resulting in rectovaginal rupture.
Posterior presentation, lateral
position (horse and cattle)
supineposition and infusingfetalfluid supplement,
The operator introduces a hand and grasps the sti-
rotation is much easier in this species; instrumenis
fle region of the upper limb. Simultaneous retropul-
 are seldom required.
sion and downward pressure are applied to rotate
the fetus through 90°.
Faulty presentation
Posterior presentation,ventral
position (horse and cattle)
Instead of the long axis of the fetus being in line
The operator introduces ahand between the fetal
with thebirthcanal itmaybedisposedvertically
hindlimbs and up to the inguinal region, where one
or transversely fo the pelvic inlet. Owing to limita
of the thighs is grasped; then, pushing forwards,
tion of space in the sagittal plane, absolute vertical
the operatorrotatesthefetusthrough ahalf-circle.
presentation is not possiblebut oblique vertical pre
Failing this,traction on crossed limb snares should
sentation occurs rarely, in mares rather than cows.
be used, or if the hindlimbs are protruding suffi-
According to whether the fetal vertebral column or
ciently from the vulva, an alternative procedure is
abrdomen is presented at the pelvic inlei, such dys-
toplace a traction bar (a length of broom handle
tociasare described as dorsovertical orventroverti
willsuffice if a specific instrument isunavailable)
cal presentations.Transverse presentations are also
between the projecting hind feet and to bind it to
uncommon and aremore likely to beencountered
them by means of a snare;rotational force is then
in the mare; they may be ventrotransverse or dor-
applied to the traction bar.
sotransverse and,again,oblique variants are more
There is a grave risk that the hind feet of a foal
often seen.
in posterior presentation, ventral position,will pen-
All dystocias that arisefrom defects ofpresentation
etrate the vagina and rectum (Fig. 16.1). In such a
are serious, the special form of bicornual transverse
case a caesarean operation should be perforrmed and
presentation of the mare being notorious.The aim
the rectovaginal fistula repaired later.
in all cases is to achieveversion of the fetus so that
a vertical or transverse presentation is converted into
Dystocia due to defects of position
a longitudinal one. Obviously the nearer extrem-
in sheep and goats
ity should bemoved towards the pelvicinlet but
where both extremities are equally distant it is usu-
The methods of treatment are those described for the
ally simpler to convert toposterior presentation (two
horse and cattle. By raising the ewe into the inclined
298
Chapter
|161
Dystocia due to faulty position and presentation, twins and fetal monsters
Oblique dorsovertical presentation
Dog-sittingposition'aptly describes the dystocia,
(horse andcattle)
thefoalbeingdisposedwithitsforeendadvanced1o
a variable degree inthevaginaanditshindpartsin
According to whether the head or hreech isnearer
the uterus.It differs from normal anterior presenta-
thepelvicinlet,thepresentationis convertedinto
tioninthatthehindfeetalsopassintothebirth canal
anterior or posterior longitudinal.An attempt is
andrestonthepelvicbrin.Thus,themorethefetus
madetobringthe feialexiremity(headand/or
is pulled,the reateris theimpaction.Most cases are
limbs)to thepelvicinlet andfirst to convert the
severelyimpacted,but after theinduction of epidu-
defectintoaventrallongitudinalpresentation.
ral anaesthesia and the infusion oflubricantfluid
The fetus can then berotated to the dorsal position
into the uterus,an attempt should alwaysbemade
asdescribedearlier.Retropulsion and thepresence
torepelthefetus sufficiently to allow thehindfeet
ofcopiousfluid(naturalorartificial)in theuterus
tobepushed off the pelvic brim into the uterus and
arebothessential.Agrip is taken on thefetus by
thus toconvert thedystociainto asimpleanterior
means of Krey's hook as near as possible to the
presentation.Traction is thenapplied,Placing the
more proximal fetal extremity.Then,while retro-
mareorcow in dorsalrecumbencywiththehind-
pulsion is applied,the hook is pulled on with a
quarterselevatedoftenhelps.Shouldthisattempt
view to bringingtheforeor hindendof thefetus
fail, then a caesarian operation is the only effective
tothe pelvicinlet.After adjustmenisofposition
method of treatment. In a case of dog-sitting posi-
and posture,thefetus is then delivered by gentle
tion where the head,neck and forelimbs protrude
traction.
fromthevulva,retropulsion willnotsucceed.
Should version not be practicable,a caesarean
Where swelling of thevaginal mucosa prevents
operation should be performed.
vaginalmanipulation,a caesareanoperationshould
beperformed.
Oblique ventrovertical presentation
(horse and cattle)('dog-sitting
position')
Dorsotransverse presentation (horse
andcattle)
Whereas this abnormality (Fig. 16.2) is more fre-
This is arare cause of dystocia (Figs.16.3,16.4) but
quent than thepreceding,it isstill rareandis only
lilelytobeencounteredinthemare.However,when
obliquevariantsofitoccurinboththemareand
cow.The obstetrician should ascertain the polarity
present it shouldcause no difficulty in diagnosis;if
theveterinary surgeon iscalledtoa foalingmare
ofthefetus and decidewhichextremityisnearerthe
fromwhichthefetalheadandforelimbsprotrude,
pelvic inlet.The technique of correction required
andtowhichlaytractionhasbeenappliedwith-
involvesrepulsion ofthe fetus and the advance
out success,itisvery probablya case ofdog-sitting
mentofitsnearerextremitytothebirthcanal.
position'oversize being very unlikely in mares.
Unless one extremity is within easy reach,uter-
ineversion islikelytobeanextremelydifficultor
impossible task inboth thecow andmare.If there
appears to be a chance of success, the cow should
begiven an epidural anaesthetic,and in themare
general anaesthesia should be induced, so that she
can beplaced onherback.Fetalfluid supplement
is then instilled and an attempt is made bymanip
ulationoftheproximalfetalextremitytoturnthe
fetus into ventral position,anterior or posterior
presentation.Thenext step is torotate the fetus
into dorsalposition.Finally,itis delivered by trac
tion.lfafterashort,determinedeffortitisobvious
that version cannot be achieved, a caesarean oper-
ationshouldbeperformedimmediately.Fetotomy
isvery difficult tocarry out in this typeofdystocia
Fig.16.2Disposition of the foal:dog-sitting position
andconsequentlyisnotrecommended.
299
Part
31
Dystociaandother disorders associatedwithparturition
Ventrotransversepresentation
(horse and'cattle)
Thispresentation(Fig.16.5)ismorelikely tobe seen
in the mare than in he cow, and oblique variants of
itare more usual.A variable numberof fetal append
agesmayenter thematernalpelvis.Itispossible that
the head as well as the forelimbs are in the vagina
sented.The condition must be distinguished from
twinsanddoublemonstersandfrom schistosoma
reflexus.The aim ofvaginal interference is first to
convert theabnormalityintolongitudinal-usually
posterior-presentation,ventral position;this means
that theposterior extremitymust beadvancedwhile
the anterior extremityisrepelled.Generalanaesthe-
sia anddorsalrecumbencyarehelpfulinthemare.
Unless progress with version is soon apparent,the
caesarean operationisrecommendedforbothmare
and cow（see Ch.20).
Inthebicormual typeof transverse preseniation pecu-
liar tomares the fetalextremities are disposed in
the two horns and its trunk lies across the anterior
Fig.16.3Disposition of the foal:dorsotransverse presenta
tion,uterinebody gestation.
Fig.16.5 Disposition of the foal: ventrotransverse presentation;
Fig.16.4Disposition of the calf:dorsotransverse presentation.
uterine body gestation.
300
Chapter
[16]
Dystocia due to faulty position and presentation, twins and fetal monsters
Dystocia due to defects of
presentation in sheep and goats
Themethodsoftreatmentarethosedescribedforthe
mare and cow.By raising the ewe into the inclined,
supineposition andbyinfusingfetal fluid supple-
ment,versionis much easier in this species but,in
protracted dystocia,caesarean section may provide
an easier solution.
Dystocia due to twins
Twin gestation in cattle often culminates in dysto
cia but in mares abortion is a more likely sequel
(see Ch.26).It is arguable whether twin gesiation
predisposesto dystocia insheepandgoats,because
the increased likelihood ofmaldisposition and the
added risk of simultaneouspresentation dystocia
are balanced by smaller fetuses and a reduction in
fetopelvic disproportion.Twin dystocia is of three
types:
·both fetuses present simultaneously and become
impacted in the maternal pelvis (Fig.16.7)
Fig.16.6Disposition of the foal:ventrotransversepresentation
withventral displacement of theuterusinthemare,bicornual
·one fetus only is presented but cannot be born
gestation.
because of faulty disposition usually dueto failure
of normal extension of limbs or head because of
insufficientuterine space
portion of the uterine body (Fig. 16.6).Ventral dis-
·inuterineinertia,defectiveuterinecontractions are
placementoftheuterusmayhaveoccurred and,
causedeitherbyoverstretchingoftheuterusbythe
if so,it may be impossible to palpate the fetus.As
excessivefetal load orbyprematurebirth.When
soonasthepresentationisrecognized acaesarean
inertiaispresentbirthofthefirstorsecondfetus
does not proceed although presentation is normal.
operationshouldbeperformed.
Fig.16.7Sinultaneous engagermentof twins.One twinisinanteriorpresentation,dorsalposition,shoulderflexionposture;the
otherisin posterior presentation,dorsal position,exiendedposture.
301
Part
3
Dystocia andother disorders associatedwithparturition
The smaller size of twin fetusesfacilitatesmanipu-
lativecorrectionanddelivery;forthesamereason
natural orobstetricdelivery may be possible despite
defective posture.
In the treatment of twin dystocia,thefirst essen-
tial is to determine which fetal appendage(s) is
(are)presented andits(their)relationship to each
of the fetuses.If this is made a rule,the obste
trician will not blunderinto applyingtraction
simultaneously to two fetuses.Nor should twins
be mistaken for a schistosome (Fig.16.8), double
monster(Fig.16.9)or ventrotransversepresenta-
tionofa single fetus(Fig.16.5).
Where a twin is presentedwith an abnormality of
posture,it is treated as if it were a single fetus;in
such cases the presence of twins may not be known-
but may be suspected on account of small fetal
size and thehistory of the dam-until theuterus
issearched afterdelivery andanotherfetusfound
Again,the association of uterine inertia with twins
maybe known only after delivery of thefist fetus.
Little attention hasbeengiven by veterinary sur-
geons to therelationshipbetween the typeof dys-
tocia andthedispositionofthetwinswithin the
uterus. Simultaneous presentation would seem
Fig.16.9 Conjoined twin Charolais calves.
probable when a twin from each horn approached
thepelvicinlet;abnormalityofposture and inertia
wouldbemore likelywhenboth fetusesoccupied
When twins areknowntobepresent andretropul-
the same horn.However,Anderson etal (1978) saw
sionisrequired toallowoneanunimpededassisted
exitortoprovidespaceinorder tocorrect asimple
no dystocia in 16 cases of experimentally induced
malposture,it should beperformed very carefully.
twinningin cows,ini whicha 5-day embryo was
There is a much greater likelihood of causing uter-
placed in each uterine horn.Their observations,
ine rupture when twins are present,in cattle and
and the clinical experience of the author,indi-
especiallyin sheep andgoats.Spontaneousrupture
catethatdystocia ismorelikelywithunicornual
has been seen when both fetuses were in the same
twinning.
horn.
There are many stillbirths among catle twins;
the second calf tobeborn is more likely to survive.
Breechpresentations arecommon.
Simultaneous presentation of twins (Figs.16.7 and
16.10) is treated in logical sequence.The polarity of
the fetuses is determined,themore advanced fetus
recognized and its presenting extremity appropriately
snared.Any defect ofpresentation,position or pos-
ture must be diagnosed and treated;correction may
be greatly facilitatedbymeans of epidural anaesthe-
sia.Then,with continuing retropulsion on theless
advanced fetus,thenearer oneisbroughtinto thepel-
vis and deliveredby simpletraction.The other fetus,
which may bepresented inthe opposite direction,is
thenappropriatelymanipulated.Thedeliveryofovine
Fig.16.8Schistosome afterremoval bycaesarian operation.
twins ismore easilyachievedifanassistantholds
302
Chapter
1161
Dystocia due to faulty position and presentation, twins and fetal monsters
Dystocia due to monsters
Monstrosities most often cause dystocia in dairy
cattle,the commonest examplebeing schistosoma
reflexus; next in order of frequency are ankylo-
sed calves.including perosomus elumbis; double
monsters;dropsical fetuses,including anasarcous
and hydrocephalic calves: and achondroplastic
monsiers (see Ch.4).The same varieties occur,but
lo a lesser extent, in sheep.With the notable excep-
tion of wryneck, monstrosities are uncommon in
mares.Instances of hydrocephalus,double mon-
sters and perosomus elumbis occur occasionally
in pigs.
With the exception of anasarcous fetuses, gross
malformation is often associated with ankylosis of
joints and muscular atrophyconsequently many
Fig. 16.10 Simultaneous engagement of twin lambs. One
monsters weigh less than normal calves.This, coll-
twin is in antericr presentation,dorsal position,extended
pled with the fact that they are sometimes associ-
posture; the other is in posterior presentation, dorsal position,
ated with abortion or premature birth,means that
extended posture (From a paper by H. Leeney in Transactions
a monster may be sufficiently small to be passed
of the Highland Agricul:ural Society,c.1890.)
spontaneously. However, the grossly irregular devel-
opment, including bending or twisting of ihe verte-
bral column and ankylosis or duplication of limbs,
lion.When the ewe is delivered of twins the uterus
means that a wider than normal fetal diameter
should alwaysbeexamined for a third fetus.
presents at the pelvic inlet and that severe dystocia
In occasional cases of prolonged delay, corrective
results.
manipulation is inpossible and fetotomy of the pre-
senting fetus may be required. Severe pelvic impac-
tion of dead feruses may be morereadily relieved by
Principles of the delivery of
a caesarean operation.
monstrosities
The afterbirth of bovine twins is likely to be
retained.
Recognition of the exact disposition of the fetal
Vandeplassche et al (1970) have recorded useful
extremities,and an estimate of fetal size, may be
data on 44cases ofequine twin gestation.Allpairs
very difficult.The obstetrician must then consider
were of dizygotic origin (i.e. non-identical). In 33
whether careful traction -with due regard to lubri-
of 34 twin pregnancies, it was found that one fetus
cation and protection of thebirth canal from irreg-
occupied eachhorn;in thiereimaining case the twins
ularly disposed appendages -is likely to succeed.
wereinthesame horn.Of44livefoalsborn,37were
Before an attempt at vaginal delivery,the diameter
reared.The study showed that there was a much
of anasarcous, ascitic and hydrocephalic fetuses (see
smaller likelihood of viable twin foals being born to
Ch. 4) may be reduced by appropriate multiple or
thoroughbredmares than to Belgian draught mares,
single incisions with a fetotomy knife. If moder-
and this differencemight berelatedto a better uter-
ate traction does not soon succeed,fetotomy (see
ine capacity in the draught mare (Vandeplassche
Ch. 19) or a caesarean operation (see Ch.20) must
et al1970).
be employed. Occasionally, monstrosities present
Mostcases of equine twin conception arefollowed
baffling problems to the obstetrician. This happens
by early death of one or both of the conceptuses (see
when the presenting part of the fetus is normal and
Ch. 26). About 2% of equine gestations start as nor-
the distal extremity is grossly malformed; birth pro-
mal twin fetal development,but mummification
ceeds normally until the malformed portion engages
or abortion frequently occur so that fewer than1%
the pelvic inlet. The cause is not apparent and may
reach term.
be impossible to ascertain. Examples are provided
303
Part
31
Dystociaandother disordersassociatedwithparturition
by perosomus elumbis where the front half of the
calfnegotiatesthebirth canal but the ankylosed
and distorted hindlimbs becomeimpacted;a hydro-
cephalicfetus inposterior presentation;and cases of
anterior duplication presented posteriorly.In these
instances,heavy but unsuccessful traction hasusu
allybeen appliedbefore the arrival oftheveteri-
nary surgeon.This history,together with the normal
appearanceof the presenting portion,shouldmake
the veterinary surgeon suspicious that an abnormal-
ity is present in the distal portion.A caesarean oper-
ationprovidestheeasiestsolution.
Obstetricmanagement of
schistosoma reflexus
Thismostfamiliarbovinemonstrosity requires spe-
cialconsideration.Thefeaturesofthemalformation
weredescribedin Chapter4.Theweightof themon-
ster calf is usually around 22 kg. lt may occur in other
ruminants and swine,and may bepresentedviscer-
ally orbyitsextremities.It is not uncommon for a
fetusinvisceralpresentation tobenaturallyborn.
With this type of dystocia,fetalviscera may be
seen protruding from ihevulva（Figs.16.11,16.12);
if not,they are soon located byvaginal exploration.
Thevisceramaybemistakenforthoseofthemother
and uterinerupturemay be suspected,but it should
Fig.16.11Friesian heifer witha schistosoma reflexuscalf in
not be difficult by careful examination todispose of
visceral presentationresulting in theappearance of the fetal
thissuspicion,the absence ofa uterine tear and the
viscera at thevulva.
continuity of the viscera with the fetus being soon
established.Theviscera mustbe torn away from the
fetus,whoserigidvertebral angulation may then be
feltatthepelvicbrim.Thefetal diameterisnowcom-
paredwith that of the birth canal;whereit seems
favourabletobirth,Krey'shooks arefastenedtothe
presentingfetus.Reasonable traction,withadequate
lubrication,isnow applied,theveterinary surgen
paying particular regard to the possibility of damage
bybonyfetalprominencestothebirthcanal.In this
way, the expulsive efforts of the cow are gently aided,
andsmooth deliverymay be achieved.Figure 16.13
shows a schistosome delivered bymanipulation and
tractionfrom thecowshown inFigure16.12.1f,after
a short period of such traction,it is obvious that
safevaginal delivery is notpossible,then fetotomy
Ch.20) should be performed.If the fetus is alive and
invisceral presentation,then itis easytokill thecalf
by exsanguination by grasping theheart andruptur-
Fig.16.12Friesiancowwith a schistosomareflexuscalf in
ing the major vessels by giving it a sudden tug.
visceral presentation;thecalfis shown inFigure16.13.
304
Chapter
|16】
Dystocia due to faulty position and presentation, twins and fetal monsters
Fig.16.14Schistosoma reflexus presenting byits extremities;
best treatedbya caesarianoperation.
caesareanoperationfortheremovalofaschistosome,
the veterinary surgeon should always consider the
advantage of fetotomy from thelaparotomy site;in
Fig.16.13Schistosomedeliveredfromcowshownin
thisway therequisitelength of theuterineincision
Figure 16.12.
maybekeptwithinreasonableboundsand therisk
ofuterine rupture during extractionminimized (see
Ch.20 on the caesarean operation).
When a schistosome presents by its extremities
After successful removal ofa schistosome,the
three or four legs,with or without the head-the
uterus should alwaysbe searched for injury andto
excessivefetaldiameter,togetherwiththeankylosis
ensurethe absenceofasecondfetus.
of joints, is lilkely to prevent natural or manipulative
The sameconsiderations apply to thetreatment of
delivery per vaginam (Fig.16.14) and unless the
monstrosities in sheep.
fetusis very small in relation to the maternal pelvis-
asmightoccurinaschistosometwintoanormal
calf-time should not be wasted on an attempt
References
at vaginal delivery.A caesarean operation will be
Anderson GB,Cupps PT,DrosMet al 1978Anim Sci
presentation.Exceptions may bemet in the case of
46:449
small fetuseswhere the removal of a head or single
VandeplasscheM,PodliachoukL,Beaud R1970CanIComp
limbwill makebirthpossible.When performing the
Med34:281
305
17
Chapter
DavidNoakes
Injuries and diseases incidental to parturition
There are numerous accidents and diseases that
Postpartum haemorrhage
accompanyorfollowparturition.Threethatfollow
delivery of thefetusnamelyprolapseof theuterus,
retentionofthe fetalmembranesandpuerperal
Bleeding from the maternal side of the placenta in
infection,are considered elsewhere(see Chs18,22).
natural separation ofthe afterbirth is onlylikely in
Traumaticlesions of the softtissues ofthe genital
carnivora,wherebreakdownofthemarginal haema-
tractorbonypelvismayleadtofatal haemorrhage
toma is accompaniedby agreen orbrown discharge
or infection,or to disability duetofraciures,dislo-
of altered blood. If,however, premature dehiscence
cations or paralysis. Other complications of parturi-
occurs when the afterbirth is removed during an
tion comprise displacement,hernia and rupture of
elective caesarean operation,severe and even fatal
the pelvic or abdominal organs.Parturition and the
haemorrhagemay follow.Inveterinary obstetrics,
puerperiummay also be complicated bymetabolic
the usual cause of serious haemorrhage is lacera-
diseases,particularlyhypocalcaemia andketonaemia,
tion of a uterine bloodvesselbya fetal appendage,
andby displacementofthe abomasum.A difficult
obsteuricinstrumentor thehandof theobstetrician.
foalingmaybefollowedbylaminitisor tetanusand
Afterremovalof thefetus,much bloodmay accu-
in all species puerperal animals may incur embolic
mulate in the uterusbefore it begins toescapevia
pneumonia,toxaemia,septicaemia andpyaemia as
thevagina;alternatively,blood may drain through a
sequelstouterine infection.Endocarditis,unthrifti
tearintheuterinewallinto theabdomen.
ness and sterility are possible later sequelae.
When,after delivery of the offspring there is a
While spontaneous trauma,rupture or displace-
profusehaemorrhagefrom thevulva,themost likely
ment may ocur in unassisted deliveries, they are
sourceis thebrokenendsofthevesselsof theumbil
rare.The most frequent cause of parturient and post-
ical cord,which have recoiled into the vagina.This
parturient disease is delay in giving obstetric aid to
is likely to occur in uterine inertia where, owing to
dystocia cases, or bad and unsympathetic obstetri-
pooruterine contractions,much of theblood from
calpractice,frequentlybyunskilled individuals.For
thefetal sideoftheplacenta（allantochorion)isnot
thisreason itisvery impoitant fortheveterinarian
expelled into thefetus during second-stage labour.
attending dystocias to determine if,and what,lay
Similar bleedingfrom mares is seen after the stud-
assistancehasbeengiven,bothby questioningthe
groom has hastened a normal delivery by traction
personresponsibleforthecareandalsobyclinical
on thefetus andhasimmediatelyligated theumbili-
examinationofthegenitaltract.Ifskilledattention
calcord(near tothiefetalabdomen)andthensev-
is provided at the correct timeto animalswithdysto-
eredit.Suchhaemorrhagefrom theallantochorion
cia,thefrequencyand severity of postparturient dis-
does not affect the dam, but the young animal is
easecanbemarkedlyreduced
therebydeprivedofanaturalbloodtransfusionand
306
Chapter
171
 Injuries and diseases incidental to parturition
this could be a cause of cerebral anoxia in newhorn
vulva are more likely to be lacerated than the dilal-
foals.
able vagina. The retroperitoneal fat surrounding the
If, when the postparturient uterine examination is
vagina of heifers of the beef breeds makes such ani
being conducted, profuse haemorrhage is occurring
mals particularly prone to vaginal contusion when
from a uterine laceration,prompt contraction of the
the fetus is oversized. Infection with Fusobacierium
uterus should be promoted by means of an injection
necrophorum is then probable, and a most severe
of oxytocin. Next day, any blood clots should be
necrotic vaginitis ensues. The condition is very pain-
manually removed. Haemorrhage associated with
ful and causes continuous, exhausting straining and
uterine rupture is attended towhen the uterine tear
marked toxaemia. Pyogenic infection is also pos-
is repaired. When severe haemorrhage is occurring
sible.All vaginal contusions and lacerations should
from a ruptured vaginal vessel, an attempt must be
be treated with mild emollient and antibiotic prepa-
made to close the vessel. Ligation is usually not prac-
rations;parenteral antibiotics shouldalso be given
ticable but artery forceps may be applied and left on
Caudal epidural anaesthesia, particularly when xyla-
for 24hours.Where the vessel cannot be secured, an
zine is used, gives temporary relief from straining
intravaginal pressurepack canbe improvisedwith a
(see Ch.12).
large clean towel, or by the insertion of a large roll of
Rupture of the vagina should be repaired, if pos-
cotton wool. General symptoms of severe haemor-
rhage and shock can be caunteracted by blood trans-
Infection following rupture may give rise to perito-
fusion (4-5 litres) from a neighbouring animal, or
nitis,to severepelviccellulitiswith marked toxaemia
the use of blood volume expanders.
and straining, or to abscess formation with subse-
Fatal haemorrhage from vessels in the broad lig-
quent vaginal constriction.Lacerations of the cervix
ament occurs in the mare and cow. Rooney (1964)
may be sutured by applying vulsellum retraction for-
recorded10casesoffatal haemorrhagefrom the ovar-
ceps to the organ and withdrawing it to the vulva.
ian,uterine or external iliac arteries in foaling (eight)
Wounds to the vulva and perineum are generally
or pregnant (two) mares. All were aged mares (>11
easily sutured,with any devitalized tissue, includ-
years)and mine of tien were thoroughbreds.The
ing any loosely attached portions of fat being first
ruptures were associated with aneurysms or degen-
removed. lf lacerations of the vulva and perineun
erative changes in the arteries,and it was presumed
areleft unsutured,scar tissue formation and distor
tion impair the sphincter action of the vulva,with
consequent aspiration of air,vaginitis and metritis;
during pregnancy associated with reduced elasticity;
a special,and much more difficult,operationis then
required.
(McGladdery 2001).Sometimes in mares thehae-
morrhage is contained within the broad liganent,
ration hasbeen perfornmed in the mare and the vulva
with the formation of a large haematoma;this can
hasbeenincised atparturition to allowbirth of the
be diagnosed by careful transrecial ultrasonography,
foal,the incised tissue should be resutured imme
which shows a hyperechoic structure in the broad lig-
diately after delivery.Repair of the vulva,perineum
ament.Attempts at suirgical repair are rarely success-
and cervix may be conveniently carried out under
fil,sinre stress-induced hypertension may exacerbate
caudal epidural anaesthesia.
the problem (McGladdery 2001).A more cautious
In cows, previously unsuspected organizing hae-
approach is preferable, such as sedation and the use
matomata of the vaginal wall may suddenly pro-
of blood transfusions and blood volume expanders,
lapse from the vulva 4-6 weeks after parturition.
with regular monitoring of blood values.
These lesions resemble fibromata but are not neo-
plastic and are easily excised.
Contusions and lacerations of
the birth canal and neighbouring
Haematoma of the vulva
structures
This is a sequel to contusion of the submucous tis-
sue during delivery. One lip of tlie vulva is usually
Anypart of thebirth canalmaysuffercontusion dur-
affected, and an obvious round swelling occupies the
ingforcible extraction of thefetusbut thecervix and
vulvar orifice (Fig. 17.1). The condition may arise
307
Part
31
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
poor relaxation of the vulva and perineum as well
as unsympathetic forced traction. These injuries may
be classifiedasfirst-, second-and third-degree tears
and rectovaginal fistulae.
Many heifers sustain slight superficial tearing of
the upper commissure or other part of the vulva (first
degree laceration) because of stretching during expul-
sion of the fetus, such lesions may heal satisfacto-
rilyby first intention without suturing,although it is
preferable to do so where possible. Tears that extend
more deeply into the perineum involving muscle
(second-degree laceration)destroy the sphincteric
effect of the vulva and lead to aspiration of air into
the vagina, even ihough the integrity of the anus
is not impaired.These require immediate surgical
repair. With greater stretching and tearing during the
second stage of labour, the wound may extend into,
and destroy, the anal sphincter, thus creating a clo-
aca through which faeces fall into the caudal vagina
(third-degree laceration) (Figs. 17.2A, 17.3). Despite
rapid epithelialization, the abnormal communica-
tion between the terminal rectum and vagina persists,
although its extent may be considerably reduced by
wound granulation complete surgical repair about 6
weeks after it occurred is required. Simple rectovagi-
nal fistulae (Figs. 17.4, 17.5) without damage to the
anal sphincter are uncommon spontaneous obstetri-
cal injuries in cattle,although they occur as develop-
mental anomalies in cases of anal atresia. They may
also result from an unsuccessful attempted closure of
Fig.17.1 Vulvarhaematoma;note that it involves the left
labium.
a third-degree perineal lareration in the mare.
In the mare, the mechanism of perineal tearing is
different. In this species, the initial injury is usually
spontaneously in the mare but in both cows and
perforation of the vaginal roof by a fetal forelimb,
mares it is likely to follow assisted delivery in which
which may be deflected dorsally during the second
considerable manipulation, or forced traction, was
stage of labour by a hymeneal rim. As a result of vig-
required. Haematoma of the vulva may be confused
orous sustained straining. the limbis then likely 1o
with prolapse, tumour or cyst of the vagina. If leff
perforate the rectum and be forced, possibly with
untreated, natural resolution usually occurs within a
the fetal head, through the anal orifice, which in
few weeks with resorption of fluid and regression of
turn may be ruptured. Early recognition of the injury
swelling: occasionally, pyogenic infection occurs and
may allow repositioning of the fetal extremities and
may be accompanied by fibrosis and distortion of the
normal vaginal delivery, but deliberate incision of
vulva, with vaginal aspiration. If left for 3 or 4 days
the perineum and anal sphincter is usually expedi-
after labour, the haematoma may be safely incised
ent if the rectum is perforated because a third-degree
and the clot removed without recurrence of haemor-
defect is easier to repair surgically than a rectovagi-
rhage. An abscess should be opened and drained.
nal fistula,which would otherwise result. Mares in
which a Caslick closure of the upper vulvar com-
missure is not reopened before foaling may sus-
Perineal injuries atparturition
tain a similar injury in a slighily different way, the
Serious perineal injuries orcur during the second
tear extending dorsally from the vulva, as in cows.
stage of labour in both the cow and the mare,mostly
Records of cases presented for repair indicate that
in primiparous animals and often associated with
third-degree tears are the most common perineal
308
Chapter
17
Injuries and diseases incidental to parturition
D
一
Fig.17.2Repairof third degrceperineal laceration in aFriesianheifer.(A)Theperineal laceration iscxposedwith thecowunder
caudal epidural anaesthesia.(B) Comrmencement of the dissection cf thevaginal mucosa.(C)Completion of the dissection of the
vaginal mucosa;ncte expcsed tissuereauy for suturing.(D)Commencement of clcsure.(E)Clcsure alnost completed.(F)Restoration
of acompleteshelf of tissuebetweenrectum andvagina;the dorsal commissure of thevulvawillrequirefurtherrepair.(Courtesy of
Dr.T.R.Ayliffe.)
injuryinthemare,butrectovaginal fistulaformation
siderabletissuedamageand adegreeofsuperficial
isstill more frequentin themare than thecow.By
sloughing is usual before granulation begins.The
contrast,second-degreedefectsarerareinthemare
extentofinevitabletissuenecrosisprejudicesthe
butnotuncommonin cows,simplybecauseof the
likelihoodoffirst-intentionhealingafterimmediate
different mechanisms of tearing in the two species.
suturing.It isnevertheless advisable to stitch deep
Perinealdefectsgranulateandareepithelialized
perinealwoundsthathavenotperforatedtheanal
rapidly,but they arelaceratedwounds with con-
sphincterassoonaspossible.Third-degree tearswith
309
Part
31
Dystociaandother disordersassociatedwithparturition
Fig.17.5Acquired rectovaginal fistulain a cow.With a
bandage passed through the fistula.
fuidsrworsestillaccumulationoffaecalol
inits terminal segment.Pneumovagina,in turn，by
distorting the lumen,may lead to pooling of urine
Fig.17.3 Third-degreeperineal defect in themare showing
cranialto the externalurethralmeatus.Inevitably
aflap of mucosa(f)attached to theroof of thevagina at the
inboth thecow and the mare,these factors result
caudal borderof theresidual shelf.
ingrossbacterialcontaminationand ascending
infection in thegenital tract.In both species,there-
foresizeable cloacallesionsresultininfertility and
other uses because of perineal incompetence.
In casesofrectovaginal fistula,thedegreeof faecal
contaminationofthevaginadependsontheextent
ofthefistula.Thefewanimals thatare abletomain-
tain a normal pregnancy are generally found to have
a caudallysitedlesionofverysmall diameter.
Surgicalintervention shouldbedelayeduntil all
tissue surfacesarecovered by epithelium and this
usually takes 6weeks or so.In the mare, the urinary
bladderissometimesevertedsoon aftertheinjury
occurs （Fig.17.6),but it is easily replaced and
retained if necessary with sutures.There is noneed
Fig.17.4Acquired rectovaginal fistula ina cow.Vulva dilated
forother treatment duringtheinterveningperiod
to vaginal opening to fistula.
except perhaps for tetanus prophylaxis in themare.
Second-degree defects are easily obliterated by
suripping the vaginal mucosa from the normal level
destruction of thesphincter andrectovaginal fistulae
ofthe upper vulval commissure dorsally on both
shouldbelefttoheal bygranulation andsurgical
sides and suturing the submucosal tissues as in a
reconstruction can be undertaken later if necessary.
Caslick operation.
The extent of such defects is considerably reduced
For many years, surgical reconstruction of the
bycicatrization andoccasionallysmall,obliquefis-
perineumwasbased on the techinique described
tulaein themareclosecompletely,butinmostcases
by Gotzein1938,inwhich,afterappropriatestrip
a significant defectremains.
ping of the mucosal surfaces, the residual shelf
The clinicaleffects ofa third-degreedefect aretwo-
between rectum andvagina was mobilized and fixed
fold:continuous aspiration of air into the vagina
ascaudallyaspossibleto separatethetwocavities.
andcontaminationofthevaginal lumenwithfaecal
The results were generally good but the operation
310
Chapter
171
Injuries and diseases incidental to parturition
forcepsareplacedonthecutaneousborders of the
cloaca down to the normal level of the upper vulvar
commissure and on the caudal edge of the residual
shelf. Bridges of skin across the defect are removed
and it is then possible to see a sharp demarca-
tion between the vaginal and rectal mucosae (Fig.
17.2A-C). The first stage of the procedure is to sep-
arate thevaginalmucousmembranefrom the tis-
sues that will subsequently be apposed to create a
shelf. The dissection begins at the level of the nor-
mal uppercommissure and is extennded dorsally on
the mucocutaneous border and then cranially on
bl
both sides along the junction of vaginal and rectal
mucous membranes until the incisions meei on the
caudal edge of the residual shelf. The final stage of
dissection is the separation of vaginal mucosa for
4 cm cranial to the edge of the shelf (Fig. 17.2B, C).
It is essential that all the vaginal mucous mem-
brane is removed from the tissues that are to be
sutured. There is minimal haemorrhage during the
Fig. 17.6 Third degree perineal laceration in a mare with
procedure and no need for hiaemostasis. In some
eversion of the bladder (bl)
cases,cicatrization results in considerable asymme-
try ofthecloaca,which should becorrected before
suluring is begun.The curtain of separated vaginal
mucosa is then included in the purse-string-type
resulted in ronsiderable postoperative pain and
sutures using an absorbable material thiat are placed
somelimes faecal impaction because ofreluctance
andtied seriallyfrom the depth ofthewound out-
to defecate.The method has largely been super-
wards (Fig.17.2D,E).The method of suturing is
seded by the technique described by Aanes (1964),
illustrated in Figure 17.7.
in which the rectum and vagina are separated by
It is most important that the stitches tighten prop-
the construction of a new shelf from tissues in situ
erly hecause dead space predisposcs to wound break-
without undue tension on suture lines.Aanes advo-
down.The operation is conpleted with imattress
cated a two-stage operation but the method to be
sutures in the perineal skin (Figs. 17.2F and 17.8).
described forrepair ofa third-degree defect is a one-
Further minor closure of the upper commissure may
stage procedure with other minor modifications of
be necessary under local anaesthetic infiltration when
his suturing technique.
the integrity of the repair has been properly tested
In cattle,the operation is ideally performed
a month or so later.It should be emphasized that,
under caudal epidural analgesia.The same tech-
although this operation restores breeding ability, it
nique can be used in the mare but the operation
does not prevent air movement through the incompe-
can equally well be performed in this species with
tentanal sphincter, aconsiderationthat may beimpor-
the animal in dorsal recumbency and the hind-
tant in mares that are to be used for other purposes.
quarters raised, under general anaesthesia. Cows
In such animals, a second operation to strengthen the
require no dietary preparation.In the mare, a laxa-
sphincter can be attempted later by stripping mucocu-
tive diet without roughage is advisable for 3 days
taneous tissues in the defective segment and suturing
beforehand. followed by overnight starvation.After
what muscle remnants can be identified. The horse's
proper cleansing of the site, the rectum is gently
anus is normally somewhat lax, and minor incompe-
packed with towelling:if the mare is anaesthetized,
tence is no great detriment. If attempted reconstruc-
thebladder is catheterized to divert urinefrom the
tion is unsuccessful, the operation can be repeated,
operation site. In cows, the defect is usually no
but the prognosis is then less good because of local
more than 6cm deep from the perineum but in
fibrosis and reduced vascularity.
the mare it is considerably longer and sometimes
Unless the vulval length is inadvertently short-
extends almost to the cervix.In both species, tissue
ened during reconstruction, subsequent parturition
311
Part
3
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
Normal
extent of
upper vulvar
commissure
OOOReflected mucosa
Purse-string type suture
Fig.17.7 Suturing technique for reconstruction cf the perineum.(A) Below the shelf.(B) Caudal to the shelif.
inboth the cow and tiemare usually occurs nor
Perineal defects are usually obvious in mares but
mally without the risk of vulval tearing or the need
are nevertheless sometimes not noticed by unwary
for episiotomy.
purchasers. They are less obvious in cattle, particu-
Paradoxically,a simple rectovaginal fistula ismore
larly if the anal orifice remains iniact.
difficult to repair than a third-degree defect. Aanes
(1964)recommends that such lesions should first
beconvertedinto a cloaca(asin a third-degree lacer-
ation) and repaired as such after granulation stops.
Damage to the lumbosacral
The deliberate destruction of perineum and anal
plexus
sphincter can be avoided by adopting a different
surgical approach to suchlesions.Unless the fistula
is deeply sited,it can be exposed satisfactorily by
When a large fetus is forcibly drawn into the mater-
a dorsal commissure episiotony that is extended
nal pelvis, the lumbar nerves, which pass over the
cranially under the anal sphincter and rectal floor
lumbosacral joint 1o form the anterior part of the
beyond the fistula (Fig.17.9).The rectal mucous
lumbosacral plexus, may be damaged; paralysis of
membrane lining the lesion can then be securely
the gluteal or obturator nerves is a possible result.
inverted with sutures placed in a transverse direction
This is particularly likely when an oversized fetus
inthe submucosal tissuesbeforetheepisiotomy is
becomes impacted in a state of hip-lock'(see Ch. 14).
repaired in the conventional way.
the nerves being trapped between thelumbosacral
312
Chapter
171
Injuries and diseases incidental to parturition
promontory of the mother and the iliac bones of
the calf. In addition, the obturator nerve, as it passes
down the inner surface of the iliac shaft, may be
damaged by alt oversized fetus.
Gluteal paralysis
lhe mare it occurs after a spontaneous birth.It is
recognized when the dam is found to have diffi-
culty in rising and when she wallks with ‘weakness
of thehindlimbs Later, atrophy of the gluteal mus
cles is apparent.Prognosis is favourable, the disabil-
ityusually disappearing in a few weeks,although
occasionally complete recovery may take months.
In warm weather the affected animal shiould be
placed in a paddock that is free from ditches and
obstacles; here a firmer foothold for getting up is
more likelythan in abarn or loose-box.The animal
may be helped to rise by lifting on its tail and then
steadying its hindquarters.In order that the mare
may suickle the foal and also rest on its fct, slings
may be usefully employed.If themare or cow can-
not get up within a few days of parturition the prog-
nosis is grave.
Obturator paralysis
Fig. 17.8 Completed one-stagereconstruction of the
Obturator paralysis is more frequent in cows than
perineum inaFriesiancow.
mares. The obturator nerve supplies the adductor
muscles ofthe thigh; thus when both nerves are dam-
aged the legs will be splayed and the cow is unable to
rise. If the cow is helped to its feet,the legs slide out
laterally. When paralysis is one-sided, the cow also
the affected leg is prevented from sliding outwards.
If thecow falls,there is ariskof limb fracture or dis-
location of the hip joint. Where there is complete
and bilateral paralysis,prognosis should beguarded;
where it is unilateral and the animal can walkwithi
assistance,the outlook is favourable.Hobbling
together of the hind legs with a strap applied above
each fetlock prevenis excessive abduction and sec-
ondary tearing of the adductor muscles or fracture
of the femoral neck during attempts to stand. Most
cases show rapid improvement within a few days
andprogress to a complete recovery.Ulnless there
Fig.17.9 A congenital rectovaginal fistula in a donkey
is marked improvement within a fortnight, recov
exposed by episiotomy.
ery is unlilkely. Treatment comprises good nursing.
313
Part
31
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
Thecowshouldbewellbeddedwithshortlitteron
symptoms are shown to others in which shock
an earthen floor or on a concretefloor onwhich
and fatal toxaemia soon supervene. Thus in some
sand or grit has firstbeen sprinkled.She must be
instancesHreowner isunawareoftheaccident
assisted andmaintained on her feet for milking or
and theonlyevidence ofitisthesubsequentfind-
suckling andasoften aspossibleafothertimes.The
ingofauterineadhesionorofamummifiedfetus
patient shouldbestimulated towallbut should be
among the abdominal viscera - so-called extra-
prevented from falling awkwardly. Slings are occa-
uterineorpseudoectopicpregnancy.When rup-
sionallyemployedfor cattle.Bedsores must bepre-
ture occurs duringlabour and thefetus passes into
vented,theanimal beingturnedfrom sideto side,
the abdomen,labour pains and straining cease
thehindquartersmassaged,thebeddingfrequenty
anduterine inertia maybe suspected,untila uter-
changed and the cow's rear and udder kept clean
ine exploration proves otherwise. Alternatively,
anddry.
the dam's intestines may prolapse into the uterus
and evenprotrudefron thevulva;thecondition
may thenbe confused with dystocia due to schis-
Rupture of the uterus or vagina
tosoma reflexus (see Ch.16:Figs.16.11,16.12)
invisceralpresentation.Accidentalrupture of the
Rupture of the uterus may occur spontaneously
uterusislikelytooccurinthemost difficultdysto-
but faulty obstetric technique is a more frequent
cia cases:those in which theinitial disposition of
cause.Spontaneous rupture is most likely to arise
thefetus ismarkedly irregular and difficult to rec-
inassociationwithuterinetorsion orwithcervi-
tifyandthoseinwhich therehasbeenmuch delay
calnon-dilatation but isalsopossiblydueto the
intreatmentwiththedevelopmentofunfavour-
gross tuterine distension that occurs with twins
able complications.Insufficient uterine space for
in one horn,with hydrallantois or with exces-
theextension ofa limb orhead,inordinatetrac
sivefetalsize.Themostlikelytimeofspontane-
tiononawronglydisposedoroversizedfetusand
ous rupture is in late gestation or during labour.
excessivelyvigorousretropulsionaretheimmedi-
Hopkins &Amor(1964) have remarked on the
ate causes of uterine rupiure. When the cervix is
associationofspontaneousuterinerupture and
incompletely dilated,traction on the fetus may
breech presentation; they encountered three cases
cause rupture of that organ. Careless use of the
and cited four other cases fromtheliterature.
obstetricforcepsinthebitch isa causeofuterine
In their cases, and in another spontaneous rup-
rupture.Lastly,rupture of the uterus may be due
ture with breech presentation (Arthur GH, per-
to external violence as,for example,when the par-
sonal communication) the dorsal aspect of the
turient dam fallsheavily orreceives a severekick
leftuterinehorn wastornandthetearextended
orhorn-gore on its abdomen.
caudallytoinvolvetheuterinebodyandcervix
Whenmaking the initial examination of a dysto-
too.Their hypothesis is that breech presentation
cia case, the veterinary surgeon must always explore
predisposestorupturebecausethebreechofthe
thegenitaltractfortraumaticlesionsthatmayhave
calffullyoccupiesthematernalpelvicinletand
beencausedbyunskilledlayinterferenceorwhich,
allows noegressfor thefetal fluidwhentheuter-
rarely,may have arisen spontaneously.If uterine
ine and abdominal contractions build up the
rupture is found then,or occurs during subsequent
hydrostaticpressurewithin theuterus.Inareview
manipulations,the obstetrician must decide
of 26 cases of uterine rupture,18 of which were
largelyonconsiderationsofsizeandsiteofthe
heifers, Pearson & Denny (1975) considered uter-
lesion and the amount ofmanipulation,or trac-
ine torsion and fetopelvic disproportion to be the
tion,still required to effeci delivery-whether 1o
major predisposing factors.In this series,14 of
proceedwith the deliverypervaginam orwhether
the26fetusesweremainlyorentirelywithin the
to perform a caesarean operation,and repair the
peritonealcavity;four were still alive atthe time
uterine rupture from thelaparotomy site after the
of laparotomy.According to the size of the rup-
removalof the fetus.Except wherea small dorsal
ture-whichmayhealwithoutincidentor allow
ruptureis discoveredandthe amountofobstetric
escapeoftheconceptus inthe abdomen-and
interferencestill requiredissmall,alaparotomyis
to whether or not infection occurs, there is great
indicated.The procedure then adopted is almost
variationinthesyndromefromcasesinwhichno
identicalto ihat describedfor caesarean section,
314
Chapter
171
 Injuries and diseases incidental to parturition
the only complication being the possibly unfa-
Prolapse of the bladder
vourable site of uterine rupture in relation to the
abdominal incision. The accidental rupture may
be extended and the fetus extracted or, if the rent
Prolapse of the bladder is most likely in the mare
(see Ch.10). In this species the urethral opening
is unfavourably placed, another surgical incision
is wide and parturient straining very forceful. The
must be made for delivery and then both it and the
organ becomes everted during labour and may be
rupture must be repaired.The tear in the uterus is
much more accessible for suturing after the fetus
injured during fetal expulsion. It should not be diffi-
cult to identify the everted bladder. It is pear-shaped
has been removed.
Spontaneous rupture of the vaginal wall in
and attached to the vaginal floor; urine drips from
     s  
the two openings of the ureters and the congested
(1961); since then, it has been reported by others
mucosa is apparent,Epidural anaesthesia should be
(Knottenbelt 1988, Mosdol 1999). Small intes-
induced.The bladder is first cleaned, and any lacera-
tions are repaired by suture. The organ is then com-
tinepasses into the vagina and protrudes from the
vulva; frequently the ewe will be found dead, pre-
pressed between both hands and gradually forced
sumably from shock. The precise aetiology of the
back into the urethra.Further manipulation is then
disorder is still unknown; Initially, it was gener-
applied to the vaginal floor until the bladder is prop-
ally believed to be associated with cervical vagi-
erly replaced. Antibiotic therapy lasting several days
nal prolapse,although Mosdol (1999) found
should be prescribed. Tetanus antitoxin should be
given. Prolapse of the bladder is rare in cattle (Figs.
evidence that uterine torsion during late pregnancy
might be involved; this is discussed in Chapter 5.
17.10,17.11). Brunsdon (1961) described a case
that occurred during second-stage labour and that
In one case, which was considered to have a simi-
lar aeriology, M. W. Fox (personal communication,
he successfully replaced.
1962) noted complete prolapse of the intact preg-
nant uterus through a tear in the dorsal wall of the
Prolapse ofperivaginal fat
vagina.O'Neill (1961) observed several parturient
ewes that were unable to lamb in which rupture of
the uterus was present. Prompt adoption of thie cae-
Prolapse of perivaginal fat is most lilkely in fat heif-
sarean operation and repair of the uterine tear gave
ers of beef breeds and is a sequel to a rupture of the
good resulis.
vagina,often a small one.The fat should be care
fully removedwith scissors and if possible thevagi-
nal tear should be sutured.
Protrusion of the bladder
Protrusion of the bladder may follow a rupture
in the floor of the vagina or prolapse through
the dilaied urethra (Brunsdon 1961)and may
occur during or after parturition (see Ch. 10). The
rounded organ protrudes from the vulva. The kink
that forms in the urethra prevents micturition;
thus the organ progressively distends with urine.
The condition must be distinguishied from pro-
lapse of the vagina, cyst or tumour of the vagina,
haematoma of the vulva and prolapse of perivagi-
nal fat. The surface of the bladder is cleaned and
the organ is punctured with a hypodermic needle
to allow drainage of urine. It is then dressed with
an antibiotic powder and gently pushed back into
place through the vaginal rupture.The latter is then
repaired. Epidural anaesthesia will greatly facilitate
Fig 17.10 Cow with prolapsed bladder (b) (caucal view).
return of the protruded organ.
(Courtesy of Dr Robert Zobei).
315
Part
3
Dystocia andotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
affected.Inthemaretheconditionisalikelysequel
toretention qf the fetal membranes.2-4 days after
foalingtheypical stance oflaminitisisseen,the hind
legsbeingplacedwell forwardtoeasetheweighton
themore severelyaffectedforefeet.Itis amostpain-
ful affection and causes rapid loss of weight.Owing
totheprolongedperiodsofrecumbencyanddimi-
nutioninmilksecretionthefoal mayrequireartifi-
cial feeding.
Avoidance ofpuerperal laminitis lies in prevent-
ing metritis by treating cases of dystocia promptly
andcarefully,and by the appropriate treatment of
retained fetal membranes(seeCh.26).
Parturient recumbency
Fig.17.11Cowwith prolapsed bladder(b)(lateralview)
(Courtesy of Dr Robert Zobel).
Recumbency,asacomplicationofparturition,socca
sionally seen in all speciesbut is essentially abovine
Prolapse ofthe rectum
condition.Linder this heading,cows thatbecome
recumbentinlate gestationshouldfirstbeconsidered;
the cause hereisnutritionalandtwoseparate entities
Slighteversionoftherectumisacommonaccom-
are seen.In one type,recumbency is associated with
paniment ofpowerful expulsive efforis.lt recedes
starvation.Cases occur towards theendofthewin
after delivery.Severe prolapse is likely only in the
ter whenfodderis scarce orpoorly saved.Cattle on
mare;ifit is already present in a dystocia case when
hill farms are chiefly affected.Premature induction of
the veterinary surgeon arrives an attempt should be
calving with corticosteroids(see Ch.6),or an elec
made toreducetheprolapseandan assistant should
tive caesarean operation, can be used provided the
beinstructed to maintain theorganinpositionby
animal isnot too severely affected.Otherwise,nthe
pressinga towelagainst themare's anus.Epidural
interestof theanimalswelfare,euthanasia shoulde
anaesthesia may be needed to replace the rectum.
performedandmeasurestakentoensurethatsimi-
When theprolapsehasbeen present forsomehours
lar cases donotrecur.Apromptcaesareanoperation
before veterinary assistance is available and the
and dietary supplementation are indicated.The other
organhasbecomemarkedlyoedematous andcon-
entity isa syndrome that appears tobe identical to
tused or torn,it maybe difficult or impossible to
pregnancy toxaemiaof ewes.Affected animals are in
replace.Submucousresectionunder epidural anaes-
good bodily condition and are usually pregnant with
thesia,orunder a general anaesthetic,must then be
twins.Thegeneral behaviourbecomes sluggish,ape
carried out.In themare,parturient prolapse of the
titeispoor andketosissometimes accompanied by
rectum,nomatterhow transient,may provefatal
icterus,is present.Premature induction ofcalvingr
because stretching or tearing of the colic mesentery
termination of thepregnancy is normally followed
can result in infarction of the terminal colon (Fig.
by rapid recovery. Cases that have been unsuccess-
17.12). The affected segment of bowel becomes
fully treated therapeuticallyhave shown marked fatty
atonic,defaecation stops and themare's condition
infiltration of the liver.The cause may be an excess of
deteriorates insidiously during the next few days.
concentrated food in early pregnancy and a deficient
diet in lategestation.
Puerperal laminitis
Recumbency due toparturient
hypocalcaemia orpuerperal metritis
Puerperal laminitis is a troublesome complication
of puerperal metritis. It is essentially an equine
Hypocalcaemia is the chief cause ofrecumbency
conditionbuttheotherfarmanimalsareoccasionally
in parturient and puerperal cows, although it may
316
Chapter
171
Injuries and diseases incidental toparturition
B
reductionof theprolapse.
be confused with the final stage ofsevere puer-
Truehypocalcaemia occursoccasionallyin sows
peral toxaemia resulting from uterine infection.
butthemostlikelycauseofpostparturientrecum-
A properconsideration of the history and dueregard
bency is toxaemia due to metritis or mastitis.
tothe symptoms should differentiate the condi-
Incompleteparturitionwithretentionofafetusora
tions.Puerperalmetritisusually follows dystocia
portionof the afterbirthshould alwaysbesuspected.
and isoften accompaniedbyretentionofthe after-
Failureofmilksecretionis oneof thesymptomsof
birth.Thereisafetidvulval dischargeand diarrhoea;
toxaemia and hypocalcaemia;it sometimes results
straining is frequent and there is an expiratory grunt;
from lack of the letdown stimulus.So-called aga-
thepulseisfrequentbut thetemperature,although
lactia of sows is thus nota specific syndrome but
atfirst raised,may be falling in a case of advanced
toxaemia and is thereforeunreliable.Avaginal and
ent affections.
uterine examination should verify the suspicion of
metritis as a cause of recumbency.The clinical signs
Physical inability to rise
andtreatmentofpuerperalmetritis andendometri-
tis are described and discussed in Chapter 22.Other
Physical inability torise may be due to muscular
severetoxaemiasthatmaycauseparturientrecum
weaknessor tolesions ofthelocomolor system.
bencyareacutemastitisandperitonitisassociated
Inanitionduetoavarietyofdiseasesmaycoincide
with uterine rupture.
withparturition.Locomotorlesionsthatmayoccur
317
Part
Dvstocia and other disorders associated with parturition
during labour and cause recumbency include dislo-
grave. Slings, hoists and other devices are sometimes
cations of the hip and of the sacroiliacjoints,frac-
used to encourage the patient to siand but in gen-
ture ofthe pelvis,femur orvertebral column,rupture
eral they-afeof little use.The best contribution that
of the gastrocemius muscle and paralysis of uhe
can be made to a recovery is the provision of first-
obturator or gluteal nerves. A diagnosis of disease
class nursing. This comprises placing the recumbent
ofthelocomotor system depends on amethodical
animal on anple, soft, clean bedding that overlies a
clinical examination with a view to eliminating the
dry’ floor and is frequently changed. The patient is
several possibilities. The degree and form of the dis-
turned from side to side as often as possible, with
ability and themanner oftheunsuccessful attempt
concurrentmassageof thelimbmuscles.Meanwhile
to rise often give a strong indication of the cause.
close veterinary attention is paid to the health of the
The examination includes the humane manipula-
tion ofthehindlimbswith thehelp ofan assistant
to determine the presence of excessive mobility or
Puerperal tetanus
crepitus; it is combined with a rectal examination
of the pelvic bones. Regional absence of peripheral
sensation may verifynerveparalysisincludingpara
Puerperal tetanus is a possible sequel to uterine
plegia associated with vertebral fracture.In cases of
manipulation for dystocia, retention of the after-
birth or prolapse of the uterus. It is most likely 1o be
ciated with attempts to rise,the affected animal is
seen in mares 1-4 weeks afier foaling.
usually bright,its appetite is good and, when undis-
All equine obstetric interference should be
turbed, its temperature and pulse are unaffected.
accompanied by prophylactic injections of tetanus
Each case must be treated on its merits and the
antitoxin.
reader isreferred to othertextsforfurtherinforima
tion. lt is not unusual in cattle practice to fail to dis-
References
cover the cause of recumbency despite a meticulous
and complete examination; apart from recumbency
such cases appear normal in every way.
Aanes WA 19G4J Am Vet MedAssoc 144:485
Where no cause of recumbency can be found in
Brunsdon IE 1961 Vet Rec 73: 437
an animal that appears normal in other respects, tis-
Goize R 1938 Deutsch Tierarzl Wschr 49:163
sue swelling. oedema or haemorrhage in the vicin-
Hopkins AR,Amor OF 1964 Vet Rec76: 904
ity of nerves is possible. If such were the case, the
Knottenbelt DC1988Vet Rec122653
McGladderyA2001 In Pract23:74
normal recovery processes would diminish pressure
Mosdol Q1909 Ve1Rec144:38
on the nerves and this would be reflected in pro-
O'Neill AR 1961 Vet Rec 73: 1041
Pearson 11,Denny HIR 1975 Vet Rec 97:240
tlepracticeshiows that if a cowis still unabletorise
Rooney EF 1964 Cornell Vet 54: 11
after being recumbent for a week,the prognosis is
White JB 1961 VetRec73:281,330
318
18
Chapter
DavidNoakes
Postparturient prolapse of the uterus
Prolapse ofthe uterusis a commoncomplication of
hours after calving, Gardner et al 19y0) of an other-
the third stage of labour in the cow and the ewe. It
wisenormal second-stage labour, although Gardner
occurslessfrequently in the sow and israre inthe
et al (1990)reported that,in their study,47 out of
mare and bitch. In the ruminant species the prolapse
200 cases had received obstetrical assistance and
is generally a complete inversion ofthe gravid cornu,
similarlyMurphy&Dobson(2002)found that33%
while in the sow and thebitch inversion is gener-
of their cases followed an assisted calving. In some
ally partial and comprises one horn only. Cases are
cases, prolapse rmay be delayed for several days;
onrecordinwhichthebitchhas evertedonehon
these are generally associated with a grossly pro-
before she has completely delivered the fetuses from
tracted and assisted labour. Rarely, where delivery
the other. In the mare, the rare cases of prolapse are
is achieved by heavy traction,the uterus prolapses
generally parial only.
immediately after the calf is withdrawn.
Cattle
Aetiology
The cause of prolapse of the uterus is noi clear. I1
The incidence has been reported asranging from
occurs during the third stage of labour normally
0.2% in range beef caitle in America (Patterson
within a few hours of the expulsion of the calf and at
etal 1979) and0.3% in Scandinavian dairy cattle
a time when some of the fetal cotyledons have sepa-
(Rasbech et al 1967, Ellerby et al 1969, Odegaard
rated from the maternal caruncles.The only conceiv-
1977, Roine & Soloniemi 1978) to 0.09% in dairy
ableforcethatcouldlifttheheavyuterusfrom the
cows in California (Gardner et al 1990)
abdominal cavity into the pelvis, and thence propel
The occurrence seems to be affected by seasonal
it to the exterior, is abdominal straining. Gravity,
as well as regional factors, the condition being com-
perhaps through the medium of a sloping floor, and
tractionby the weight offreed dependent afterbirth
1990). in some years and in some localities.
are probable additional forces. Straining occurs nor-
Pluriparae of the dairy breeds are more prone to
mally during the third stage and is synchronous
suffer from the disorder than are heifers,although
with thecontinuingperistalticmyometrialcontrac-
ina study byMuurphy&Dobson(2002) iniheUK,
tions passing from the uterotubal junction to the
the disorderwas morefrequentlyseeninbeefbreed
uterine body and in the reverse direction (see Ch. 6)
heifers than in cows.The highest incidence in dairy
One can imagine the uterus being more affected by
cows in New Zealand was in fourth parity animals
abdominal straining when it is relatively flaccid,
(Oakley 1992). In the majority of instances the and it is a particularly apt clinical observation that
prolapseoccurswithinafewhours(over90%<24
many cases of uterine prolapse are associated with
319
Part
1311
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
hypocalcaemia （milk fever),which is known to
predisposetouterineinertia(Gardneretal1990,
Murphy & Dobson 2002). It is possible to hypoth-
esizethat uterineinversionandprolapseareasso-
ciated with the onset of uterine inertia during the
third stage,when a portion of detached afterbirth
occupies the birth canal and protrudes from the
vulva.This concept of an association with inertia
correspondswith the greater frequency of prolapse
incows than heifers,in dairy rather than beefcows
andincloselyconfinedandhighlyfedcowsrather
than those at range.Vandeplassche& Spincemaille
(1963) are of the opinion that the pregnant horn
does not undergo a progressive inversion from its
anterior extremity:only the posterior two-thirds
invert. The actual protrusion of this portion can
occur very quickly in onebout of suraining.
Some cattle,with extreme laxity of the perineum
Fig.18.2Uterine prolapse ina cow.Note that the fetal
and vulva,may prolapse immediately after every
membraneshavebeenshed.
calving.In Australia,uterine prolapse is a feature
of the disease seen in sheep grazed on oestrogenic
clover pastures.
treatment is forthcoming and thirdly on whether the
organhas sustained severeinjury.Nevertheless,asthe
The signsofthiscondition areobvious.As a rule,
condition is generally encountered,ie.as a sequel t
the affected cow is recumbent and,if in lateral
recumbency,ruminal tympany will be prominent
anormal parturition,and whereprofessional assis-
tance is forthcoming within an hour or two of its
（Fig.18.1),but occasionally the cow is standing
occurrence,the prognosisis generally good.Oakley
withthe evertedorganhangingdown almost toits
hocks (Fig. 18.2).
(1992) reported that 19(18.4%)out of 103 dairy
cowsthatsufferedfromprolapsediedwithin24
hours of treatment,with a further 16(15.5%) dying
Prognosis
orbeing lost from the study during thecourse of the
The prognosis will depend firstlyon therype of case.
calving season.Replacement ofthe organ does not
offer insurmountable difficulties, and recurrence
secondlyonthedurationoftheconditionbefore
after replacementis uncommon.Moreover, such
animals generally conceive again.Patterson et al
(1979) reported that40%of cowsbecame pregnant
after uterine prolapse.Murphy &Dobson(2002)
reported that 55%of cows that had suffered from
the disorder werebred again,compared with 91.7%
for theunaffected control group,of which75%and
80.7% conceived,respectively;the mean calving-
conceptionintervalwasextendedby50 days com-
pared with the controls.In Oalley's[1992) study.
53 （77.9%) out of 68 became pregnant, although
six (8.8%) subsequently aborted.A 10-day extension
of the mean calving-conception interval was found
of those that were re-bred subsequently conceived,
although three aborted mid-term.Not infrequently,
an animal that has everted her uterus at one partu-
Fig.18.1Uterine prolapscina cow.Note that thefetalmembranes
rition calves subsequently without trouble;in fact,
arestill attachedand thecowisrecumbent.
repetition of the condition is the exception rather
320
Chapter
181
Postparturient prolapse of the uterus
than therule.Murphy&Dobson(2002)reported
only one recurrence at the next calving out of 77
cows that survived the event,while Jubb et al(1990)
reported finding one cow that had prolapsed twice.
Orcasionally prolapse of the uterus is followed in
a matter of an hour or soby the animal's death.On
postmortem examination in such cases it is found
that death was due to internal haemorrhage con-
sequent on the weight of the everted organ having
torn the mesovarium and the ovarian artery. Even
in those cases in which there has been delay and in
B
C
which the endometrium is grossly contaminated
Fig.18.3 (A) The cow is positicned in sternal recumbency
and deeply congested, the prognosis is not hopeless,
with the hind legs extended backwards and the prolapsed
for the recuperative powers of the organ are quite
astonishing:thus when dealing with dairy cattle
placed on a bale covered in a clean sheet (C) held in a 'sling
amputation of the everted organ should be consid-
by two assisants on either side. (Modifiec after Plenderleith
ered only when the injury is gross andresolution is
1986.)
clearly impossible.
cow's hocks and supports the weight of the prolapsed
organ on his/her thighs, prior to replacement.
Treatment
Whether the cow is standing orrecumbent, an epi-
Replacementofthe everted organ
dural anaestheticshould be given.This will prevent
straining and also has the advantage that defaeca-
On notification of the case, the farmer should be
tion is in abeyance during the operation. The everted
instructed to wrap the prolapsedviscus in a large
organ should be thoroughly washed with warm
towelor other suitable material to prevent fuiriher
normal saline solution.If the fetal membranes
contanination if,as is likely,the cow is recumbent;
are already partially detached and their complete
if she is standing, the organ should be supported
removal canbecarried out easilyandwithout injury
by a large towel or sheet held by people on rither
to the caruncles, this should be done.But when
side until professional assistance is forthcoming.Itis
attachment is complete or when artempts at detach-
good praclice to give a preliminary injection of cal-
ment are associated with haemorrhage, it is bet-
cium borogluconate (as for milk fever) and to relieve
ter tiat the organ be replaced with the nembranes
ruminal tympany, if present, by passing a stomach
still adherent.The subsequent management of the
tube.In thepast,the main difficulties in replacement
retained fetal membranes should be on the princi-
of the organ have been associated with the almost
ples outlined on pages 423-425.
continuous straining that manipulation of the uterus
The prolapsed organ should be palpated in order
provokesandthefactthatpressurehad tobeapplied
to detect the possible presence within it of a dis-
in an uplill direction.Numerous methods of over-
tended urinary bladder; if such is the case,it should
coming these difficulties have been introduced: the
berelieved by the use ofa catheter.The uterus should
tension of a rope around the posterior abdomen,
be supported by assistants holding the corners of a
raising the animal's hind parts on boards or on a
towel (Fig.18.3) or upon a piece of board about 1m
truss of straw, or even casting her and raising her
long, or a bale of hay or straw, covered by a clean
hind paris by means of a block and tackle hooked to
cloth or towel (Fig. 18.3).
a figure-of-eight rope around the hocks.Plenderleith
R. H. Smyth (Personal communication to G.H,
(1986) described a method that is now in common
Arthur,1948)provides an cxcellent description of
usage amongst practitioners. The cow is placed in
replacement as follows:
sternal recumbency with both hind legs pulled out
behind her (weight therefore being taken on her sti-
Havingwell soaked the hands,theoperatorcommences
toreplac theuts litteby litlestaring wihthose
fles) (Fig.18.3). The assistant sits astride the cow, fac-
portions nearest the vulval lips (Fig 18.4). By gentle
ing the rear and holds the cow's tail up vertically.
pressure, the rearest cotyledons are pushed into the
This manoeuvre causes the slope of the vulva to be
vaginataking arethat helipof thevulvaremainwe
upwards.Thevelerinary surgeon kneels between the
apart and donotbecome turned inwards.ltis generally
321
Part
1310
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
best toreplaceportions of the upper and lower surfaces
with parenteral antibiotics and a non-steroidal
alternately.When the last portions only remain to be
anti-inflammatory agent.
replared,an assistant should press against hese,using
A final advamfage of caudal epidural anaesthesia is
the palms of both hands, while the operator endeav-
that for an hour or so after replacement of the organ
ours to draw the lips of thevulva over the prolapse.As
ihe mass disappears through the lips of the vulva the
suraining will be prevented;the duration will be
operator, using a clenched fist, should then continue
extended if xylazine is used as well. It has been cus-
to press it forward to the full length of the arm. lt is
tomary'to insert vulval sutures to prevent the pos-
important that the uterus should be pressed forwards
sibility of re-prolapse. This practice is controversial;
beyond the cervical ring: to ensure lhis the operator
manyconsider thatit servesno usefulpurpose since,
locates emargins ofthedilated cervix,draws hm
if the prolapse has been replaced correctly, it should
towards him-or herself and,if possible, at the same
time pushes the uterus in a forward direction with the
notrecur.lt may even stimulate the cow lo strain,
other hand.In some cases it may be found helpful to
allowingtheprolapsetorecurwithintheanimal
grasp the cervical ring at several points in succession
and thus not be detected.Others consider that,pro-
and with a piston-like movement of the hand and arm
vided thecow isre-examined 24 hourslater and the
insinuate the uterine mass through it.
sutures are removed, it can prevent the recurrence
When thishasbeen accomplished,thecervixshould
of a complete prolapse, which will be much more
lie unoccupiedat thelevel of the pelvicbrim and
difficult to replace a second time. In uncomplicated
if the whole uterus has passed the cervix it will
cases it is generally found that within 24 hours of
replacement the degree of cervical contraction pres-
promptly regain irs normal position. To ensure com-
plete replacement of the uterus,9-14 litres of clean
ent is such that recurrence is very unlikely.
warm water are delivered into the uterus by gravity
feed and immediately removed by siphonage, the
replacement is similar to that described for the cow,
weight of water effacing anyremaining inversion of
except that it is easier to perforin because of the facil-
the horn.lo help restore uterine tone and thus to
ity with which the hindquarters of the ewe or doe can
prevent recurrence of the prolapse, oxytocin should
be kept raised by an assistant; caudal epidural anaes-
be given. Preoperative treatment with oxyiocin,
thesia shiould always be usedexcept in those situa
although reducing the size of the prolapsed organ,
tions where a long delay may occur before it could
increases the turgidity of the everted organ and
be treated by a veterinarian.However,because of
makes replacemenu more difficult.Evenifthe animal
their different physical relationship to the caruncles,
shows no clinical signs of hypocalcaemia, calcium
thefetalcotyledons cannotreadilybedetachiedand,
borogluconate therapy should be given, together
rather than clamage the uterus by persistent attempts
to separate them,it is preferable to leave them
attachied and return themwith theuterus;failure to
Cervix
Tail
Direclion
of push
toreplace
Direction
o*push
toreplace
Prolapsed
s
Fig. 18.4 Diagram illustrating where pressure is applied to
start the replacement of the prolapsed uterus. (Redrawn from
Fig. 18.5 Uterine prolapse in a doe goat, fetal membranes
Noakes1997.)
have been shec.(Courtesy of Dr YoavAlony.)
322
Chapter
181
Postparturientprolapseoftheuterus
Fig.18.6Uterine prolapse in a doe goat;under caudal epi-
Fig.18.8Aperivulvarpurse string sutureis being inserted to
dural anaesthesia theuterus iscarefully and gradually being
ensureretention of the uterus.(Courtesy of DrYoavAlony.)
replaced.(Courtesy of DrYoavAlony.)
bodybutseemtobemorefirmlyattachedatthe
horns,particularly thetip.Theconsequence of this
is thatas the uterine contractions during the third
stage of labourpersist to assist in the separation and
expulsion of the fetal membranes, the pull on the
attached membranes at these points cause the ever-
sion of thetip or tips ofthe horns.The continual
uterine contractions and the subsequent straining
as themassofthefetalmembranesenter thepelvis
causethewholeof theuiterustobeinverted andpro-
lapsed.Some interesting observations regarding this
hypothesis for the aetiology were madeat theRoyal
Veterinary College in mares that were subjected
Fig.18.7Theprolapsed uterus of the doegoat hasbeen
toelectivecaesareanoperationatabout320 days
completely replaced.(Courtesy of DrYoav Alony.)
ofgestation.In three such cases,uterine prolapse
occurred during expulsion ofthefetalmembranes
andgynaecologicalexaminationofthemrevealed
thatthefetalmembraneshad completelyseparaied
detach them al thisstagewill not significanily affect
fromtheendometriumexceptatthesiteofthehys-
the prognosis.Anaerobic infection should be antici-
pated and a prophylactic antibiotic used.Murphy &
terotomywound,wherethemembranehadbecome
accidentally sutured to theuterus,or atihe tip of
Dobson(2002) found that,among sheep farmers,
the non-pregnant horn. Iit sccmed that the weight
thereisareluctancetoretainaeweforbreedingthat
has suffered from prolapse for fear of it recuirring.
oftheseparated anddependentportion had caused
sufficient traction on the uterus 1o evert part of it
and then,presumably,the mare strained o cause
Horse
the prolapse.This is the reason why,before repair-
ing the uterine incision during a caesarean opera-
Aetiology
tion,the allantochorion should be separated from
the endometrium for some distance（see Ch.20)
The disorder is relatively uncommon in this spe-
Similarobservations havebeenmadeinthreecasesof
cies.It is likely toberelated to the expulsion of the
retainedfetalmembranesinwhichuterineprolapse
fetalmembranes,whichtendtoseparatefrom the
occurredwhile themembraneswerebeingremoved
endometriummuchmorereadilyintheuterine
and was undoubtedly due tothe traction applied
323
Part
131
Dystociaandotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
totheallantochorionby theveterinarian.Theever-
probability oflaminitis occurring.Vulval sutures
sionoftheuteruscausedat thepointofattachment
should neverbeused.
ofthe allantochorion was quiclly converted into
a prolapse when the mare strained.Therefore,it is
Pig
suggested that, in spontaneously occurring cases of
uterineprolapse,animportant causativefactoristhe
weightof thoseportionsoffetalmembranesthatare
The consensus ofveterinary opinion is thatpigs are
dependentfromthevulvaandthetractionthatthey
unabletotolerateuterineprolapse,unlesshieuterus
exert on the uterus during the passage of a peristal-
isreplacedeasilyand quickly;frequentlybythetime
tic wave along that organ. In view of these obser-
helpis summoned thesowhasdied,mostprobably
vations,it is important that undue raction on the
from afatalhaemorrhagefollowingruptureofthe
detachedportionofallantochorionshouldnotbe
uterinevessels,or possibly from shock.The degree
applied while themore anteriorretained portion is
ofprolapsewill varyfrom part ofone horn at its
being freed.This is also why the use of an oxyto-
simplest toboth horns at ismost extreme.
cin dripisthepreferredmethodoftreatingretained
The sow should be deeply sedated or prefera-
fetal membranes (see Ch. 26).
bly given a general anaesthetic (the methods are
described under the caesarean operation in Ch.20)
Treatment
andplacedinaninclinewiththeheadfacingdown-
wards orsuspended byher hindlegs.If theuterus is
The approach isvery similar to that described above
traumatized,euthanasiaispreferable,particularlyin
for the cow.It is important to ensure that the mare
commercial pig units because there will be a delay
isadequatelyrestrainedtopreventtraumato the
beforeshecanbeservedbytheboarandbecome
prolapsedorganandtopreventinjury tothevet-
pregnant.An alternative procedure that merits a trial
erinarian;sedationmayberequired.Caudalepidu-
istofloat'iheuterusbackintotheabdomenwith
ral anaesthesiais arequirement topreventstraining
theaidofwaterpressure.The sowisplacedon her
(see Ch. 12); in some cases where the mare is very
side,head downwards,on a slopeand theendofa
fractious, general anaesthesia may berequired,in
soft tube of rubber or plastic,2cmin diameter and
whichcase theadded advantageofelevatingher
1.5m long,isgently passed into the stomaofthe
hindquarters can greatly assist replacement.Before
prolapsed viscus and eased along as far as possible.
replacement,anattemptshouldbemadetoremove
Clean water is then allowed to flow into the pro-
thefetalmembranebutonlyifthe allantochorion
lapsed viscus.Theweighi ofthe introduced water
can be readily separated from the endometrium
without causing haemorrhage;ifthis is excessive
abdomen;thetubeisintroduced further and more
then asmuchaspossibleshouldbecutawaybefore
fluid is infused.By this means the whole uterus is
replacement.Ifthereplacement ismadeundercau-
notonlyreturnedbutcompletelyreplacedwith-
dal epidural anaesthesia with the mare standing
out manipulation.In the case ofnon-commercial
it is helpful to have assistants support the everted
pet sows,replacement can be attempted under gen-
organ; as well as providing physical assistance,
eralanaesthesiavia alaparotomy（Raleigh1977),as
this also counteracts the effects ofpassivevenous
describedbelowforthebitch.
congestion.
Penny&Arthur(1954)havedescribed postoestral
Theuterusshould bereplaced startingatthepart
prolapse of the uterus in a gilt.
adjacent to the vulva as described in the cow.The
lechniqueiseasier than inthecowbecauseofthe
Dog and cat
absenceofthecaruncles;this tends to reducethe
amount of haemorrhage.After replacement it is
A laparotomy can be performed and,with simulta-
inverted;an intrauterine infusion of saline,with
neous external manipulation and abdominal taxis,
subsequent removal by siphoning,canbe used,ol
replacement can be attempted.It is more usual,
lowedbytheuseofoxytocintohasteninvolution.
however,tocarryoutexternal’hysterectomy onthe
Systemicantibiotics aswellas anti-inflammatory
prolapsed organ.Theprognosisis favourable after
agents should be used and there is a relatively high
amputation.
324
Chapter
181
Postparturientprolapseoftheuterus
References
OakleyGE1992NZVetJ40:120
OdegaardSA1977ActaVetScandSuppl 63:1
Patterson Di,BellowsRA,BurfeningPletal 1979IAnimSci
Ellerby E lochumsen P,Veiruplt S 1969Kgl Vet Landbohojsk
49(suppl1）:325
Arsskr77:154
PennyRHC,Arthur GH 1954VetRec66:162
Gardner IA,ReynoldsJP,RiscoCA,Hird DW1990Am Vet
PlenderleithRW1986InPraci 8:14
MedAssoc197:1021
Raleigh PJ1977VetRec100:89
JubbTFMalmoJ,BrightlingP,DavisGM 1990Aust Vet]
Rasbech NO,Jochumsen P,Christiansen IJ 1967Kgl Vet
67:22
Landboh6jskArsskr:265
MurphyAM,Dobson H 2002Vet Rec151:733
RoineK,Soloniemi H1978ActaVet Scand 19:341
Noakes DE 1997 Fertility and obsteurics in caule,2nd edn.
VandeplasscheM,Spincemaille1963BerlMinchTierirzil
Blackwell Science,Oxford
Wochenschr76:324
325
19
Chapter
JosVermunt
Fetotomy
By definition, fetotomy (originally referred to as
method of correcting dystocia in animal species that
embryotomy) is sectioning of a fetus into two or
give birth to several offspring at a time. The various
more parts within the uterus and vagina. Its purpose
techniques describedbelowrelate to the cow.
is toreduce the size such that delivery through the
If the obstetrician is certain that the fetus can
birth canal becomes possible. Nowadays, fetotomy
be delivered by the employment of limited feto-
is applied only when the fetus is already dead. It is in
tomy, such as the removal ofa forelimb,or a fore-
the cow that the procedure is most frequently used,
linb together with the head and neck,this will
for, although it can be effective in relieving dysto-
certainly be the method of choice;unfortunately,
cia in the mare, hind, ewe and doe goat, there are
having embarked on a fetotomy the obstetrician
problems,and thus limitations. For cxample, in
frequentlyfindsthat total dismembermentwill be
the mare, the vaginal wall often becoines oedema-
necessary.Because of the difficulty in assessing the
tous following minimal obstetrical manipulations,
extent of fetotomy required,and the knowledge
resltingin a severe reduction in thelumen of the
that total fetotomy is a tedious and arduous task,
birth canal. Thus, those manipulations required to
there is an increasing tendency for veterinarians
perform fetotomy are likely to induce these changes
to resort to a caesarean operation (see Ch.20) in
quickly, making it very difficult because of reduced
cases where the fetus cannot be delivered by rea-
space. In addition, the mare is much less stoical
sonable traction. The decision-making process, of
than the cow,possibly requiring sedation or gen-
whether to doacaesarean operation or a fetotomy
eral anaesthesia.If dystocia can be relieved by one
to resolve a dystocia, depends to a large extent on
simple procedure then it may be worth considering
whether the veterinarian possesses the skill and
(the techniques used are generally the same as those
workingknowledge toperform anidcomplete 1he
described below for the cow); if not, then a caesar-
chosen procedure equally well.lt is unfortunate
ean operation should be considered as the method
that,with the greater ease and increased success
of choice. In ewes and doe goats, the main diffculty
rates of the caesarean operation,veterinarians
with performing fetotomy isthe small size ofthe
in many parts of the world have lost the skills
dam. However, limited fetotomy can be done quite
required to perform fetotomy successfully.
successfully to relieve dystocia; some shepherds
Boih ihe caesarean operation and fetotomy pro-
are very skilled at performing subcutaneous feto-
cedure have a place in veterinary practice and bothi
tomy (see below) when the fetus is emphysematous
and undergoing extensive putrefaction. Dystocia in
inal delivery is not possible, the caesarean operation
hinds is frequently due to postural defects, and par-
is the methad of choice if the fetus is alive and via
tial fetotomy can be carried out quite successfully in
ble. Fetotomy must be given first consideration if the
this animal species. Fetotomy is not applicable as a
fetus is dead,especially when it is emphysematous
326
Chapter
1191
Fetotomy
and the cow is toxic. It is important for the veterinar-
Indications
ian to be decisive so that either a caesarean operation
or fetotomy is not used as a last resort.A common
mistake is the use of too great and too prolonged
Fetotomy is commonly utilized:
traction in the case of fetomaternal disproportion
·to correct dystocia due to fetomaternal dispropor
before the decision to perforn either procedure is
reached; about 5 minutes without any obvious prog-
mal size fetus in an undersized (usually juvenile)
ress is a reasonable period of time. In the case of
cow
faulty disposition the same considerations apply, if
to correct maldispositions (presentation,posi-
after 15 minutes no progress is being made.
tion, posture) of the fetus thiat cannot be corrected
Subcutaneous fetotomy was developed in thc
orwhere correction would be an unacceptablerisk
late 18th century and is carried out with the use of
tothecow
knives, chisels and hooks.Fetal parts are systemati
to deliver a pathologically enlarged fetus (emphy-
callyremoved while leaving the skin attached to the
remainderof the fetus,which is still inside theuterus.
sematous calf) or monster (schistosome,fetal
dropsy).
Atleastonedistal limb extreimityisleftattached to
the skin, thus providing a point for attaching snares
Experienced veterinarians generally agree that a com-
or chains and enabling traction to be applied to the
bination of forced traction and fetotomy increases
rest of the fetus.In addition,the retained fetal skin
the risks to the cow and prolongs the calving proce-
perfectly protects the dam's birth canal and uterus
dure rather than shortening it. A limited or partial
from being damaged (Paiba 1995). Nowadays, sub-
fetotomy will normally suffice when dealing with a
cutaneous fetotomy is rarely taught as a practical
maldisposition oran abnormal fetus.However, ifall
procedure at veterinary schools around the world
relevant paris of the fetus are too large in relation to
but the procedure will be briefly outlined below.
thecow's pelvis,then a total or complete fetotomy
Since the early 2oth century, percutaneous feto-
will be required, usually involving four to six cuts.
tomyhasbecome themethodmostcomimonly
The size of each amputated piece should be small
employed,and this procedure will be described
enough tobe delivered with a minimum of traction.
belowin detail.The techniqueinvolves thedismem-
A total fetotomy maybe a difficultandphysically
berment or dissection of a fetusby cutting through
very demanding procedure where there is extreme
skin,muscles,ligaments and bone using braided
fetal oversize,an emphysematouscalfand thefetus
wire （Mortimer & Toombes 1993;Frazer 1998).
is in ventral position.Furthermore, incomplete dil-
Damage to the uteris and birth canal duringcutting
atation of the birth canal,a contracted uierus or a
and manipulation of the fetus is a potential risk in
restless cow, as well as a faulty cut, all can signifi-
all percutaneous fetotomy operations.
cantly prolong a fetotomy. However, a well trained
In comparing thefacility withwhich a calf may be
and experienced obstetrician should recognize a
removed by subcutaneous orpercutaneous fetotomy,
hopeless case; once a fetotomy is started it should be
itmust be clearly appreciated that the troublesome
completed.The whole procedure,when performed
part of the percutaneousmethod is the correct plac-
by an experienced operator, should,as a rule,take
ing and retention of the wire. Given strong multifila-
no longer than 1-1yhours.Aprolonged fetotomy
ment wire, the actual sawing presents no difficulty.
will only result in an increase in the severity of the
Occasionally, the Iwo methods may be combined,
trauma to the cow's genital tract and exhaustion of
e.g. the subcutaneous procedure for the forelimb(s)
the operator.
and percutaneous fetotomy for the head, trunk and
Fetotomy offers a good alternative to the cae-
hindlimbs.No matter what method is used,to sue-
sarean operation if there is enough room in the
cessfully perform a fetotomy it is essential thal the
pelvic canal to accommodate and correctly place
veterinarian has the technical knowledge and expe-
the instruments.
Using the correci technique
rience, and uses the proper equipment plus copi
and approach, recovery time and the amouni of
ous amounts of obstetrical lubricant; the procedure
aftercare are generally less than is needed for the
should always be carried out under caudal epidural
caesarean operation. As mentioned before, partic-
anaesthesia in all ruminant speries (see Ch. 12), and
ularly with maldispositions,it is often possible to
in the mare under sedation or general anaesthesia.
deliver the fetuswithouthaving to do a complete
327
Part
3
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
fetotomy.However,mostexperiencedobstetricians
wire-saw handling and cutting.Cheaperversions
willalsoadmit thatdeviationfrom the‘recom-
often developydeep grooves on the head due to
mended approach' often results in more cuts (and
damage cmused by the wire-saw. These grooves
consequently more time) beingrequired to com
causethewiretobreak,leadingto enormousfrus-
plete the procedure.Also,an incorrectly placed
tration on the part of the obstetrician.The LItrecht
cutcan exposesharpbonefragments,which may
model hasahandlenearitsbuttendenablingthe
readilylaceratethereproductivetract
instrument to be firmly gripped and a notched
plateimmediatelybehindthehandle thatper-
mits the anchoring of a calving chain under ten-
Instrumentation
sion;thisgreatlyfacilitatesmaintainingthecorrect
position of the instrument.The use of a fetotome
A set of high-quality, correctly designed instru
protects thecowfromwireinjuriesand allowsfor
ments (Fig. 19.1; see also Fig.12.1) is required
cuts to be made in different planes, i.e. towards
toperform a percutaneous fetotomy,and these
and away from the operator,aswellas atright
shouldinclude:
anglestothelongitudinalaxisoftheinstrument.
Because of the relatively large size of themodern
·Fetotome(either theLltrechtmodel,which essen-
dairy cow,it is important to use a fetotome of
tially is a two-barrelled fat tube,or the dou-
ble-tubed Swedishmodificationoftheoriginal
adequate length
Thygesen's fetotome; Fig. 19.1). The head of the
·Fetotomethreaderorwireintroducer(Fig.19.1)-
instrument is the part that will be positioned
required for threading approximately 4-5m（or
insidethecow'suterusorvagina and in constant
four tofive times the lengthof the fetotome)of
contact with the wire-saw; it should be smooth,
saw wire through the tube(s)of thefetotome.
roundedandmadeofverydurabletemperedsteel
Some threadershave a small brush attached at
andhardenedchrometominimizeproblemswith
oneend,whichisveryusefulforcleaningout hair
hand grips.(I) Shriever's wire-introcucer.(K) Gattli's spira tubes,used to protect the genital ract from the cutting wire.
328
Chapter
191
Fetotomy
and debris between cuts, and when cleaning up
Subcutaneous fetotomy
afterwards
·Hand-grips or wire handles -these should per-
mit quick and secure attaching and fastening
Subcutaneous fetotomy:removal
of a forelimb (anterior longitudinal
ofthewireandhaveastrongandcomfortable
grip.For ease of working, the‘split-bartype
presentation)
hand-grips with a wing-shaped fastening nut
A foreleg may be removed by subcutaneous or per.
are preferred
cutaneous fetotomy.The simpler method,which
·Krey-Schottler hook(seeFig.12.1]-this double
will now be described, is subcutaneous removal,
jointed hook is an essential piece of equipment.
for which the essential instrument is a guarded
When attached to a calving rope or chain,it is
fetotomy knife. When both forelegs are equally
used to grasp onto severedporions of the fetus,
accessible,itis immaterialwhichisremoved,but
particularly the vertebral column,and to apply
the right-handed operator will find it easier to
traction to the fetus.A properly designed Krey
performfetotomyontheleftforelegofthefetus.
hook should have a‘stop',which isa safety fea-
This leg is snared-around the pastern rather
ture that prevents exposure of the sharp points
than above the fetlock-and sustained traction
when the hook is closed.Ifthis'stop'is missing or
is applied to it by one assistant. The obstetrician
worn there is a risk of a laceration occurring if the
makes a smallincision with a scalpelinio the skin
hook accidentally slips off during traction
in front ofthefetlock joint.Intothis'nick’the
·lntroducer(Fig.19.1)-also anessentialpiece of
beak of Robert's fetotomy knife is inserted,and
equipment;it is used to pass the wire-saw around
a longitudinal incision is made up the front of
oroverafetalpart,typicallytheneck,alimborthe
thelimbfrom thefetlocktothescapular cartilage
severedhindparts
(Fig.19.2).
·Curved finger knife (e.g.Llnsworth's guarded
Theknifeisnowlaid aside,and thesecond stepin
knife) - this is only required for certain cuts;
the procedure is literally the'skinning'of the limb
for example,it may be used to cut anotch' for
in situ (Fig. 19.3). This operation requires strong
the wirewhen removing a retained forelimb or
fingers but with diligent application it may be com-
hindlimb
pleted in about 10 minutes. (The separation of the
skin from themuscles lyingover the scapula com-
·Calving chains plus handles(seeFig.12.1）-at
pletes this second step.)
least onechainand handle arerequired;thechain
Thethird stepinvolvesthedivisionoftheadduc
isusedto'anchor'thefetotometoalimbofthe
tormuscles.This is conveniently done byreintroduc-
fetus and the handle to facilitateremoval of paris
ing Robert's knife and,by vigorous probing with the
of thefetus that havebeencutoff
beakoftheinstrument,themuscleassisseparated
·Wire-saw-the quality varies between brands.
When threading the wire,it must be handled care-
fully,especially avoiding it from getting kinked.
Such kinks areweak spots on which the wire may
easily breal when the sawing is carried out. lt is
essential thatfetotomywire is storedina dry place
(i.e.not in the obstetrics kit); it will corrode very
quicklywhen damp orwet,causingit to become
weakened
A pair of sharp, side-cutting pliers -essential for
clean-cutting the wire
Hand pump plus plastic tubing - for infusing
lubricantintothe uterus and around thefetus.
Fig.19.2Subcutaneousfetotomy,used to amputate the
Spatulas or chisels, hooks and guarded knives,
extended forelimb.Stage 1:the skin has been incised from
such as Roberts, are required for performing subcu-
thefetlock to the scapular cartilageusing Robert's fetotomy
knife.
taneous fetotomy(Fig.19.1).
329
Part
31
 Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
there is fetomaternal disproportion, to allow deliv-
ery.The principles of traction previously described
are applied andin this case the foot and slin of
the amputated linb afford a safe hold for a snare.
Should delivery not be possible after this operation,
theother forelegmust beremoved inthe sameway,
after which moderate traction is usually successful.
Occasionally,afterremovalofoneorbothforelimbs-
and despite partial rotation of the fetus -its hind-
quarters become locked at the pelvic inlet (so-called
hip-lock'; see Ch.14).Now the calf should be with-
Fig. 19.3 Subcutaneous fetotomy, used tc amputate the
drawn as far as possible and the protruding part of the
extended forelimb. Stage 2: the skin surrounding the imb is
trunk completely severed.Thefetal abdomen is evis-
dissected from the underlying tissues,using fingers and hand
cerated, following which one of the hind legs must
and extending as high as possible over the scapula.
the one chosenwill depend largely on themobility
into several'strings';then each of these in turn is
of the retained extremity. If it is possible, the poste-
engaged and severed by the knife.
rior part of the calf should berepelled and one of the
The fourth step (Fig. 19.4) is to disarticulate the
hindlimbs brought forward with the aid of a snare;
fetlockjoint so that the digit is left connected totlie
thelimbis then removed by subcutaneousfetotomy
detached skin of the metacarpus.A snare is then
(to be described below). Ifit is not possible to grasp
attached to the cannon bone and, in order to get a
the limb and bring it forward it must be amputated
more securehold,an additional half-hitch isput on
in the following way. Using a direct-cutting fetotomy
above the first loop.
knife, such as Unsworth's, an incision is made over
The shank of the snare, with traction bars, is
the hip joint of the leg to be removed. The muscles
then handed to two assistants and thefinal step in
lateraltothefemoralheadare also divided andthe
the operation consists in avulsion of the skinned
upper extremity of the femur is isolated. Around
forelimb by forcible traction while the operator
this a snare is passed and by vigorous abrupt trac-
applies counterforce to the front of the fetus. In
tion the teres ligament is broken and the articular
this way, the remaining muscle attachmenis to the
head is freed from the acetabulum.The snare loop is
top of the scapula arebroken and the limb comes
thenmade securebelow the greater trochanter and
away.
sustained traction is applied. This causes the leg to
In many cases, ihe removal of the one forelimb
bedrawn out from its skin; difficulty occurs over the
gives a sufficientreductionin fetal diameter,where
calcaneus buta few strokes of the fetotomy knife
frees this part also. The hind digit should be left
attached tothe skin and the leg disarticulated at the
fetlock joint.After one of the hindlimbs is removed,
the remainder of the posterior part of the fetus can
be withdrawn by traction through the medium of
the Krey hook-which isattached to the coapted
skin of the severed trunk,and the digit and skin of
the amputated limb.Amputation of both hindlimbs
is rarely needed.
In cases where ‘hip-lock' occurs after partial feto-
tomy of the front extreinity,Grahian's （1979)
method of causing fetal pelvic collapse should be
Fig.19.4 Subcutanecus fetotomy.used to amputate the
considered as an alternative to firther dismember-
exlended forelimb.Stage 3:after the attachments of the
ment of the fetus (see Ch.14).
pectoral musclesin the axillahavebeen broken down and the
Complete fetotomy, as described above, is tiring
fetlock joint disarticulated, traction is applied to the'skinned
and time-consuuming, andrequires substantial skill,
limb.Note that the digits are still attached to the skin.
as well as the appropriate equipment.If the fetus is
330
Chapter
19
Fetotomy
emphysemaious andundergoing putrefaction the
Percutaneousfetotomy
tissues readilybreakdown,even withmodest force,
thus maling thetaskmuch easier.
Some generalrules
Subcutaneousfetotomy:removalof
A fetotomy,totalor partial,can be performed on
the hindlimb (posterior longitudinal
boththe standingorrecumbent cow;inthelatter,
presentation)
the hindquariers should be slightlyelevated.From
theobstetrician'spointofviewthe standingposi-
A'nick'ismadeinthe skinjustabove thefetlock
tion is far more convenient:howeveritis less safe
ontheposterior aspectoftheextendedfetalleg.
for thecow.Ifthecow isrecumbent,she shouldbe
Intothisisplaced thebeak’of Robert's knife and
placed inleft lateralrecumbency,with thefirstpart
withitanincisionismadefromthefetlockupthe
of thefetus to be amputated situatedupperimost.
backof thelimbtothe anteriorglutealregion.The
In this position,therumen will not bepushing the
skin is separated all around the leg, and the mus-
uterusdown.Inorder to amputatetheotherextrem
clesabove thehip joint,as well asthe adductor
ity,thecowshouldberolledoverontoherright
muscles,are divided.Thefemoral head is detached
side,so that partof the fetus isnow uppermost.The
from the acetabulumby introducing a traction bar
manoeuvremay need toberepeated,if total feto-
underneath theAchilles tendon and forciblyrotat-
tomy is tobeperformed.
ing the limb laterally. The skin is then cut suffi-
One of themajor problems duringa fetotomy
ciently around the fetlock joint to give scopefor
arises from brealing of the wire.Fetotomy wire,
disarticulation and arope snareisplacedoverthe
which is multifilament in design,tends to curl
freed end of the metatarsus.Sustained traction on
and kink very readily, even after one or two cuts.
thesnarebytwoassistants,withretropulsionof the
Therefore,it isimporiant to examine thewire after
calf by theobstetrician,usually causesavulsion of
eachcutand ifnecessary toreplaceitifitiskinked
the skinned limb.
orfrayed.
Removalof the oneleg,followedbytractionon
The procedure should be done as near aseptically
itsfoot-stillconnected tothe trunkby the skin
as possible.Severalbuckets of clean warm water and
of the leg-and on theother limb often resuls in
disinfectant shouldbe available;one to thoroughly
cxtraction of the calf. If it does not,then the other
clean the tail,vulva and perineal area ofthe cow
hindlimbmustbesimilarlyremoved.Thiswill allow
before starting thefetotomy,another for theinstru-
completedelivery orbirthoftheposteriorhalfof
mentsused during theprocedure,and finally oner
the calf.
two for cleaning up afterwards.
Shouldtheforequartersbecomeobstructedat
the pelvicinlet,then further fetotomy is required
Before getting started
asfollows.Asmuch of thecalf aspossibleis with-
drawnfromthevulva and amputated.Evisceration
Ifthere aresuspicionsoflow-gradehypocalcaemia
is now carried out.The remainder is repelled and
being present,particularly in case of third-parity
then,with Unsworth's knife,an incision is made
or older cows,calcium borogluconate should be
in the skin over the scapular cartilage and the
administeredinuravenouslybefore starting thepro-
musclesthatconnectthescapulatothespine
ceduretoreduceihechancesofthecowbecoming
are divided.By blunt dissection,the upper end
recumbent.Thecowshould berestrained inacaly-
ofthe shoulderbladeis isolatedand to itKrey's
ing-box; head bail or crush, ensuring that there is
hook isfastened and traction applied.In this way,
adequate room behind the animal.Epidural anaes-
thesia should beused routinely,although it will
thelimbisdrawn outofitsskinasfarasthefet-
lockjoint,atwhichpointitis disarticulatedand
only partially stop abdominal straining.However,
removed.The digits,with skin attached,together
it doesreduce the sensitivity ofthebirthcanal and
with Krey's hook gripping thethoracicvertebral
hence thepelvicreflex that willbeelicitedbyvaginal
column,serve as traction points for extraction of
manipulations.
theremainder of the calf.In rare cases,before the
The use of tocolytic drugs, such as clenbuterol and
anterior half can be withdrawn,the other fore-
isoxsuprine, is controversial. The myometrium is
limb must beremoved.
notresponsivetotheseagentstoanygreat degreeif
331
Part
131
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
thefetus hasbeen dead for sometime;even less so
with the fetus;at the same time paying altention
when it isemphysematous.In case theuterusdoes
totherelativeppsitionoftheuterineorintercor-
respond,thechances ofafoldof therelaxeduterine
nual septum.Someveterinarianslikeanassistant to
wall becoming trapped in thewire-saw are greatly
holdthe externalpart of thefetotome,whileothers
increased.If this is unnoticed,the result could be
prefer tobeincompletecontrolof theinstrument
catastrophicforthecow.
themselves.With either approach,at least one assis-
Lubrication is one of themain keys to success,and
tant is required to control wire tension during its
5-10 litresofthickobstetricallubricant should be
placement, and to do the actual sawing procedure.
infused into the uterus as deeply as possible.Ideally.
Sawingshouldnotbestartedbeforeafinalcheck
the lubricant should be slightly warmed as this
on the position of the fetotome has been made.
mayimprove the degree ofuterinerelaxationthat
Oncethe obstetricianhasconfirmedthatthewireis
isachieved.Frequentre-application oflubricant is
snuglypositioned around thefetusand theheadof
requiredtoensurearelativelynon-traumaticdeliv-
thefetotomeisprotectedbythehandoftheopera-
ery.Insufficient useoflubricant can be,and often
tor,sawing can begin.
is,the cause of failure.Apart from facilitating the
The correctness,especially of the fist cut, is of
removalofthefetal segments,it alsoprotectsthe del-
paramount importance.Initially there should be
icatetissuesofthecow'sreproductive tract,aswell as
slow, short,continuous sawing strokes usingmoder-
thehands and arms ofthe obstetrician.Skin infec-
ate force.Asthewirebecomesfirmlyembedded in
tionson thearmsof theoperator,usuallycaused by
the tissue,long,continuous strokes shouldbemade
Listeria spp.or Salonella spp.,are not uncommon,
usingstrongpressure.Longstrokes usethemaximum
especially following fetotomy of a dead fetus.For
lengthofavailablewire,whichspreadsthewearand
thisreason,disposableplasticsleeves shouldideally
also reduces the amount of heat produced and the
be worn.Hlowever, these readily become caught up
likelihoodthatthewirewillbreak.Ifcorrectlydone,
in the wire,making the procedure much more dif-
the cutting action is fast,with the sectioning com-
ficult.For this reason,many obstetricians dispense
pletedin arelativelyshortperiodof time.
with them, advocating the use of petroleum-based
Although the successive cuts of a total fetotomy
lubricants because of their tendency to stick to tis-
may vary somewhat according to the individual case
sues andprotect thehands and armsoftheobste-
and thepersonalpreferenceof the obsteirician,the
trician;however,they aremoredifficulttoremove
following approach for dealingwith a fetus in ante-
fromarms andhands.Agood alternativeforobstet-
riororposteriorpresentationisrecommended.
rical lubricant is apolyethylenepolymerproduct,
Totalfetotomy
lubricants, which are commonly used for rectal
examination,maybesatisfactoryforrelativelysim-
Fetusinanteriorlongitudinalpresentation
pleassisiedcalvingsbutare oflirtlevalueincase of
(Fig.19.5)
fetotomy,becausethey arerapidlydilutedby the
fetal fluids.
1.Amputation of the head.Sometimes the fetal
Before startinga fetotomy,thetotalplanfor the
head needs to be removed to allow access to the
procedure shouldbeproperlythoughtthrough in
forelimbs,especially if they are flexed. Both tubes
relation to theparticular case.The obstetrician's task
ofthe fetotome are threaded and thewire loop is
is tocarefully guide the threadedfetotome through
passedover thefetalheadsoitisseatedbehind the
the dorsal half of the vagina and into the uterus,
ears.If theres adequateroom,theheadof thefeto
always making sure that the wire has not twisted
tomeispositioned between-andposteriorto-the
and isnot crossed.Itis crucial that thewire does
mandibles.When spaceis limited,theinstrument
not come in contact withmaternal tissue during the
should bepositioned to one side of thefetal head,
sawing process.The head of the fetotome should
withtheheadofthefetotomepositionedatorjust
reach thepointfor final sectioningbeforethewire
beyond thecaudal aspect oftheramus of theman-
is guided forward to reach its correct position,and
dible (Fig.19.6).1f there is adequate room, most of
the operator must ensure that theheadofiheinstru-
the fetalneck should beremoved as well.Forthis,
mentreimainspositioned attheintendedsite.The
thewireloopshouldbeguidedforwardsalongthe
obstetrician'sfingers should always bein contact
neckasfaraspossible,andtheheadofthefetotome
332
Chapter
191
Fetotomy
5Longitudinal split
1
2
③
④
6
Fig. 19.7 Percutaneous fetotomy: temporary positioning of
thefetotomy wire between the claws of aforelimb.
in the axilla and it is inportant to check that the
Fig. 19.5 Drawing of a calf in anterior longitudinal presenta-
wire is also situatedmedial to the elbow.Traction
tion showing the successive cuts required for a tctal percu
is applied to the limb once more,so that,when
taneousfetolomy.Cut5isrequiredonlyiftheamputated
thoracic/iumbar ring is too big te be extractec.
the chain is anchored back into the notchied plate,
the forelimb is held in full extension (Fig. 19.8).
The head of the felotome must remain dorsocau-
dal to the scapula during the sawing process; this
will ensure that tie wire cuts thirough the muscle
attachments so that the entire scapula is removed.
If thefetotomeis allowed to move backwards by
the assistant's sawing action, the cut will prob-
ably be made thirough the distal scapula or, even
worse, the proximal humerus.In the latter case, the
diameter of the ferus is not reduced to any extent
(the shoulderjoint is not removed),and there isa
very sharp piece of bone left, still firmly attached
to the remainder of the fetus. Furthermore, a suit-
Fig.19.6 Percutaneous fetotomy: positioning of the fetotome
able traction point (for anchoring a calving chain
to amputate the head.
lo) no longer remains on thiat side. If the cut has
been made ihrough the scapula, the retained piece
should now beplaced alongside the neck, close to
of bone must be removed by hand by severing the
the scapula.
muscle attachments one by one, which can be quite
2.First forelimb.In some cases, the removal of
difficult, especially in a fresh fetus.
one entire forelimb (including the shoulder joint
An alternative technique is to loop the wire
and scapula) may reduce the diameter sufficiently
around the neck stump and forelimb, and to push
to permit extraction of the remainder of the fetus.
A calving chain is placed around the pastern and
the leg is pulled into extension. Both tubes of the
fetotome are threaded and the chain is passed
through the wire loop.The wire should be placed
temporarily between the claws (Fig. 19.7).The feto-
tome is then advanced along the lateral aspect of
the forelimb and shoulder until the end is situated
above,and slightly behind,the dorsal aspect of the
scapula. The calving chain is theni anchored into
the notched plate of the fetotome handle,which
keeps the forelimb extended.The wire loop is then
removed from between the claws and guided up the
Fig.19.8Percutaneous fetotomy: amputatior of a forelimb,
medial aspect of the limb while the assistant applies
showing the positioning of the fetotome and wire to ensure
complete amoutation of theextended limb.
gentle tension.The wire should become seated
Part
131
Dystociaandotherdisordersassociatedwithparturition
itback alongtheoutsideoftheelbowand scap-
situatedontheoppositesideoftheneckstumpor
ula soit will liebehind the posterior angle of the
thoracic inlet.For this cut in particular, i is impor-
scapula, where a deep incision has been made
tantthatthefetotomeremainsindirectcontactwith
withafingerknifetoaccommodatethewire.The
theskinofthefetus and isnotmistakenly advanced
headofthefetotomeisbroughtuptothebaseof
into the non-pregnant horn before the sawing pro-
the neck on the side opposite to the foreleg being
cess is started. If this happens, part of the uterine
removed(Fig.19.9).With thewireloop correctly
septumwill beamputated,withcatastrophicresults
placed,the cut is easily completed.Following this
forthe cow.
cut,anattempt maybemadetodeliver theremain-
If there is adequate room,all,or atleast alarge
der ofthecalf by traclion.A chainisplaced onthe
part ofthe thorax maybeincorporated in this cut.
attached limb and,with theaid of theKreyhook,
Thewireloopisguided around thethoraxandposi-
another point of traction is available on the neck
tioned caudally as far as possible (Fig. 19.10). It is
stump (i.e.the exposed lower cervical vertebral col-
important that the sawing is continued until all of
umn).If an oversized fetus still can not be deliv-
theribs andvertebralcolumn are completely sev-
eredafter thefirst two cuts(i.e.head/neck and one
ered.If the sawing action is interrupted,there isa
completeforelimb) havebeenmade,another three
high probability of thewire getting stuck inbone
to five cuts may be necessary to completely dis-
tissue.Once thistransversecuthasbeen completed,
member the remainder of the fetus.
the detached segment of fetus is carefully with-
Sometimes,itispossibletoremovethehead,neck
drawn from the birth canal,using the Krey hook
and one forelimb all in one piece. To do this,the
attachedtothevertebral stump as a secondtraction
fetotomeisintroduced andpositionedas described
point.Ifcarriedoutcorrectly,thethoraxwill nowbe
above for the forelimb,but the wire loop is now
cut to such a degree that all thoracicand abdomi-
guided along the opposite side of the head and necl
nal organs can be removed by hand; the eviscera-
until it is seatednear thethoracicinlet.If done cor-
tionwill substantiallyreducetheoverallsizeof the
rectly,his cut then runs obliquely across the fetal
remainderofthecalf.
neck and thorax, creating an opening in the thorax
4.Thorax.TheKrey hook is attached to the severed
through which complete evisceration of both tho-
vertebralcolumn and the chain ispassed through
racic and abdominal contents is carried out.Now
thewireloopofthepre-threadedfetotome.Thewire
the fetus may bepartially or completely extracted,
loop is held just outside the vulva,while he feto-
depending on its size,by placing traction on the
tome is advanced over,or alongthe dorsal aspect of
remainingforelimb.
the fetus tojust behind thelast ribs(if possible).The
3.Second forelimb.This mayberemoved ina sim-
Kreyhook ispulled tight and thechain is anchored
ilar manner to that described abovefor the first
intothenotchplate.Thewireloop isthenguided
forelimb.Often it ispossible tohave thewire loop
around the thorax,using a‘sweeping'motion,to
Fig.19.9 Percutaneous fetotomy:an alternative approach to
Fig.19.10 Percutaneous fetotomy:transverse division
armputate the leftforelimb andneckfollowing amputationof
through the trunk after amputaticn of the head/neck and
thehead.
rightforelimb
334
Chapter
191
Fetotomy
Fig.19.11Percutaneous fetotomy: division of the thorax with
a single cut show ng the position of thefetotome wire behind
the sternum.
end up just behind the sternum (Fig. 19.11). The
Fig.19.12 Percutaneous fetotomy:longitudinal cut required
obstetrician should hold both theKrey hook and
to reduce the diameter of the thorax.
the fetotome with one hand while holding the hall-
dle of the fetotome with the other. Some sideways
movement of the head of the fetotome should be
anticipated during the sawing process, but this may
be reduced by also grasping some fetal slin with the
hand thatholdstheKrey hook and the fetotome
inside the cow.Initially, short sawing strokes should
be used until the wire becomes properly embeddled.
Extraction of the amputated chest (or part of it) is
generally fairly easily accomplished by controlled
traction on theKrey hook.
Ifit turns out that thisportion of the thoraxis too
big to extract safely,then another longitudinal cut is
required to reduce its diameter.The wire is removed
from one feiotome tube and attachied to the intro-
ducer,which is thien advanced over the dorsal aspect
of the thorax and pushed down over the edge of
Fig. 19.13 Percutaneous fetotomy: positioning of the feto-
tome and wire tc amputate the lumbar area.
the amputation site. A hand is introduced into the
thoracic cavity and pushied tlirough he diaphiragm
to retrieve the introducer. The wire is then looped
6. Hindquarters. The final cut involves sectioning
back through the thorax and the second channel of
the hindquarters.Only one tube of the fetotome
the fetotome is threaded.The head of the fetotome
is threaded. The Krey hook should be attached to
is positioned adjacent to the Krey hook, which is
the vertebral stump and the hindquarters pulled
attached on to the verlebral stump. It is important
towards the cow's pelvic inlet. The wire introducer
that the ciut is made through the ribs near their verte-
with the wire attachied is advanced over the dorsal
bral attachments (Fig. 19.12). This part of the thorax
aspect of the sacrum and the tail head and pushed
can then be collapsed (rolled into a compact mass)
down behind the perineum. It is retrieved from
for easy delivery.
below by passing a hand under the calf and between
5.Lumbar area. If the fetus is very big. il may be
the hindlimbs. The wire is pulled out and threaded
physically impossible to guide thiewire around the
through the serond channel of thefetotome. Ideally,
remainder of the fetus; thus it will be necessary to
the wire should be situated on one side of the tail
amputate the lumbar area first (Fig. 19.13), before 
while the end of the fetotome is placed against the
bisecting the hindquarters.The approach is the same
opposite side of the vertebral column, next to the
as described for the thorax section.
Krey hook (Fig. 19.14). This ensures that the cut
335
Part
Dystocia andotherdisorders associatedwithparturition
Fig.19.15Percutanecusfetotomy:carpal flexion with the
Fig.19.14 Percutaneous fetotomy: positioning of the feto-
fetotomy cutmadethrough thedistal part of thecarpal
tomeandwire tobisectthehindquarters.
joint.
through thefetalpelvisismadein a slightlydiago
willbetheresultandtherewillbenothingtoanchor
nalmanner;nowhalfcan bewithdrawn in turn by
thechain to.Theobstetrician will also need to deal
meansof theKreyhook.
withasharppieceofboneif thecutismadetoolow,
Insomecasesofdystociaduetofetomaternaldis-
i.e.below the joint.
proportion, the forequarters of a fetus in anterior
presentation aredelivered and thenthe situationof
Unilateralorbilateralshoulderflexion
a'hip-lock'develops(seeCh.14).Now theforeparts
ofthecalfareamputatedby a transverse cut through
posture;percutaneous removal
thelumbararea.Thefetusis eviscerated,afterwhich
ofaretained forelimb(s)
theintroducer,withthewireattached,ispassedover
In many cases,extravulval decapitation needs tobe
thedorsalaspect ofthehindquarters andretrieved
performed first, to provide more space for subse-
ventrally.The cut is completed as described above.
quent procedures.Thedisadvantageis thatitremoves
a point of attachment for ropes/chains to apply trac-
Correctionoffetalmalpostures
tion,sothataKreyhookwill berequiredasa sub
stitute. A finger knife is used to make an incision
Carpal flexionposture
through theskinjustmedial to the dorsal aspect of
Dystocia due to uni-or bilateral carpal flexion can
thescapula and thendown into theconnective tissue
be difficult to correct manually,especially if the
between thescapula and thorax.Inthefirstinstance,
dystociahasbeenprolonged andtheuterusiscon-
onlyonetubeofthefetotomeisthreadedand the
tracted.It may not bepossible or safe to repel the
wire is attached to the introducer,which is then
fetusandcorrectthefaultydispositionwithoutthe
passed over the scapula and down between the tho-
riskofrupturingtheuterus.In thesecases,thehead
raxandthiereflectedforelimb.Thewireisretrieved
andnecl should be amputatedfirst,followedby a
frombelow and thesecondchannelofthefetotome
fetotomycut,whichshouldbemadethroughthe
is threaded.The instrument is then advanced along
distal part of the carpal joint. One rube of the feto-
themedialaspectoftheshoulder andheldin that
tomeis threaded and theintroducer,withthewire
position.The free hand pushes the wire loop into
attached,is passed around the flexed carpal joint.
thepreviously madeincision(Fig.19.16).Tension is
After threading the second channel of thefetotome,
appliedto thewire to ensure that theloopis situated
theheadoftheinstrumentshould bepositioned
medial to thebody of the scapula.The head of the
against the distal row of carpal bones (Fig.19.15).
fetotomemustbeheldmedial totheshoulderjoint
If done correctly, there will be no sharp bone frag-
duringthe sawingprocess.Alternatively,thehead of
ments,and a calving chain can be anchored against
the fetotome can be positioned dorsal to the pos-
the tuberosities of the distal radius,providing an
terior angle of the scapula.Hlowever,considerable
excellent traction point.If thecut is made toohigh,
forceisnowrequired tomaintaintheinstrument in
ie.through the distal radius,a sharp piece of bone
thispositionwhile sawingseversthemusclesthat
336
Chapter
19
Fetotomy
Fig.19.17Percutaneousfetotomy:position ofthefetotome
to correct cystocia cue tolateral deviation(flexion) of the
neck by amputation of the head and neck
Fig.19.16Percutaneousfetotomy:position of the fetotome
andwireforamputationof theforelimbincaseof shoulder
flexion.
canberepelledinto theuterustoberetrieved later,
oncethefetotomyiscompletedortheremainder of
attach thielimbtothetrunkandthe skinat thebase
the fetus is delivered.
of theneck.The detached forelimb iswithdrawn by
means of Krey's hook.
Downwarddisplacementofthehead
If bilateral, an attempt should again be made to
(ventralflexionoftheneck)
extend the other retained limb and, this being pos-
sible,traction onit,and on the neck-through the
Downwarddeviationoftheheadisrareincattlebut
medium of Krey's hooks - should result in delivery.
this postural defect can prove very difficult to cor-
Alternatively,the fetusmay bewithdrawnwithout
rect by means of manipulation,and amputation of
extension of the other leg.If both these artempts
the head is indicated in obstinate cases.However,
fail,thentheotherlimbmust alsoberemoved,the
the introduction and correct placing ofthe wire
subsequent procedure being that described for feto-
between the markedlyflexed neck and chest can be
maternal disproportion.
very difficult.With the help of the introducer, the
wireshouldbepassedunderneath theflexedneck.
The head of thefetotome ispositionedon top of
Lateraldeviation(flexion)ofthehead
theneck,betweentheshoulderblades.Whenthecut
Invery obstinateneglected cases ofdystocia dueto
hasbeenmade,thefetusshouldberepelledintothe
lateral deviation of theheadwhen thefetus is dead,
uterusbeforethe ainpulated head and neckcan be
and in theoccasionalcongenitalrigidcurvature of
retrievedandremoved.
the neck calledwryneck,correction is impossible
and decapitationis required.Wryneck’isa not
Fetusinposteriorlongitudinalpresentation
uncommon disorder of the fetal foal,and this is a
(Fig. 19.18)
usefulmethodofcorrecting dystocia in themare.
Onetube ofthefetotome is threaded,and theend
1.First hindlimb.If the hindlimbs are extended,a
of the wire,attached to the introducer, is passed in,
similar procedurelo that described for theextended
over and around thefetalneck.It is bestachieved
forelimb canbeused.Both channels ofthe feto-
by first pushing the introducer over the neck, then
tomearethreaded.A calvingchain is attached to
between the neck and thorax before retrieving it
thepastern of the hindlimb and passed through the
frombeneath theneck.Oncethesecond barrelof
wire loop,which is temporarily placed between the
thefetotomehasbeen threaded,theinstrumentis
claws.Thefetotome is advancedalongthelateral
advanceduntil theheadofthefetotomeispositioned
aspect of thehindlimbuntil thehead of the instru-
adjacent to the thoracic inlet (Fig.19.17）.Tension
ment is situated near the greater trochanter, after
shouldnowbe applied to thewire so the operator
which the chain is anchored into the notch plate.
can check whether the wire loop is seated as close to
The wire loop is then removed from the interdigi-
the thorax as possible. Once the cut is made, the sev-
tal space and guided up themedial aspeci of the
eredneck can be grasped,either by hand or with the
limb.Thewire shouldbepositionedbetween the
useof Krey'shook,and theneck,plusattached head,
tail and the ischiatic tuberosity opposite to the leg
removed.Alternatively,the detached headandneck
being amputated.Itis important tocheckthat the
337
Part
Dystocia andother disorders associatedwithparturition
sure that the tail of thecalf isincluded in theloop;
1
Longitudinal
otherwise, during sawing, thewire may slip down
thelimbandihecutwill bemadethroughthedistal
third ofthe femur.
2.Second hindlimb.If delivery is not possible after
removing one hindlimb,the second limb can be
removedina similarmanner（Fig.19.20).Itisoften
possible to pass the wire loop past the fetal pelvis so
itissituatedinthelumbararea,justcaudaltothelast
rib(Fig.19.21).Alternatively,thepre-threaded feto
Fig.19.18Drawing of a calf in posterior longitudinal presen-
tomecanbeadvancedover thedorsal aspectofthe
tation showing the successive cuts required for a total per-
pelvis and lumbar spine, and the wire loop guided
cutaneous fetotomy. Cut4isrequired onlyif the amputated
thoracic/umbarring is toobig to beextracted.
upventrally.Theresulting transversecut now allows
extractionofthehindlimband theremainderofthe
pelvis.lf both hindlimbs have been removed,this
transverse cut can also be made by using the Krey
hook,which is attached to the vertebral stump,to
anchor the fetus to thefetotome.Now,the remain-
derof thecalfisdrawn towardsthecow'spelvicinlet
and evisceratedbeforethenext cut is made.
Fig.19.19 Percutaneous fetotomy:amputation of ahind-
limb,showing the positioningof thefetotomeandwire to
ensure completeamputation of theextended limb.
wireisalsosituatedmedial to thestifle.Nowthe
fetotome is advancedfurtheruntil theheadisposi-
tionedjustbeyond thegreater trochanter,nearthe
lumbar vertebrae (Fig. 19.19). Traction is applied
tothelimb soitis fully extended and the chain is
anchored back into thenotch plate.If properly car-
Fig.19.20 Percutanecus fetotomy:positionof the fetotome
ried out, this cut will be diagonal across the pel-
to amputate the second complete hindlimb.
vis,removingthe entirehindlimbincludingthe hip
joint;thusreducing thewidth of the fetus,soitmay
bepossible toextract theremainderof the calf.A
chain isplaced onthe attached limb and,with the
aid of Krey's hook,anotherpoint of traction is avail-
ableontheperineuin ortheseveredpelvis.If the
fetotome inadvertently moves backwards during
the sawing process, the cut will be made through
the proximal femur; as a consequence the width of
thefetal hindquarters is not reduced and there is a
sharppieceofboneleft.
An alternative approach is to place thewire loop
overonefoot andpassitupthelimbsothatlaterally
it lies anterior tothetubercoxae,where adeepcut
in the skin and underlying tissues, previously made
Fig.19.21Percutaneousfetotomy:positionof thefetotome
with a finger knife,helps to retain it.The head of
andwiretoamputate thecalf'spelvisandsecondcomplete
the fetotome is positioned next to tlie anus,making
hindlimb.
338
Chapter
191
Fetotomy
3.Thorax.If the remainder of the calf cannot be
extracted,then its trunk must bebisected,the trans-
verse division being made as far forward as pos-
sible.Bothtubesofthefetotomearethreadedand
thefetus is pulled towards the cow's pelvicinlet
using theKrey hook,which is attached to the ver-
tebral stump.The chain ispassedthrough thewire
loop,whichis held outside thevulva,whilethefeto-
tome is advanced over the dorsal aspect of the tho-
rax,so that the head ofthe instrument is situated
just caudal to,orbetween,thecalfs shoulder blades
(Fig.19.22).Thewireloop isnowguided around the
thorax(usinga‘sweeping'motion),ensuring that-
Fig.19.23Percutaneousfetotomy:position of thefetotome
ventrally-itbecomespositionedjustcranialto the
andwire toamputatecne completeforelimb.
sternum.Thefetotomeis held inposition by the same
hand thatholdstheKreyhook.Whenthediameterof
this section of the calf is still too large to allow its
delivery,the rib cage should be collapsed as described
An alternative method isto diagonally divide the
for thefetusinanteriorlongitudinalpresentation.
forequarters,in which case usually only one cut is
4.The forequarters. If it is still not possible to
required.Only one tubeisthreadedand theKrey
extract the anterior portion of the fetus using
hook is attached to the vertebral stump.The wire
theKreyhookattachedto theseveredvertebral
loopis completedasdescribedabove,butnowthe
stump,one,orifnecessary both,forelimbs should
head of thefetotome is either placed on the oppo-
beamputated.Only onetubeofthefetotome is
site sideof theKrey hook or against the lateral aspect
threaded and the wire,with the aidoftheintro-
of the opposite thoracic wall (Fig. 19.24). In the lat-
ducer, is passed forwards between the neck and
ter case,some blunt dissection is required before
foreleg,whereit isretrieved byreachingbeneath
theheadofthefetotomecanbepositionedfirmly
the calf.Thewire is withdrawn and the second
between theribs and the scapula.Once thewire has
channelof the fetotome isthreaded.Thehead
becomefullyembedded,theheadofthefetotome
ofthe instrument shouldbepositioned against
should bemoved to the lateral surface of the oppo-
the severed end of the vertebral column,next to
site scapula.If this oblique sagittal cut is carried out
the Krey hook (Fig.19.23).The severed limb(s)
correctly,one part will consist ofone forelimb and
andtheremainderofthefetusmaybebroughtout,
the major part of the thorax,the other part is head
oneby one,by attachingKrey's hook tothem.
neck,the other forelimb and the remainder of the
Fig.19.22Percutaneous feto:omy:position of the fetotome
Fig.19.24Percutaneous fetotomy.position of the fetotome
andwire tobisect the thorax.
and wire to diagonallybisect theforequarters.
339
Part
Dystocia and other disorders associated with parturition
thorax.Thesepariscan nowbewithdrawn one after
retainedhindlimb,wherethehand,passedinunder
another, while paying attention to any sharp bone
the calf,reachesiandpullsitout,completingthe
fragments.
loop.After threating the other channel of the feto-
tome,the instrument is passed aloug the vagina
Correction of fetal malpostures
and the head of thefetotome isplaced against the
perineum of the calf.At this stage, a crucial step in
Hockflexionposture
theprocedureis toinclude thefetal tail in theloop
of thewireandtoholdtheheadofthefetotome
Incasesofuni-orbilateral hockflexion,a similar
firmly against the ischiatictuberosity oppositeto
approach to that described for carpal flexion is used
ihe leg being amputated (Fig.19.27).while saw-
(Fig. 19.25). The key aim is to retain a point of trac-
ing takes place.In this way, the femur is sectioned
tionforthecalvingchainandtohavenosharpbone
through its articular head.Followingremoval of
fragments (Fig.19.26).
thesevered limb,theotherretainedhindlimboften
can be delivered because more room is created for
Hip flexion posture
mutation.If this hip flexion cannot be resolved
Onetubeofthefetotomeisthreaded andthefree
safely,theretained hindlimb should be similarly
end of thewire,attached to anintroducer,is passed
amputated.
In cases where the calf's posterior end is jammed
overthedorsal aspectofthefetus anddownbeiween
thebodywall and thestifleofthemost accessible
into the cow's pelvis,it may be difficult,if not
impossible,to repel the calf and an alternative
approach may be chosen if the calf is not over-
sized.The pre-threaded fetotome is advanced
alongthedorsal aspectofthecalfuntil thehead
oftheinstrumentissituatedabovethelastribs,
while the wire loop is placed around the back of
the calf,approximately 2-3cm below the ischiatic
tuberosities (Fig. 19.28). The resulting cut severs
both hindlimbs through theproximal femur and
continues through the abdomen,finishing at the
thoracolumbar region. The amputated hindlimbs
areremoved one after another,thenthepelvis,the
abdominalvisceraandfinallytheanteriorpartof
the fetus usingKrey'shook.
Fig.19.25Percutaneous fetotorny:hcck flexionwith the feto-
tomycut madethroughthedistalpart of thetarsaljoint.
Fig.19.26Percutaneousfetotomy:showing howamputation
at thelevel of the hockshouldbedone to ensure that thereis
Fig.19.27Percutaneous fetotomy:position of thefetotome
astill  tractionpoint left(rightvs lefthindlimb),butwithout
ancwire foramputation of the hindlimb in case of hip flexion
thepresence of sharp bone fragments.
posture.
340
Chapter
191
Fetotomy
fluid and it may now be possible to pass the wire
around the hindquarters. Cases of fetal anasarca [see
Ch.4) cause dystocia because of the great increase in
fetal volume dueto the excess offluid in subcutane
ous tissues, particularly of the head and hindlimbs.
Delivery of severely affected fetuses usually requires
partial fetotomy or multiple incisions of the subcu-
taneous tissues.
Where it is obvious, because of excessive fetal
size - as in anasarca and extensive duplication - or
because ofvery irregular presentation,that several
fetotomy sections will be required, the veterinary
Fig, 19.28 Percutaneous fetotomy. position of ihe feiotome
surgeon should resort to the caesarean operation.
and wire wihen using an alternative approach to manage a
This will be less arduous for the operator and, in
case of bilateral hip flexicn.
general,better for the immediate health and the
future breeding potential of the cow.
Monsters
Percutaneous fetotomy in the obstetric
management of schistosoma reflexus
General principles
After killing and evisceration of ihe calf, usually
Inview ofthe worthlessnature of fetal monsiers,
only one to three cuts are requiredon these rela-
the use of fetotomy to effect per vaginam delivery
tively small fetuses.Before embarking on the feto-
should be first considered,although if it is alive it
tomy pracedure itself, it is wise spending some time
must be killed first.This is best done by grasping the
makingoneself familiarwith thepresentedcase.The
umbilicus and rupturing it with a sudden pull; rapid
correct placement of the saw wire is the most dif-
death occurs due to exsanguination. If it is possible
ficult part of the whole exercise. The rigidity of the
to reduce the fetal diameter, by making a small num-
curved spine and ankylosed limbs prevents repul-
ber of sinplecuts to enable aper vaginam delivery,
sion of any fetal part, and inappropriate cuts will
then percutaneous fetotomy should be attempted.
leave many sharp bone fragments thiat can easily
Thus, for ankylosed fetuses, including wryneck' and
traumatize the birth canal. The vertebral angulation
perosomus elumbis,for cases ofanterior duplica-
should be identified,as this is the site of the first
tion and for schistosomes presented viscerally, feto-
fetotomy cut in order to bisect the fetal trunk (Fig.
tomy is indicated.Thehydrocephalicwhose cranial
19.29). One channel of the fetotome is threaded
and the wire is carried in,attached to an introducer,
have the dome sawn off by means of a fetotomy
wire.If theentireheadisamputated,the difficultyf
extracting the grossly enlarged head still remains. In
cases of fetal ascites ('water belly'), typically only the
anterior half [head,neck,and forelimbs) of the fetus
can be delivered,with the greatly extended abdo
men preventing firther extraction (see Ch.4). Now,
a finger knife is used to incise the fetal abdomen at
several sites, enlarging the incisions by hand. During
controlled extraction of the fetus, the excess abdom-
inal fluid will escape into the uterus.Alternatively,
partial fetotomy similar to that described for hip-
lock’ can be carried out. However, if the abdomi-
nal cavity is not opened, it may be very difficult or
impossible toretrieve the introducer from under-
Fig.19.29 Percutaneous fetctomy:position of the fetotome
neath the hugely extended abdomen. Perforation of
and wire to bisect the fetal trunk of a viscerally presented
the diaphragm will release most of the abdominal
schistosoma reflexus calf after removal of theviscera.
341
Part
3
Dystociaandother disordersassociatedwithparturition
in a similar manner to that described for amputa-
tion of a flexed carpus or tarsus.If necessary,a fin-
gerknifeisusedtomakeincisionsinthelargeskin
folds,which facilitatestheventral retrievalofthe
introducer.TheKrey hook is attached to the point
of spinal angulation and the head of thefetotome
is positioned next to it.During the sawing proce-
dure,boththeKreyhook and thefetotome areheld
withonehandwhiletheotherholdsthehandle
oftheinstrument outsidethecow.Once thecut is
completed,the fetal‘halves'arecarefully extracted
by means ofKrey's hook.Sometimes,extra cuts
Fig.19.31 Schistosoma reflexus calf presenting by itsextremi-
arerequiredtoreducethefetalpartssufficientlyto
ties.
allowatraumaticdelivery.
Alternatively,thewire may be passed around the
spinal flexure of the fetus (Fig.19.30).Passing the
operation orfetotomy will be required.It is often
introducer around therigid fetus may be a tedious
possible and easier to deal with such a presentation
task; usinga smaller tool, such as a wire handle,may
by thelatter method,since thecaesarean operation
make this procedure easier.When accomplished,the
required will involve a very large uterine incision
otherchannelofthefetotomeisthreadedandthe
and the risk of uterine rupture during extraction of
instrument is passed into the vagina until its head
thefetalmonster,unlessa fetotomy iscarriedout
abuts on the ferus.The fetalvertebralcolumn is
from thelaparotomy site（Bezek&Frazer 1994)
thensawn throughand thesmallerfetalsegmentis
(see Ch.20 on the caesarean operation).Ifpos-
removed.Shoulddifficultyariseoverwithdrawalof
sible,the pre-threaded fetotome is introduced and
theremaining portion,it oomayneed to bedivided
the wire loop is then guided up and around all
perpendicularly to thefirst section, again using the
four limbs.When placed correctly, the wire will
wire-saw.
also encompass the head and parts of the thorax
When a schistosomepresentsbyitsextremities-
and pelvis（Fig.19.32).A calving chain attached
three or four legs,with or without the head-the
tooneortwolimbs can beusedto anchor the
excessivefetal diameter,togetherwiththeankylosis
fetus to the instrument.If the cut is successful,the
ofjoints,islikelytopreventnaturalormanipulative
head,neck,forelimbs and part ofthe pelvis with
delivery per vaginam (Fig. 19.31).UInless the fetus
hindlimbs attached canbe withdrawn.Sometimes,
isvery small inrelation to thematernalpelvis-
theseparateremovaloftheheadandoneortwo
asmightoccurinaschistosometwintoanormal
limbs is required to makebirth possible.Another
calf- time should not be wasted on an attempt at
delivery by means of vaginal extraction.A caesarean
Fig.19.32Percutaneous fetotorny:pcsition of thefetotome
Fig.19.30 Percutaneous fetotomy:altemaive approach for
andwiretobisect a schistosomareflexuscalfpresentingby its
bisecting aviscerallypresented schistosomareflexuscalf.
extremities
342
Chapter
1191
Fetotomy
cut through the point of spinal angulation may
needed and it is important that approximately the
be necessary to divide the remaining fetal trunk,
same volume of fluid is siphoned from theuterus
so these parts can then be extracted safely without
as has initially been infused.Oxytocin (20-40Iu)
causing trauma.
and anon-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent are
After successful removal of a schistosome, the
mandatory,and should be administered for 2 days.
uterus should always be searched for injury and to
If there is evidence of shock, fluid therapy is indi-
ensure the absence of a second fetus.
cated; hypertonic saline solution (4ml/kg) given
The same considerations apply to treatiment of
intravenouslyfollowedby20-25litresofwater
monstrosities in sheep, goats and deet.
orally.Intrauterine antibiotics are of limited value
at this stage, but systemic antibiotics should be
Postoperative management
administered for at least 4-5 days. In addition, the
administration of calcium borogluconate should
and care
be considered to facilitate uterine involution.A
The fetal membranes are removed only if they can
transrectal examination of the entire genital tract
be readily deiached. This is followed by a thor-
shiould be carried out 2-3 weeks later, al whichi
ough lavage of the uterine cavity with large vol-
stage any adhesions can be easily identified. This
umes of warm water or a 'saline solution' (9g of
is also the correct time to provide intrauterine anti-
biotic therapy for chronic endometritis.
ature, using a wide-bore tube; the fluids may be
fortified with povidone-iodine solution (<l ml
References
believedtohave boih a soothing and a stimulat-
ing effect on theuterus,and this,together with the
BezekDM,Frazer GS 1994 Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet
excavation of uterine fluid, lubricant and debris,
16:1393
may promote involution. Some people advocate
Frazer GS 1998 In: Proceedings of the 31st Annual
usingcoldwater in order to stimulateuterine con-
Convention nf the Ameriran Association of Bovine
Practitioners, p 97
tractions, but there is no evidence that ihis is of
Graham JA 1979 J Am Vet Med Assoc 174:169
any real benefit. Fluids should be infused incre-
Mortimer RG,Toombes RE 1993Vet Clin North Am Food
menially until the effluent is free of debris and no
Prod Anim9:323
longer cloudy. Normally 20-30 litres of water are
Paiba GA 1995VetRec136:492
343
—#
Part
141
Operative interventions
20 The caesarean operation and
the surgical preparation of
teaser males.....
347
Jos Vermunt and David Noakes
21
Genital surgery in the bitch
and queen
376
Gary England
20
Chapter
JosVermuntand
David Noakes
The caesarean operation and the surgical
preparation of teaser males
Indications
The caesarean operation
The reasons for surgery include most causes of dys-
tocia,but analysis of published cases shows that the
Cattle
following six major indications account cumula-
The caesarean operation is one of the most comon
tively for 90% of all caesarean operations:
1. fetomaternal disproportion (relative and abso-
cattle practice and is considered as a routine obstet-
lutefetal oversize)
ric technique. It has high maternal and fetal survival
2. incomplete dilatation or induration of the cervix
rates and often it is less exhausting,faster and safer
3. irreducible uterine torsion
than fetotomy (Parkinson 1974,Cattel &Dobson
1990). There are thrce main goals:(1) survival of
4.feial monsters
thecow,(2) survival of the calf and (3) maintenance
5.laulty fetal disposition (presentation,position or
offertility.Aprompt decision to perform a caesar-
posture)
ean operation is important for optimum success
6. fetal emphysema.
(Dawson & Murray 1992). 1deally, it is carried out
whena livecalf cannot be delivered after 15-20 min-
In individual series,their relative frequency varies
considerably depending primarily on the breed of
utes of manipulation.The cow is a good surgical risk
provided that the environment is suitable for aseptic
cattle predominantly at risk and,to a lesser extent,
abdominal surgery. Urgent intervention is indicated
on whether fetotomy is routinely practised. 1f the
if thiere is evidence of fetal hypoxia, as shown by
birth canal is fully dilated,fetal causes of dystocia
hyperactive movements of the fetus, and expulsion
maybe amenabletoreliefbyfetotomybutfailure
of the meconium, identifiable in the amniotic fluid.
of cervical dilatation and inreducible uterine torsion
 are absolute indications for surgery. Non-surgical
A successful prognosis depends on several factors:
delivery may seem advisable if the fetus is grossly
 skill and speed of the surgeon
infected, but laparohysterotony is often obfigatory
· duration of dystocia
in such cases because of premature uterine involu-
· physical condition of the dam
tion, emphysema of the fetus or constriction of the
availability of skilled assistance
birth canal. In many cases of dystocia, fetotomy
may be the preferred option. However, the choice
· surgical environment
between caesarean operation and fetotomy will, to
·concurrent disease
a certain extent, depend on the veterinarian's prefer-
* presence of a live calf.
ence andrelative experiencewith either techinique.
347
Part
41
Operativeinteiventions
Theindications for a caesareanoperation andthe
in favour of surgery.Excessive traction in such ani-
reasoningbehind anappropriatedecisionhavebeen
malsmaymerely exacerbate thedegree ofdystocia
extensively discussed (Cox 1987,Pearson 1996,
andcomprorfisethesuccessofan eventual caesar-
Green et al 1999).The prognosis and cost should be
ean operation. One practical guideline is that a cae-
discussedwith the owner priorto surgery andprefer-
sareanoperation isindicated iftheheadandboth
ablywritten,informedconsentshouldbeobtained.
elbows,or both stifles in posterior presentation,
cannot bepulled into thepelviccanal by traction
Fetomaternal disproportion
by one person.As a rule ofthumb,the elbows are
introduced into thepelviccavityifthefetlockjoints
Fetomaternal disproportionisconsistently themost
extendforatleastonehandwidthbeyond thecow's
frequent overallindication for a caesarean operation
vulva.Similarly,the stiflesareintroducedif thehock
incattle.Fourparticularformsmaybe encountered.
jointsextendforatleastonehandwidthbeyond
Physical immaturity of the dam.In herds in which
the cow's vulva.However,even then,if the calf has
bull and heifer calves are kept together,or wherea
a large chest or pelvis,subsequent obstruction can
bullrunswith suckling cows,calves may conceiveat
occur.The frequent finding in hospital referrals of
an unexpectedly earlyage.It isnot uncommon for
fractured limb bones in oversized calves suggests
heifers tobe parturient at term at only 14 months
eitheranunreasonabledegreeof tractionortraction
of age and,in exceptional casesat only1yearof
ina wrong direction.Inheifersparticularly,hurried
age.Even at 18 months of age, thie maternal pelvis
tractionearlyinsecond-stagelabouristobeavoided
isstill immature andusually toosmall fornormal
unless there is obvious dystocia,because thevesti-
vaginal delivery.This form of fetomaternal dispro-
bule andvulvawill nothaverelaxedsufficientlyand
portionisalsoknown as‘relativefetaloversize'(see
perineal damage is more likely to occur (seeCh.17).
Chs 8, 11).
If in doubt about thedecision,it is probably better
Fetaloversize.Themajority ofcasesofdisproportion
for the welfare of the cow and calf to perform a cae-
are animals thatare mature and at normal term.In
sarean operation(Green el al 1999).The deliberate
this situationof'absolutefetal oversize'，themater-
adoption of breeding policies that require caesarean
nalpelvis is normal but the fetus is abnormally
delivery is not justifiable in ethical terms.
large,althoughnormally developed inother aspects.
Ir is not uncommon for several heifers in a group
Among dairy breeds, the Holstein-Friesian is more
torequiremorethannormalassistanceorhavetobe
susceptibletothisform ofdystocia duringthefirst
delivered by caesarean operation.If the time interval
pregnancy than the Ayrshire or Jersey.Certain beef
permits,theprematureinduction ofparturition in
breedsare alsofrequently affectedwith fetomater-
the later calving animals within 10 days of antici-
nal disproportion andnotonlyduringthefirstpreg
pated termmay beofconsiderablebenefit(see
nancy,Double muscling or generalized muscular
Ch.6).Where an elective operation is required，it
hyperplasia is well recognized in certain breeds such
shouldideallybeperformed during thefirst stageof
asthe Belgian Blue(see Chs 8,11)
labour(seeCh.6).
The management of dystocia caused byfetoina-
Fetal monstersandinfection.Themost extremeform
ternal disproportion depends largely on experi-
ofdisproportion iswherethereispathological fetal
enced clinical assessment ofhow much traction
oversize such as fetal anasarca and achondroplasia,
can safelybeexertedwithoutriskofseriousbirth
which greatly increases the cross-operational diam-
canal trauma or,worsestill,impaction ofthefetus
eter of the fetus.Conjoined twins are also usually
after only partial delivery. This is the most worry-
toolarge forvaginal delivery.More common than
ingof all obstetric problems to be encountered in
all of these,however is emphysema due to second-
cattlepractice,with ample scopefor errors of judge-
ary putrefaction,which frequently develops in pro-
ment,whichmayoften lead1odeathofthefetus
tracteddystocia.
and sometimes the dam.In many cases of fetal
Postmaturity.A moderate prolongation of preg-
oversize,thefetal headcannot be drawn intothe
nancyupto290 daysorthereabouts is anormal fea-
maternalpelviccavityandthedecisiontoperform
ture ofcertainbreedsbutin occasional animalsof
a caesarean operation is obvious.In others,traction
anybreedgestationmaylastforconsiderablylon-
ismoreeffectiveand thedecisionislessclear.The
ger,even beyond 400 days.Postmaturity results in
difficulty lies inknowingwhen to abandon traction
continued fetalgrowthinutero,particularlyofthe
348
Chapter
201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
skeleton.In suich cases,dystocia at term is due not
in responseto traction on the feius.Incising the cer-
simplytofetal oversizebut alsotoinadequaterelax-
vical rim in themidline dorsally during tractionmay
ation of the birth canal.There is also the problem
allowsafevaginal deliverybutit shouldberemeim
of'giant'calves resulting from invitromaturation/
hered that the fetus(in cases ofuterine torsion)may
fertilization(Chs1l and35).
be larger thannormal and that a cervical incision
may teat,causing severe haemorrhage or uterine
Incompletecervicaldilatation（seepp.232-233)
rupture.
Incomplete dilatation ofthe cervix is a common
Irreducible uterine torsion(seepp.235-239)
catise of dystocia in cattle but it should be diagnosed
Torsion of the uterus in cattle constitutes a major
nal exploration.Cervical dilatation during the first
indication for a caesarean operation,eitherbecause
stage of labour is a gradual process and the pres-
the torsion isirreducibleorbecausethecervixfails
ence of a cervical rim is not in itself an indication
to dilate after correction per vaginam.In most cases
ofdystocia,provided that the fetal membranes are
ofpostcervicaltorsion,the degree ofcervical dilata-
still intact.Careshould betakenin such casesnot to
tion andvaginal twisting permits theintroduction of
perforate the membranes unless the cervix remains
a hand into theuterusformanipulationofthefetus
undilated2hours or solater.Slow,orarrested,dila-
but if the torsion affects the cervical canal or uter-
lationin multiparouscowsmaybe associatedwith
inebody (i.e.precervical torsion),the fetus is totally
uterine inertia caused byhypocalcaemia;in these
inaccessible.Such torsions are an absolute indica-
animals,theresponse to calcium therapy is usually
tionfor a caesarean operation.Uterine torsion dif-
rapid.If,oninitialor subsequent examination,the
fersfrom all othercauses of dystocia incattleinthat
cervixisincompletelydilatedandthemembranes
oneorbothofthefetalmembranesusuallyremain
arealready ruptured,with afetalextremitypre-
intactevenif theplacenta separates,unless they are
sented against or through the cervix,orifthefetus
deliberately perforated.The presence of fetal fluids
isalready dead,then further cervical dilatation is
thusprotecis the fetus and the uterusfrom infection;
unlikely.Ifthecervical rimis shallowandmembra-
inthis respectthe condition carriesafavourable
nous,orifit stretches sufficiently forthehead to be
prognosis.Torsionhowevermay still have seriously
drawn into the vagina,normal safe delivery may be
detrimentaleffects on the uterus.Rotation through
possible.Intheothercases,irrespectiveofthe degree
360°iscommonandtwoorthreecompleterevolu-
ofdilatation,thecervixisusuallytoothickened and
tionsoftheuterussometimesoccur.Thegreaterthe
indurated forvaginal deliverytobe safely attempted,
degree ofuterinerotation,the greater theinterfer
andfurtherdelaywillresult onlyinfetal death and
encewithvenous circulationwithintheuterus and
a greater risk of inurauterine infection.The presence
its mesometrialandmesovarian auachments.The
ofan incompletely dilatedcervixafter thebirthof
combination ofuterinedisplacementandoedema-
onetwinwiththeotherfetusstill inutero,oftenina
tous swelling of its wall may well result in perfora-
breechpresentation,clearlyindicalesthatthecervix
tionof theuterinebody,especiallybythefetal head.
startstoconstrictsoonafterbecomingfullydilated.
In exceptionally profracted cases,a fetalextremity
Thefrequentfindingoffaultyfetaldispositionin
may impinge,hrough auterine tear,on theurethra
cases of apparent failure to dilate may indicate that,
or segmenis of large intestine and causerupture of
in these cases at least,the cervix is in fact constrict-
the urinary bladder or gut.
ingand the dysiocia is fetal rather than maternal
In most cases of uterine torsion, the prognosis is
innature.Failure of the cervix todilate or remain
excellentbutparadoxicallytheoperationmaybe
dilated is nol uncommon in premature calvings and
technically difficult,firstlybecausesmall intestineis
canresultinthefetalheadbecomingtrappedinthe
usuallydisplaced andiinpedesaccess tothe uterus
anterior vagina.Incomplete dilatation ofthe cer-
andsecondlybecausethepresenceoffetalfluids
vixisanimportant complicationofuterinetorsion.
may make the uterus difficult to handle and impos-
After manipulativecorrection of thetorsion,thecer-
sible to exteriorize for suturing.Perforation of the
vixisoftenonlypartiallydilatedandseldomdilates
oedematouswallcaneasilyoccur duringtheintra
further (Pearson 197i).In such cases,the cervical
abdominalmanipulation ofthegrossly extended
rimmaybedeepbut itisusuallythinandstretches
uterus.
349
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
Fetal monsters
Schistosoma reflexus isby farthe most common gross
structural defect in cattle (see Chs 4, 16). Occasional
cases are born normally without assistance and oth-
ers may be extracted with moderate traction.Most
affected fetuses, however, cause dysiocia because
the characteristic angulation of the spine greatly
increases the cross-operational diameter, although
the body weight is usually less than normal for the
breed. The fetus is presented in one of two ways; its
exposed viscera may protrude from the vulva or the
limbs and head may lie in the vagina and can be
felt tobe attached to the misshapen trunk.The lat
ter presentation may cause confusion, particularly in
pated (Fig. 20.1).
Cases of schistosoma reflexus occuur sporadically in
several breeds, sometimes as twin to a normal fetus
(Fig. 20.2), and may be still alive at delivery. lt is
noticeable that they are seldom associated with pro-
Fig.20.2 Schistosoma reflexus twinned to a normal calf.
tracted parturition, presumably because they cause
obvious manifestations of dystocia.The dystocia
Achondroplasia or bulldog calf deformity and ana-
is best relieved by fetotomy (see Ch. 19), although
sarca or fetal dropsy cause dystocia due to the exten-
some veterinarians prefer to use a caesarean opera-
sive subcutaneous accumulation of tissue fluids,
tion. It must he realized that, if hysierotomy is per-
which greatly increases the cross-operational diam-
formed, longer than normal abdominal and uterine
eter of the fetus and causes gross disproportion irre
incisions are usually necessary and extreme care is
spective of the fetal body weight; the latter may also
essential in manipulating the fetus from the uterus
in order to avoid serious uterine tearing, which eas-
may also be associated with severe fetal ascites, pla-
ily follows excessive traction.This manoeuvre may
cental oedema and hydrallantois.
befacilitated bythelubricant effectofresidualamni-
Lesions of the fetal central nervous system may
otic fluid. The prognosis after a caesarean operation
cause muscle contracture of the limbs, which pre-
is usually good but the dam should not be rebred to
vents normal cxtension in preparation for birth.
the same sire.
Arthrogryposis, soineties associated with torticol-
lis and kyphosis, has been shown to result from viral
infection (e.g. Akabane virus, bluetongue virus) of
the dam during pregnancy and is also recognized as
a genetic abnormality in the Charolais breed (Fig.
20.3). Because the muscle contracture fixes limb
joinis in either flexion or extension, depending on
the joint, the condition is sometimes called ankylo-
sis but the bones are not fused. Spina bifida is less
common in cattle but causes similar contractures,
usually ofthe hindlimbs only because the lesion
is thoracolumbar in position.Fetal anencephaly
and the deformity described as perosomus elumbis
may also cause limb abnormalities. In most cases
Fig.20.1 Schistosomareflexus.Incised skin pouc enveloping
of muscle contracture, the musculature of affecied
the trunk, head and limbs.
limbs is palpably underdeveloped. The degree of
350
Chapter
201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
Fig.20.3Fetuseswith varying severityof torticollisand muscle ccntracture of the limbs
contracture is often too severe for attempted deliv-
survival afier surgery.Hence, felotomy may be an
ery but, if the forelimbs in an anterior presentation
alternative option(see Ch.19). Bacterial culture of
can be brought into the vagina, traction may cause
such fetuses usually yields heavy growths of coli-
the flexed hind legs to perforate the uterus below
form, or coliform and clostridial organisms. The
the pubic brim. Conjoined fetuses occur occasion-
latter infection is associated with a high mater
ally witli varying degrees of fusion and generally
require caesarean delivery unless only the head is
period, probably because of endotoxaemic shock.
duplicated, in which case simple or partial fetotomy
On rursory examination, the clinical status of these
will readily relieve the dystocia.
cows may seem reasonable, despite gross uterine
distension; the pulse rate, however, is usually sig-
Faultyfetal disposition
nificantly raised and the animal noticeably quiet on
handling. Such premonitory signs are likely to be fol.
Provided that thecervix is fully dilated andremains
lowed, as soon as the uterus is incised, by the onset
so,most earlycases of faulty fetal disposition can be
of rapidly deteriorating shock, which is sometimes
corrected manually or relieved by relatively simple
fatal within 24 hours, despite intensive supportive
fetotomy. However, the loss of fetal fluids followed
therapy. Experience suggests that coliform infection
alone is less serious than clostridial putrefaction but
tions difficult and time-consuming and more lilkely
preoperative differentiation is not possible. Despite
to result in rupture of the uterus. In protracted cases,
the significant mortality rate in this group of cases,
constriction of the cervix may prevent vaginal cor-
surgery may nevertheless be worthwhile if fetotony
rection of the dystocia and the fetus is then lilkely to
or slaughter are not alternative options.
become emphysematous.
Miscellaneousindications
Fetal emphysema
Occasionally,animals are encountered with full cer-
Fetal emphysema is a frequent complication of pro-
vical dilatation and a normal-sized fetus in which the
tracted parturition in cattle and, irrespective of the
caudal part of thebirth canal is too constricted for
primary cause of dystocia, it is often the iminedi-
delivery even after episiotomy (see Ch. 10). 1he con-
ate indication for a caesarean operation. Hlowever,
dition is associated particularly with Friesian heifers,
such rases should be assessed carefilly and realis-
which are sometimesolder than is usual atthe time
tically beforethe operation is undertakenbecause
of first calving.The natural termination of pathologi
fetal putrefaction can seriously influence maternal
cally prolonged pregnancy may also be associated
351
Part
4
Operative interventions
with absence of normal parturient changes in the
at the site and constitutes an uncommon indication
vagina and vulva and a consequent need for a cae-
for surgery.
sarean operation.
Abortion in late pregnancy sometimes requires
Restraint,anaesthesia and preparation
treatment bya caesarean operation for several con-
for surgery
tributory reasons, such as incomplete birth canal
Different surgical approaches have been developed
dilatation,cervical constriction,fetal deformity and
for thie caesarean operation in cattle.Considerations
faulty fetal disposition.Such cases are uncommon
crucial to the choice of approach include:
but they are nevertheless importantbecause they
may be associated with specific zoonotic infections
·theveterinarian's experience and confidence
such as listeriosis, leptospirosis and salmonellosis.
·the nature of the environment (eg. whether
Fetal mummification and hydrops uteri may
ornot here is a crush or head bail for standing
now be treated initially by inducing parturition
restraint)
using prostaglandins, but a caesarean operation
·the lind ofassistance that is available
may still be necessary if induction fails or the birth
· the physical condition of the animal (e.g. whether
canal is insufficiently dilated for vaginaldelivery
it can stand for the entire procedure,whether the
(see pp. 139-143). Neal (1956) described a two-
rumen is distended or whether there is evidenceof
stage caesarean operation for cases of hydrallantois.
calving paralysis due to prolonged dystocia).
A left flank incision is made as for a normal caesar
ean operation. Once the uterus has been identified,
The options of patient positioning for caesarean
large-bore sterile tubing is used to drain the allan-
operation are:
toic fluid through a stab incision in the uterine wall
standing (suitable for left or right paralumbar
and the tube is retained by a purse-string suture.
fossa and lateral oblique approach)
The allantoic fluid is drained slowly.monitoring the
dorsal recumbency (suitable for ventral midline
pulse continuously; if the pulse accelerates, drain-
and paramedian approach)
age is suspenided for 10-15 minutes. When as much
sternal recumbency (suitable forleft or right para-
fluid as possible has been drained from the uterus,
the tube is withdrawn and the purse-string suture
lumbar fossa)
closed. Alternatively, a rumen irocar and cannula
·lateral recumbency (suitable for ventrolateral and
can beused,which areinserted through thie slin of
low-flank approach).
the right lower flank and into the grossly distended
The choice depends on the surgeon's preference and
uterus. Once the trocar is removed,allantoic fluid
the demeanour of the animal,as well as available
will flow from he cannula. A routine caesarean
facilities. In a cow capable of tolerating surgery while
operation is then performed, rather than waiting
standing,the left paralumbar fossa or flank approach
24 hours as originally described (Cox 1987).
is thestandard technique foraviable orrecently dlead,
Laparotomy is essential in cases of uterine rup-
uncontaminated fetus.Other indications for this
ture. If this disorder occurs as a preparturient
approach include cows with a large udder, extensive
complication,the fetus usually lies totally within
oedema of the udder and ventral abdomen orprolific
the peritoneal cavity and may survive, if 1he cord
ventralabdominal vascularity close to the milkvein,
is not twisted, until the placenta separates at term
such as occurs in mature dairy cattle. One advantage
(a pseudo-ectopic pregnancy). More frequently,
of the left flank incision is that the rumen can be
however, rupture occurs as a complication of
used 1o prevent exposure of the intestines.Hlowever,
dystocia,particularly ofuterine torsion,or as a
in individual cases,a large rumen,particularlyif he
result of manipulation of a fetus that is oversized
animal is straining,can interfere with surgical access
or has faulty disposition.Uterine rupture during
to the abdomen. Another advantage of the flank
parturition may result in considerable uterine
approach in the standing animal is casier correc
haemorrhage and hypoyolaemic shock.
tion ofuterinetorsion.Finally,wound dehiscence is
Repeated dislocation of the sacrococcygeal articu-
more manageable in the flank, compared with lower
lation during assisted delivery in suiccessive parturi-
abdominal incisions. The standing left paralumbar
tions, or a healed fracture ofthe maternal pelvis,can
fossa approach is favoured by most veterinarians and
result in deforimation or massive bony obstruction
is described in detail below.
352
Chapter
201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
Restraintandsedation
The location for surgery should be selected care-
fully with the objectives of ensuring good hygiene,
For standing surgery, the animal should be restrained
lighting,facilities for restraint and a suitablefloor
usinga halte,rferablynaalvingented such
surface.Avoidperformingsurgeryinbuildingsoccu-
thatthe animal's rightflank is against a wall and the
pied by large numbers of other cattle.Ideally,use
headisin thecorner,in order tolimit movement dur-
a clean calving pen or other unoccupied building.
ing surgery.Alternatively,he cow can berestrained
Cleanbeddingshouldbeprovided,althoughvigor-
in a cush or head bail,which must provide good
ousshakingofstrawwill causeunwantedcloudsof
access to the lefi side of the animal. If needed,the
dust.Lighting should be provided that illuminates
animalcan alsobepositioned againstthe exit gate of
the desired surgical site.The surgeon should ensure
the left bail area in the milling parlour.A strategically
that the light is not placed such thai the surgical
fastened siderope shouldprevent the animalfrom
site is in the shadow cast by the surgeon;equally.
turning around.The halter should be tied with a
the light must not shine in the eyes and distract
quick-releaseknot incase the cow suddenly becomes
the surgeon.Many veterinarians carry a portable
recumbent. Nose grips are often required for addi-
halogenlamp andstandforuseonthefarm;alter
tionalrestraint.Sedationshouldbeavoided ifpos-
natively, one solution is for the surgeon to wear a
siblebecauseitcan causerecumbency duringsurgery
head-torch.
andmaybedetrimental tofetalsurvival.If sedationis
Facilities for restraint should be appropriate for
necessary,xylazine is commonly used (0.05-0.1mg/kg
the size of animal and designed to avoid injury to
intramuscularlyorareduceddoseintravenously:how-
animals or humans.A ringfixed in thewallofa calv-
ever,thelatter isnot a licensedrouteof administra
ingboxandoffset50cmfromthecornerisideal;
tion in the Uk).nfortunately,xylazine is an ecbolic
if the animalgoes down the offsetringencourages
making surgery more difficult, and can cause ruminal
theanimal tolieonherrightside.Thefloor surface
bloat,whichcanobstruct thesurgicalwound.Arope
shouldprovide adequatefrictionforanimal andsur-
canbeattachedtotherighthindlegabovethefetlock
geon.Slippery concrete floors can lead to accidental
and laid underneath the animal'sbody so that,if the
falls during surgery.A 20-30cm-thick base of sand
cowbecomesrecumbent during surgerytherope can
with clean straw on top provides an ideal surface.
bepulled toenablethe animal tolieinrightlateral
Facilitiesforthecalfshouldalsobepreparedatthis
recumbency.The tail is tied out of reach of theopera-
stage;awarm,strawpencompletewithresuscitation
tivesite,usuallyothehalter alongtheright sidef
equipment would beideal.
the animalor to theright hock.
Alternatively, surgery may be performed on the
Anaesthesia
recumbent animal;this is particularly indicated in
fractious animals. If the cow is not already recum-
The choice of anaesthetic method varies between
bent,a sedative can be administered (xylazine
surgeons and the selected surgical site. For flank
0.2mg/kg intramuscularly)or the animal may be
incisions,paravertebral anaesthesia of the nerves
cast using a rope. She should be placed in right
associated with thetransverse processes ofTi3,L1,
lateralorsemi-sternalrecumbencywiththebody
L2andL3iscommonlyrecommended.Each siteis
slightly tilted to theright.Bales ofstrawmay be
infusedusing20mlofa2-3%lidocainesolution;
used toprop the cow in a stable position for surgery.
around10-15mltoblocktheventralnervebranches,
Inaddition,thelegs may behobbled,while some
5-10ml forthe dorsal branches(Cox1987).Signs of
surgeons prefer the left hind leg to be extended cau-
successful anaesthesia are a warm,hyperaemic and
dallyand fixedbya rope
flaccid flankwithno response to pain when tested
Two or more assistants areisually required for
with a hypodermic needle The advantage of para-
successful surgery:as a minimum,one to restrain
vertebralanaesthesiaisthatthewholeflankmus-
thecowandonetodeliverthecalf.Communication
culatureisdesensitized andflaccid,whichfacilitates
with the assistants by the surgeonis important.
exploration of the abdomen during surgery and
Briefly describe how the surgery will beperformed
closure of the wound.Also,the flank incision can
andoutlinetheroleofeachassistantandhowto
be extended readily if necessary during surgery.
proceed in the case of a crisis such as recumbency of
One disadvantage is that the technique is more dif-
the cow during surgery.
ficult to perform than other methods. In addition,
353
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
the cow may beunsteady afier surgery because of
effectofxylazineontheuterus.Alow epidural injec
loss of lumbar muscle tone and paresis of the ipsi-
tion (posterior block) with 4-5 ml of 2% lidocaine
lateral hindlimb,Finally,thevasodilatation in the
is essential toalfeviate abdominal straining (see Ch.
muscle layers causes a greater degree of haemor-
9).Unfortunately,severe tenesmus occasionallyfails
rhage thatmayrequirehaemostasis.
tobeprevented byepiduralanaesthesia.In caseof
Alocal anaestheticlineblock orinverted-Lblock of
an anteriorpresentation(with thehead of the fetus
theflankisan excellent alternativetoparavertebral
entered into thepelvis),it is important to repel the
anaesthesia.An 18-gaugex1.5-inchneedleisused
calfbackintotherelaxeduterus aftertheepidural
t0 administer 2% lidocainehydrochloride at several
and tocolytic drugs have taken their effect.This will
sites;the number of sites is dependent on the length
reduce the chances of continuous straining and the
oftheproposedincision.At eachpoint,5mloflocal
cow becoming recumbent during surgery. (Note:
anaestheticisinjectedsubcutaneouslyineachdirec-
tocolytic drugs may have a milk and/or meat with-
tionof theincisionlineanda further10ml intothe
holding time,which also applies to the calf after it
musculature.Normally,only a totalof80-100ml of
isborn.)
lidocaine is required; larger volumes of local anaes-
A widesurgical fieldshould beprepared.Initially
theticsolutioninfiltratedintotheincision areamay
dirtanddust should be brushed from the flank
have an adverse effect on wound healing.The tech-
andbackof theanimalbeforetheoperativefieldis
nique is quick and reliable and requires minimal
clippedorshaved.In thecase ofa flankincision,the
training.However,the parietal peritoneum may
entireflankshouldbeclippedfrombelowthetrans-
not be effectively anaesthetized,causing reaction by
verseprocesses dorsally,tojust abovethemillkvein
the patient when it is incised.Sloss&Dufty(1977)
ventrally,and fron thelastrib to thehind leg,level
reportedparticularproblemsofinadequate analgesia
with the tuber coxae. The skin should be prepared
with an inverted-Lblockinfatanimals.Asimilarreac-
usinga surgical scrub(7.5%povidone-iodine or4%
tionwill occuriftheincisionhastobeextendeddur-
clhlorhexidinegluconate solution)followed by sur-
ing surgery to extract the calf.Furthermore,because
gical spirit.Sterile drapes should be applied;in the
the flank is not flaccid, apposition and suturing of
standing animal a large single drape with a suitable
themusclelayerscan bedifficult
windowcanbeplacedoverthebackofthecowand
High epidural anaesthesia using lidocaine can pro-
down theflank.A useful alternativein thefield is to
videadequateanaesthesiaoftheflank,althoughsuch
useawiderollofplasticfilmwrapped around the
anaesthesia also tends to cause recumbency,which
cow's body leaving only the surgical site exposed.
may beprolonged in cattle.Caulkett et al (1993)
Ideally, surgeons and assistants should wear pro-
reported that epidural anaesthesia using 0.07mg/kg
tective surgical scrub suits,even in the field situa-
xylazineproducedgoodanalgesia fora caesarean
lion.Alternative,a clean and disinfectedapron can
operationin45%ofcaseswithoutsevereataxia.
be used. Many practising veterinarians prefer not
However,thereisaprolongedtimetoonsetofanaes
to wear gowns and gloves, in which case the sur-
thesia,and itwasnoteffectivein17%of cases.
geon's arms(all the way up including the armpit
andshoulder)should bebare,washed and scrubhed
thoroughly.However,dueconsideralion should be
Preoperativepreparation
given to wearinglong-sleeved plasticgloves(rectal
Preoperative antibiosisisstronglyrecommended(Cox
examinationsleeves,withthefingertipscutoff,and
1987).Commonly, 10mg/kg each of an antibiotic
the gloves held in place with elastic bands) and sur-
mixtureofprocainepenicillinand dihydrostrepto-
gical gloves,particularlyby thoseveterinarianswho
mycin is administered intramuscularly.Tocolytic
donot wear protective gloves for claw trimming and
agents, such as isoxsuprine lactate (220-250mg;
other work in cattle practice that causes gross con-
whenxylazinesedationisused,itisrecommendedto
tamination of thehands.
increasethe doseby100%) and theβ-adrenoceptor
stimulant
clenbuterol
hydrochloride
(0.3mg)
Operative technique(described fora
administeredbyintramuscularorslowintravenous
right-handed person)
injection,are widelyused andcan facilitate the
manipulation and exteriorization of theuterus dur-
The adequacy of anaesthesia shouldbe care-
ing surgery;furihermore,they counter theecbolic
fully tested before surgery because the muscle and
354
Chapter
201
 The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
peritoneum may remain sensitive despite skin
desensitization.
Left paralumbar fossa approach
The left flank incision is ihe most common tech-
nique and is most appropriate for tie standing ani
will remain standing during the procedure; if not,
recumbency should be induced prior to surgery.
A vertical skin incision is made in the middle of
the leftflankstartingi0cm ventral to the transverse
processes and extending approximately 30-40cim
long (Fig. 20.4). If the breed of dam or other indica-
tion for surgery suggests that future elective caesar-
ean operations may be necessary, the first incision
shouldbemadeat thecranial border of theflank,
just behind the last rib, thus allowing forsubsequent
incisions more caudally.
With the left flank approach the following mus-
clelayers are incised:cutaneous, external abdominal
oblique,internalabdominal oblique and thetrans-
verse abdominal muscle. The external and internal
abdominal oblique muscles are sharply incised in
the same direction, using a scalpel. Haemorrhage
from these muscle layers is usually minimal;how-
ever, when large vessels are involved,haemostats
should be applied and the vessel ligated if neces-
sary.The aponeurotic transverse abdominal muscle
is split vertically by blunt dissection. The perito-
Fig. 20.5 Incision of the peritoneum.
neum is tented and incised at the dorsal aspeci of
the incision, using a scalpel, taking care not to punc-
ture the rumen,which lies immediately beneath the
abdominal cavity is obtained, which is usually sig
peritoneum (Fig. 20.5). At this stage, entry into the
nalled by the sound of air entering the potential
space. The incision is then extended vertically with
blunt-tipped scissors, rather than a scalpel, to reduce
the risk of cutting abdominal organs. Often, a vari-
able amount of peritoneal fluid, sometimes blood-
tinged, is immediately apparent in the abdominal
Incisior
13thrib
cavity. Greater volumes are present in cases of pro-
longed dystocia, uterine infection, torsion or rup-
ture.Additionally,in the case ofuterine torsion or
uterine infection,there may be large fibrin clots
present in the abdomen. In cases of uterine torsion,
the small intestinesmay alsobe displaced to aposi-
tion immediatelycaudal to thie rumen to such an
extent that loops may spill through the abdominal
incision. The surgeon should explore the abdomen
Fig.20.4 Inc sion site ior caesarean operation:left paralumbar
to identify e uterus, and the uterine tone and the
fossa approach - standard incision used in the stand ng or
disposition of the calf should be noted.Llsually,
recumbent animal.
the tip of the pregnant horn is located in the left
355
Part
41
Operativeinterventions
lower quadrant of the abdomen, close to the flank
also causes stretching of themesometrium and can
incision.
cause pain, manifested by grunting and the cow
Calfin anterior presentation.The hindlimbs of the
displaying othrer signs of discomfort.Furthermore,
calfare situated in the tip ofthepregnant uterine
oncetheuterushasbeen handledthemyometrium
horn. With the calf in anterior presentation, it is
often contracts,making exteriorization more diff-
ideal toanchor oneorbothhindlimbsin theinci-
cult,unless a tocolytic agent has been administered
sion,whichholdstheuterinehornoutsidetheabdo-
priorto surgery.
men.To aid exteriorization ofthe uterus,the left
The uterine wall is incised over the calf's leg using
handshouldfirst locatethecalfsdigitsthenfollow
a scalpel or scissors, and it needs to be made large
the metatarsus down,and finallyhold one orboth
enoughto allowremovalofthecalfwithoutfurther
hocks. Now the right hand grasps the digits in the
tearing of theuterus or the need to extend the uter-
tip of thehornfrom themedial side,and then pulls
ineincision.Therefore,theincisionshouldbemade
thetipofthehornintotheincision.Thehockisnow
fromjustbelowthetipofthedigitsrightdown to
lifted,so levering the lower limb up through the
hock,along thegreater curvature of theuterine horn
incision.Often,it is then possible tolock thehock
andparallel tothelongitudinalmusclelayersofthe
into theventral commissure oftheincision,while
myometrium.iftheincisionintheuterusistooshort.
the digits areretained bytheflankabove the dor-
the uterusmay tear uncontrollably during extraction
sal aspect of the incision (Fig. 20.6), thereby reliev-
of the calf.Ifthe incision exiends too close to the
ing the tension on the surgeon's arims.Note.The tip
cervix,suturerepairmaybedifficult.Careshould 
of the uterine horn should not be graspedwithout
takento avoid incisingthecalf,particularly if fetal
including one of the calfs limbs,as this may tear
fluids are sparse.In addition, the surgeon should
theuterus.
avoidincisingcotyledons,which can leadtoprofuse
Exteriorization oftheuterus beforeincisingthe
haemorrhage.If they are incised inadvertently,they
uterinewall isacritical stepin thesubsequentsuc-
must beligated to avoidsubstantial blood loss.The
cess of the surgery.However,traction on the uerus
incision should always be made over the greater cur-
may require considerable strength and tenacity on
vature of the uterine horn,because this area has the
the part of the surgeon.Manipulation of the uterus
fewest large blood vessels.The greater curvature runs
between, and parallel o,rows of caruncles, which
are both visible and palpable through the uterine
wall.
The membranes (allantochorion and amnion) are
ruptured manually and the calfs fetlocks are grasped
by thesurgeon,exteriorized and passed to an assis
tant.Alternatively,sterilecalvingropes or chainsmay
be attached to the hindlimbs and handed over to an
assistant,whoinitiallypullsthecalfinadorsolateral
direction until the calf'spelvis emerges in theflank
incision (Fig.20.7).Then lateral traction is applied,
such thatthecalfisrotatedandremoved in a simi-
lar way to a per vaginam delivery of a calf in poste-
rior longitudinal presentation(Figs.20.8,20.9).At
the same time, the surgeon attempts to retain the
uterus outside the abdomen, thereby minimizing
contamination.
Exteriorization of the pregnant horn can be dif-
ficult and is not always possible, for example when
theuterusisfirmly contracted(even whentocolytic
drugs have been administered).A large fetus and
lack of physical strength may also make exterioriza-
Fig.20.6Exteriorization of the fetal hock through the cow's
tion more difficult. In these cases, the incision of the
abdomiral wound,prior to incision of the uterus.
uterushas tobemadewithinthe abdominal cavity,
356
Chapter
201
Fig. 20.7 Removal of the calf in anterior presentation through
Fig.20.9 During delivery ofhe calf's hips,thebody isrotated
the cows flankincision.lnitial tractionis dorsaland slightly
and traction is directed caudaly and laterally.
lateral.
knife (see Fig.12.1) or a scalpel blade,in which case
the surgeon's fingers shield the rutting edge. Often,
it is impossible to make the incision long enough
and it is safer to make a smallincision first,and then
one or both limbs of the calf are grasped through the
incision andpulled into theflank incision.While an
assistant applies gentle traction to the calf, the uter-
ine incision can be extended further.
A live calf should be immediatelyattended to by an
assistant,while the surgeon exanines the uterusni
tially for the presence of a second fetus. In addition,
any lacerations of the uterine wall should be noted
and repaired. The fetal membranes should only be
removed at the time of surgery if they are lying free
Fig.20.8Anti-clockwiserotationof the fetus before delivery.
within the uterus or canbe readily detached,which
is uncommon. Otherwise, they are returned to the
uterine lumen and any protruding tags are trimmed
because theuterus has become friable or is liable
so that these are not incorporated in the suture line
to damage by further manipulation. However, such
of the uterine incision. This approach is justified on
an incision may lead to gross contamination of the
wo grounds.Firstly,itshould be assumed that,if the
abdomen with fetal fluids, which are unlikely to be
fetal membranes can physically be separated, they
sterile, particularly if dystocia is the indication for
surgery.Furthermore, incision within the abdomen
uterine contractions.Secondly,if deliberate detach-
is often made more dificult by bouts of straining
ment ofthe fetalmembranes is attempted before
by the dam. This ‘blind’ incision should be made
they would normally separate and be expelled, then
on the cranial aspect of the greater curvature of the
there may be haemorrhage or incomplete removal
pregnant horn by using a Robert's embryoiomy
cither of microvilli or of larger masses of placcntal
357
Part
41
Operativeinterventions
tissue.Itiscommonpracticetoplaceantimicrobial
quadrant ofthe abdomen,itwill be necessaryfor
pessaries in the uterine lumen before final closure
thesurgeon torotatetheuterus alongitslongitu-
of the hysterotomy wound,but the value of these
dinalaxis（ctoclwise）to bring thecalfslimbsto
is questionable.If the fetalmembranes are subse-
theflankwound（Schuijt&Van derWeijden2000),
quently expelled naturally, so too are the pessaries.
whichcanberather difficult toachieveincaseof
Iftheyareretained,then theantimicrobials can have
abig fetus or a surgeon of small stature.However,
nomorethanaminimal local actioninthelumen
itisimportant thatthe uterus isrotated,becauseit
andareprobablyineffectivein controlling deep
allowsthepregnant horn tobe exteriorized.The
infection.
uterus should beincised as close to thetipof
Calf in posterior presentation.Adequate rotation of
thehorn as possible,not over a fetal limb that is
the uterus(ifrequired) is a prerequisite for success
inthebody of the uterus.Incisions madein or near
(seebelow,under‘rotationofthe calf).Delivery
thebodyoftheuterususuallycanonlybesutured
of the calf through the abdominal incision is simi-
within the abdominal caviry,which is extremely
lar to that fora normal anteriorlongitudinal pre-
difficult.
sentation. With the calf in posterior presentation,
There are two techniques to rotate the uterus,
the head and forelimbs are situated intheuterine
after which the tip of the pregnant horn should
horn.Often these structures together are sobulky
come within reach and then can be exteriorized as
that itisdifficult to getsufficient grip toelevate the
described above:
pregnant horn and bring it into or near the incision.
1.Traction should be applied on a leg with the left
Thefollowingtechniqueisrecommended:withthe
hand,while pushing the dorsal aspect of the
left hand,the digits ofthe calfsunderlying（most
uterus awayfrom the surgeonwiththeflat of the
ventral) forelimb are grasped from above and trac-
right hand.Alternatively,both hands should be
tionisappliedsothetipof theuterinehornmaybe
put against and under theback of the calf (which
elevatedhighenoughtobringthegreatercurvature
is situated inthebody of theuterus,against the
intosight.Anincisionofabout15cmlongcannow
greater curvature,and facing towards the sur-
be made safely with the right hand.The next step is
geon). The uterus is then elevated and pushed
for theleft hand to grasp themetacarpus through
over to theother sideoftheabdomen.A simi-
the incision.Because this grip is more firm,the tip
lar techniquecanbe attempted,if theindication
oftheuterinehorncanbeelevatedenough toallow
for caesarean operation was irreducible uterine
the incision in the greater curvature tobe extended.
torsion,tocorrect thetorsionbeforetheincision
The membranes are ruptured,and ropes or chains
ofthe uterus is made.However,the uterine wall
are applied to theforelimbs, which are handed over
in these cases is often oedematous and friable;
toan assistant who initiallypulls thecalf upwards.
extremecaremustbetakeninorderto avoidpen-
Atthe same time,the head is guided through the
etrationofthewallwiththefingers.
uterine incision.A finger and thumb grip in each
2.The surgeon's right hand is brought under the
orbit is oftenhelpful inbringingtheheadthrough
body of the uterus and is then positioned on the
theuterine and abdominal incision.Once thehead
dorsomedial aspect of the tip ofthe pregnant
and shoulders areoutsidetheflankincision,thecalf
horn.With thehand sopositioned,theuterus is
isslowly extractedbylateral traction.Often,there
willbeasmall amountofinconsequentialuterine
rotatedabout 9o°bypushingandpullingthe tip
ofthe horn under theuterus,which at the same
fluid spillageinto theabdomen.
time is lifted and pushed toward the opposite
Occasionally,the hindquarters of the calf may lie
side ofthe abdomenby the surgeon's forearim
sofarwithin thevagina,thatretropulsionpervagi-
andelbow.
nam by an assistant is sometimes necessary, after
careful washingand lubrication of the exteriorized
Suturing the uterine incision.The edges of the uter-
parts of the calf.The fact that many cows urinate
immedliately after removal of such a presented fetus
ularly from the cotyledonary vessels.It is advisable
suggests that urine has been retained because of ure-
to exteriorizeboth uterine horns before the genital
thralcompression.
tractbeginstoinvolute,whichwill facilitateinspec
Rotation of theuterus.If thetip ofthe pregnant
tion and repair of the wound. Large vessels that
horn (left or right) is located in the right lower
arehaemorrhagingshouldbeligated.Theuterusis
358
Chapter
201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
from theincisionedgebutareinserted somedis-
tance back from the cmerging previous bite. Each
bite should exit the uterine tissue near the edge of
the incision.It is important not to perforate the
uterine wall(the needle should pass through but
remainwithin thetissue)andtopull eachi suture
tightly following its insertion.This suture pat-
tern approximates the peritonealsurfaces,while
thewoundedgesarenotinvertedtoomuch(uter
ine healing occurs across the wound edges,rather
than on the opposedperitoneal surfaces).Thefinal
knoi is buried in the same manner astheknot at
hestart of the suture line.lf done correcily,there
will be no leakage of uterine fluid and little, if any,
exposed suture material.If there is any leakage,a
second inverting suture should be used.The advan-
tage of thissuturepattern isminimal adhesion for-
Fig.20.10 Uterine forcepsforanassistant tohold theuterus
mation following surgery.A single layer is usually
while thecaesarean incision is sutured by the surgeon.
sufficient,and this pattern isparticularly efficient
if theuterine wall is laccid during repair of the
wound,Alternatively,aLembert suturepattern can
supported by an assistant or held using uterine for-
beused withtheneedlepassingatright angles1o
ceps（Fig.20.10),keeping the entireuterineincision
the incision, or a Cushing pattern,where the nee-
outsidethe abdominal incision,and theincision is
dle passes parallel to the incision.Regardless of the
sutured using absorbable sutuire material,such as
suture pattern used, the rapidly involuting uter-
chromic catgut (3 uSP or 7 metric),polyglycolic
inewallwill leaveless tissuein each bite of suture
acid and polyglactin 910. Catgut has advantages over
material than at the moment of suturing,and this
thesyntheticsuturematerials,particularlywhenthe
may loosen thesuture.Many surgeonsoversewthe
uterus is friable,because the latter have a‘cheese
first suture with a second continuous pattern,par-
wire'effect.However,catgut causes greater tissue
ticularly if theuterusisfriable andwhere the suture
reaction and thusis morelikely toproduceadhe-
may tear through the tissues.Great careshould be
sions.Prefrably,a large,round-bodied needle and
taken to avoid thefetalmembranes being incorpo-
suturematerial for the uterus should beprepared
rated in the uterine repair.
prior to surgery.
Oncetheuterine incisionhasbeenrepaired and
Suturingshould start atthecervicalend ofthe
the uterus checked for tears,the surface should be
uterineincision,becauseif theuterus starts to invo-
cleaned with sterile gauze and/or Hartman's solu-
lutethecervixretractsintotheabdomenbeforethe
tiontoremovebloodclots andother debris.The
ovarianextremity.Avarietyofsuturepatternshave
uterus is thenreturned to its correctlocationwithin
been employed;all are continuous inverting pat-
the abdomen,ensuring that there is no torsion of
terns with the objective ofcreatinga watertight
the genital tract (see Fig.20.12).Oxytocin(20-401U)
seal byapposing serosal surfaceswhilecausing the
maybeadministered intramuscularlytohasten uter-
minimum of subsequent adhesions and uterine
ine involution at thispoint.However,uterine con-
scarring. The Utrecht method (Fig.20.i1), which
tractions induced byoxytocin may cause abdominal
is a modified Cushing pattern that is turned to a
straining,whichwill make suturing of theflankinci-
30-45°angle away from the incision,is commonly
sion more difficult. Often,it is better to wait until
used these days.The suture should start approxi-
the surgery is completed.The abdominal cavity is
mately 2cm above the upper end of the incision,
inspected for large blood and fibrin clots,which
using obliquebites so the knot is buried within
a fold of the inverting tissue.Similarly,thecon-
administration of water-soluble antibiotic, such as
tinuous interlocking,inverting pattern is inserted
crystalline penicillin, within the abdominal cavity
using obliquebites;these should begin about 2cm
isrecommendedby some surgeonsbutnotothers
359
Part
Operativeinterventions
Fig.20.11 Utrecht uterine suture technique.(A)The initial knot is buried in a fold ofuterine wall.(B) The round-bodied needlle
is directed at an angle cblique to the incisicn.(C) This suture pattern produces a continuous interlocking, inverting watertight
repair.(Adapted withi permissionfram Turner AS,Mcllwraith CW 1989 Techniques in largeanimal surgery,2nd edn.Lea &
Febiger,Plhiladelohia.)
360
Chapter
20
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
Theamountofairwithintheabdomencanbereduced
by an assistant compressing the ventral abdomen
andflankimmediatelybeforeclosureofthedor-
sal aspect of theperitoneal incision.Sutures should
beplaced approximately1cm apartusing chromic
catgut (3 USP or 7 metric).When suturing the layer
ofmuscles,more tissueoftheinternal abdominal
obliquemuscle should be incorporated in each bite,
i.e.theneedleshouldentertheexternalabdominal
obliquemuscleclosertotheedgeoftheincision
than is thecase for the internal abdominal oblique
muscle.This technique will ensure good apposition
ofthetwomuscles.Toreducedeadspacebetween
thesuturelayers,deeperbiteswith thesuturecan be
madeperiodicallyintothe deepermusclelayer,thus
intermittently anchoringthe suture intotheunder-
lying tissue. Antibiotics may be infused between
thesuturelayers;approximately250mg/mleachof
procaine penicillin Gand dihydrostreptomycin as a
mixtureiscommonlyused.Before closingtheskin,
it is advised toplaceseveralsimpleinterruptedten-
sion sulures wide and deep through the abdominal
muscles,using chromic catgut.
The skin incision is closed ina standard man-
ner (e.g.a simple interrupted horizontalmattress
or cruiciaie pattern)using a cutting needle and
non-absorbable suture material,such as sheathed
monofilamentnylon(3USPor6metric).Moderate
Fig.20.12The hysterotomyrepairedwith a continuous inver-
sion suture ofpolyglycolicacid.
tensionshouldbeappliedtothesuturestobringthe
woundedgesintocompleteapposition,whichwill
ensure a good seal and promote first-intention heal-
(Cox1987).However,metronidazole should not be
ing.Inthe case ofinfection,the most ventral suture
used because it is prohibited in food-producing ani-
can beremoved to allow drainage and/or flushing
malsin Europe andmany other countries,despite
ofthewound.Althoughoften described，theuseof
beingrecommended by some surgeons(Dawson&
a continuous suturepattern such astheFord inter-
Murray 1992).
locking pattern (Fig.20.13) is not recommended by
Closing the flank incision. The peritoneal cavily
us because of is associated risk of the entire suture
should be closed as quickly as possible to reduce
line coming undone.Nowadays this risk is greatly
the chanceofbacterial contamination.The abdomi-
increasedwith themajorityofcowskeptinloose
nal flank incision should be repaired in two layers:
housingsystems,or not housed at all.
peritoneum and transverse abdominalmuscle
in the first,and internal and external abdominal
Lateral oblique approach
oblique muscles in the second layer. A simple con-
tinuous suture pattern is used,starting at theven-
An alternative to the lefi paralumbar fossa approach
uralcommissureoftheincision.Care is taken to
in the standing cow is theleftor lateral oblique
apposetheperitoneum and transverse abdominal
approach,whichinvolves a slightly oblique incision
muscle to avoid leakage of air from the abdomi-
fromcaudodorsaltocranioventral,about3o°from
nal cavity into the muscle layers following surgery
vertical.The incisionis started about 10cm cranial
(Sloss & Dufty 1977).Air leakage is less likely fol-
and10cmventral tothetubercoxae,extendingcran-
lowing surgery on a recumbent animal because
ioventrallytoendabout3cmcaudaltothelastrib
less air is sucked into the abdomen during surgery.
(Fig.20.14).The advantage of an oblique incision is
361
Part
41
Operative interventions
The abdominal wall incision should be closed in
three layers, all in a simple continuous pattern. The
peritoneum arfd uransversus abdominis muscle are
incorporated in the first layer, whereas he internal
and external abdominal obliquemuscles are sutured
separately.
The lateral oblique approach allows better manip-
ulation and exteriorization of the uterus than the
standard flank or paralumbar fossa approach,and
has been suggested to be preferable when surgery
must becarried out on the standinganimalwith a
dead feius (Parish et al 1995).
Rightparalumbarapproach
A right flank incision is uncommon; however, it is
indicated if the left flank approach is obstructed by
adhesions as a result of previous surgery. Access to
the uterus is good but the small intestines are diffi-
cult toretain within theabdomen andinterferewith
the surgery.
Fig.20.13The Ford interlocking suture pattern for the skin
(Adapted withpermission fremTurnerAS,Mcllwraith CW
1989Techniques inlarge animal surgery,2nd edn.Lea&
Postoperative care
Febiger,Philadelphia.)
Calf.The calf should be dried and thenavel dressed
with an antiseptic immediately after delivery.Once
surgery is completed, 2-3 litres of colostrun fron
the dam should be administered to the calf, using
an oesophageal feeding tube if necessary. The dam
should beintroduced to the calf promptly,particu-
Incision
larlyin thecase of a suckler cowandcalf,toform a
13thrib
maternal bond.
Dam.The wound should be rleaned following sur-
gery but no wound powder, spray or antiseptics
should be applied to normal skin incisions. The
teats and uidder shouldbe examined and oxyiocin
(20-40lu) shouldbe administered intramuscularly
to stimulatefurther uterine involution.In addition,
calcium borogluconate should be administered
intravenously to maure dairy cows to prevent
Fig.20.14 Incision site for caesarean operation: left flank
hypocalcaemiaandfacilitate uterineinvolution.
lateral oblique approach, used in the stanoing or recumbent
A non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
animal.
should be considered,at least in cases of animals
that have had severe dystocia,uterine torsion or
hattheinternal abdominaloblique and transversus
uterine infection prior to surgery. If there is evidence
abdominis muscles can be split in the direction of
of surgical shock, intravenous fluid therapy is indi-
their respective fibres and there is improved access
cated;2-3 litres of hypertonic(7.2%) sodium chlo-
to the genital tract (Cox 1987).Potential disadvan-
rideisparticularly elfective.This should befollowed
tages are incision of the cirrumflex iliac artery if the
by 20-25 litres of water given orally if the cow does
incision is extended toofarcaudodorsally and lack
not drink. Systemic antimicrobial therapy should
of anaesthesia if too far cranioventrally, when using
be directed against the most common bacteria pres-
paravertebral anaesthesia.
entin the postpartum uterus (ie.Arcanobacterium
362
Chapter
1201
 The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
pyogenes, Escherichia coli, Fusobacterium spp. and
the fetus is removed has little impact on the likeli
Prevotella (formerly Bacieroides) spp.,and should
hood of the cow surviving.An emphysematous fetus
be administered for an appropriate period of time,
is often associated witi profound toxaenia and
usually 3-5 days,or until the fetal membranes are
bacteraemia of the dam, resulting in fever, hypoten-
expelled.Appropriate choices are procaine penicil-
sion and shock. Therefore, it may be necessary to
lin Gwith orwithout dihydrostreptomycin,amoxi
first provide supportive treatment for cardiovascular
cillin, ampicillin,ceftiofur and oxytetracycline.
stabilization and management of shock, using intra-
The dam is often re-examined 24-48 hours after
venous fluids and NSAIDs.
surgery andparticular attention should be given t0
When the calf is emphysematous, exterioriza-
the animal's rectal temperature, demeanour, appe-
tion of the gravid uterine horn becomes crucial in
tite and faecal consistency.The faeces are often dry
order to avoid contamination of the abdominal
and the cow mildly constipated following surgery.
cavity with infected uterine contents.In the stand-
Pyrexia, depression, inappetence and diarrhoea
ing animal,complete exteriorization is usually not
may indicate peritonitis. If the fetal membranes
possible and another approach should be used in
have been retained, appropriate trearment should
which the iterus can be apposed more closely to
be instituted.Skin sutures should be removed na
the incision.
sooner than 3 weeks after surgery. In addition,
a postnatal examination of the genital tract can
Ventrolateralapproach
be performed at this time because endometritis
Aventrolateral incision is particularlyindicated for
is more common following caesarean operation.
the removal of an emphysematous fetus (Campbell
Insemination should be delayed until more than
& Fubini 1990). The gravid horn can be exterior-
60 days postpartum.
izedmore easilybut theincision maybe difficult to
close because of the tension on most layers of tissue,
Theemphysematousfetus
andwoundproblems such as breakdown and dehis-
While fetotomy is generally the preferred procedure
cence or incisional hernia often occur after surgery
to enable delivery of ani emphysematous calf, a cae-
becauseof thelimited holding strength of the fascia
sarean operation is indicated when obstetricmanip-
of this part of the abdominal wall.
ulation or fetotomy is not possible.This may be
The cow should be in lateral recumbency, with
because theuterus iscontracted around theswollen
the pregnant horn nearest the incision. The hind-
calf, thereis little or no uterine fluid present, thecer-
limbs are pulled caudally and the upper hindlimb is
vix is incompletely dilated or is constricting again,
abducted slightly toprovidemore roomin case the
or the uterus is friable and is therefore easily dam-
incision needs to be extended.An oblique abdom-
aged. The veterinarian may also be inexperienced in
inal incision in thelower flank,starting from the
performinga fetotomy.
flank fold dorsal to the attachment of the udder,is
Where there is an emphysematous fetus, themain
continued cranially, parallel to the ventral border
aim ofthe caesarean operation is survival ofthe
of the last rib; it rmore orless follows the imaginary
cow,maintenance of fertility is of relatively little
line between the stifle and the navel (Fig. 20.15).
concern because of the life-threatening nature of the
Initially, the incision should be 30-40 cm long, and
condition.Because this is often a salvage operation,
can be extended caudallytowards theaitachment of
ihewelfareofthe animal andcosttotheowner are
thehindlimb or craniallyparallel to thesubcutane-
also important considerations. It is inappropriate to
ous abdominal vein or milk vein. As a precaution,
embark on a prolonged and costly caesarean opera-
this major vessel should he identified and marked
tion (or fetotomy) if the prospects for survival of
prior to the cow becoming recurmbent as it ofien col-
the cow are poor. Hopeless cases or cases beyond
lapses in recumbent animals.
the expertise and capabilities of the attending veter-
The skin and external sheath of the rectus abdomi-
inarian should he recognized before the pracedlure
nis muscle are incised. The rectus abdominis muscle
is started and either theanimal shouldbe humanely
fibres are then bluntly separated in the direction in
destroyed or expert assistance should be sought.
which they run.The internal rectus sheath is very thin
The most important rule in the management of
and its fibres are separated perpendicular to their ori-
an emphysematous fetus is not to panic. By the time
entation. The uterus lies directly underneath the inci-
the cow is presented, the question of how quickly
sion and an attempt should bemade to exteriorize the
363
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
Lastrib-
Flark
Tuber coxas
Ventral approach
A midline or pafamedian incision (Fig. 20.15) is not
commonly used in the field because general anaes-
thesia or heavy sedation isrequired and respira
tory function of the dam is compromised. Hlowever,
the technique with the cow in dorsal recunbency
gives excellent access to the uterus.Non-absorbable
Venlrolateral
suture material should be used for repair of all
muscle layers of the incision because postoperative
Milkvein-
wound deliscencehas severe implications,includ-
ing herniation. The ventral midline approach has
Paramediar
Veniralmidline
ihe added ardvantage of the greater holding strength
of the linea alba.
all used in the recumbent animal and particularly suitable for
Low flank approach
extraction of an einphysermatous fetus.
With the cow inleft lateral recumbency,theincision
is made from approximately 15 cm below the trans-
entire gravid hom.If this is not ossible,the bodywall
verse processes of the lumbar vertebrae, extending
should be pushed down and around the uterus. The
down to just above the milk vein (Fig.20.15). The
uterusshouldbefurtherisolatedfromthe abdomen
three abdominal muscles should besharply incised
using drapes, such as clean towels or plastic sheeting.
in the same direction.After the abdominalcavity
'The uterine wall is then incised and the emphysema-
is opened, the cow is pushed up to a near sternal
touscalf(withorwithoutplacenta)iswithdrawnfrom
position and the pregnant horn is rolled out of the
the uterus.After the removal of a severely emphiysema-
abdomen on to a large plastic sheet that has been
tous fetus,the uteruis is often noticeably ischaemic,
sterilized or disinfected previously.The uterus is
of cardboard-like consistency and totally atonic
incised, its contents are removed and the incision
The uterine incision should be closed in a double
is closed using a double suture line. The flank inci-
layer, preferably using theUtrecht miethod, thus pro-
sion shouldbeclosed as described for theleftpara-
viding a secure closure,which is less likely to leak
lumbar fossa approach. Although this particular
uterine fluids during contraction and involution
approach for the caesarean operation is not tried
of the uterus.The surface of the uterus should be
and tested,it maybeauseful alternative techinique
thoroughly cleanedwith an isotonic saline solution
in the field.
before returning it to the abdomen. The abdominal
wall incision should be sutured in layers.The peri
Intraoperativemanagement
loneum and internal rectus sheath can be dlosed
together. The rectus abdominis muscle should be
The emphysematous fetus presents unavoidable
sutured (if possible) in a continuous pattern. The
risks ofperitoneal contamination,notleastbecause
most important layer is theexternal sheath of the
its hair and hooves may already have been shed. In
rectus abdominis muscle, because it has the most
such cases,incision of the uterus is often followed
tensile strength:it is best closed in a single inter-
  e so o  a a
rupted or vertical mauress pattern.The skin should
parts of the fetus may be grossly swollen and crepi-
be closed in an acceptable manner.
tate on handling.The uterine wall is often tightly
Theadvantage of the ventrolateral approach is that
stretched, and intrauterine manipulation can be dif-
it gives good exposure of the uterus, even when it is
ficult.Abdominal wall and uierine incisions ofade-
friable,and it minimizes therisk ofuterine contents
quatelength aretherefore essential.Sucha fetus often
contaminating the abdominal cavity.However,repair
requires considerable traction,not only on limb
of the abdominal musclelayers canbe more difficult,
particularly if the muscles are under tension, and
in the orbits and at appropriate points on the trunk
sutures may tear thirough the tissues.A surgical drain
of upper limbs to secure additional purchase.It may
maybeinserted duringrepair of thewound
be necessary to incise deeply at several sites over the
364
Chapter
201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
thorax and abdomen to release gas, and sometimes
to retained fetal membranes.Removal of the mem-
partially to eviscerate the fetus,before removal is
branes during surgery is rarely possible but the pla-
possible. Incision of the fetal abdominal wall may
centa is normally expelled within 4-6 hours after
also be necessary where there is ascites. In rare cases,
surgery. Hlowever, if the membranes are retained
thefetus simply cannot beremoved from the uterus
more than 24 hours after surgery, gentle altempts
because it is impossible to make a uterine incision
at removalcanbemadedailybyexploration of the
of adequate length;in such animals,fetotomy from
vagina only. Intrauterine and intramuscular antibi-
the laparotomy site maybe attempted.
otics can be administered; although most literaure
recommends no treatment in uncomplicated cases.
Once the membranes have been expelled, usually as
Success rates and complications of surgery
a necrotic mass afier approximately 7-11days, gentle
Fetal survival following caesarean operation partially
lavage of the uterine lumen with 5 litres of warn,
depends on the indication for surgery. However,
normal saline can be administered using a sterile,
Barkema et al (1992)reported a calf mortality rale
wide-bore tube.
of12% following caesarean operations,compared
Adhesions. To date, no clinical research has docu-
with 5% for control calvings.
mented any beneficial effect of any prophylactic
Maternal survival rates following caesarean opera-
Ireatment (e.g. lavage of the uterus, NSAIDs, intra-
tion are high; most surveys report 90-98% dam sur-
abdominal antibiotics) to prevent adhesion forma-
vival (Dehghani&Ferguson1982,Cattel &Dobson
广
fion in cattle. Still,it is not uncoimmon foradhesions
1990, Dawson & Murray 1992). In a series of 1134
to develop following a caesarean operation.Neither
operations performed principally for dystocia,
the sunure pattern (ie. Lltrecht method, Lembert
Pearson (1996) reported an 88% 1matermal survival
o1 Cushing)nor the suture material (i.e. plain cat
rate,despite the fact that 37% of calves were dead at
gut, chromic catgut, polyglycolic acid or polyglactin
the time of surgery.Furthermore, So% of cows sur-
910) used to repair the uterine incision appears to be
vived even when an emphysematous fetus was pres-
very important (Anderson 1998). However, the sur-
ent (Vandeplassche 1963)
geon doesseem tohavehiegreatestinfluenteon the
Complications associated with a caesarean opera-
number and severity of adhesions that occur.The
tion are often due to difficulties encountered during
surgeon's speed, skill and dedication are mentioned
rotationof theuterus,exteriorizationof the pregnant
intheliterature asbeing thebestprevention against
horn,making the uterine incision, removal of the
adhesionformation.lt is cucial to obtain a good
calf and suturing of the interine incision,and most
seal of the uterine incision, whenever possible, and
of these difficulties can be anticipated. However, sev-
to avoid excessive tissue handling, trauma, ischae-
eral complications havebeen reported to occur fol-
mia and haemorrhage.
lowing a caesarean operation.
The use of synthetic absorbable suture materi-
Subrutaneous emphysema.Air ofien leaks from the
als,such as polyglactin 910 and polyglycolic acid,
abdominalcavityinto the subcutaneoustissues and
does not seem io offer any advantage with regard
muscle layers following surgery if the peritoneun
to the development of adhesions.However, from a
is not closely apposed, causing emphysema (Sloss
surgical point of view, these materials have excel-
&Dufty 1977). The condition is miore common in
lent handling qualities, are more pliable than cat-
animals that have tenesmus after surgery, usually
as a consequence of dystocia, and can extend as far
a higher guarantee of uniform material quality than
as the shoulders in some cases. Although unsightly.
a biological product such as catgut. Besides the
it has no significant detrimenial effect on ihe ani
high cost of these synthetic suture materials, there
mal and treatment is not required. Dependent on
is another important disadvantage.Because of the
the volume of air, the tissues return to normal in
braided structure, there is more drag as it passes
1-8 weeks.
through tissue, which can lead to small tears, espe-
Metritis and retained fetal membranes. Retention
cially when the uterine wall is oedematous. Catgut,
of the placenta occurs in 6-10% of cases of caesar-
on the other hand, is more easily damaged by con-
ean operation.Dystocia, twins, uterine torsion and
tact with the needle. This can cause the uterine
fetal monsters are common indications for a cae-
suture to break,which would inevitably resuli in a
sarean operation;the procedure itself predisposes
severe peritonitis.
365
Part
41
Operativeinterventions
Nowadays, the trend among cattle surgeons is to
Inaddition,removalofslin sutures too earlyafter
uselarge-diameter[6USPor10metric),plaincatgut
surgery can leadto theincision line opening up:
suturematerialforclosureoftheuterineincision.
3weeksisammimumperiod.
Although thismaterial ismore reactive than chro-
Serum-like fluid occasionally accumulates at
miccatgut or thesyntheticmaterials,it may actually
theventral aspectofthewoundbeiween themus
resultin fewer adhesions,possiblybecauseofthe
clelayers if the dead spaceis notfully occluded;
timefactor.Withtheabundantbloodsupplyofthe
it will resolve spontaneously or can be drained
rapidlyinvolutinguterus,thesuturematerialisprob-
surgically.
ably absorbed so quickly that adhesions have less
In other cases,there may be formation of an
chance to form compared with suture materials that
abscess. In most instances, this can be lanced,
remain in situ for longer periods of time.The knots
drained and irrigated as a granulating wound and
arethelastportionof thesuturelinetobeabsorbed,
second intention healing will follow.Antibiosis is
probably because cellular invasion is more difficult.
usuallynotrequiredbutmay benecessaryif there
Therefore,buryingtheknotsinfoldsofuterinewall
is pyrexia.
at both ends of the incision,as is achieved when
Nerve paralysis.Cows that are recumbent during sur-
using theUtrechtmethod,should always be the pri-
geryhave theriskof temporaryorpermanentper-
mary goal when suturing the uterus.
oneal nerveinjury.Animalsthat havebeen inlateral
Peritonitis.Diarrhoea,pyrexia,inappetence and
recumbencyonahardsurfacemaysufferfromradial
abdominal pain are the common presenting signs
paralysis.In addition,a numberofcows may have
of peritonitis following a caesarean operation.
sustained trauma to the obturatornerveduringdys-
Fortunately,the omentum and/or theuse ofantimi-
tociapriortocaesareanoperation.More often,how-
crobial therapyoftenlimit theperitonitis.However,in
ever,femoral paralysis is encountered asa‘stretch
manyinstancestherearerecurrent cyclesofperitonitis
injury'inlargecalves,mainlyofbeef breedsfollow-
andhealingleadingtoformationofextensiveadhe-
ing hip- or stifle-lock during parturition.
sions andchronicweight loss.
Fractures. The dam may sustain a fracture while
Inadequaterepair of theuterineincision,particu-
attempting torise after surgery.However more com-
larly in the presence ofa metritis,is the principal
mon is a long-bone fracture or growth-plate separa-
causeofpostoperativeperitonitis.However,insome
tion of the calf during attempts to correct dystocia
cases,theperitonitismay alreadyexistatthetime of
priorto caesarean operation.
surgery. The incidence is increased in the case of a
Postpartum haemorrhage.Haemorrhage from the
dead or emphysematous fetus,after severe dystocia
abdominal incision is usually limited,although
rupture ofthe uterus orpresence of a fetal monster,
dependent on thehaemostaticconcern of the sur-
and after spillageofinfected uterine fluids into the
geon.However,haemorrhagefrom theuterineinci-
abdomenduringsurgery.Spillageofsmall quantities
sion can be considerable,and in some casesfatal,if
of uterine fluid into the abdominal cavity appears to
thecotyledonaryvesselsaredisrupted.Occasionally
beoflittleconsequencetotheoutcoineofthecae-
the haemorrhage may be minimal at surgery but
sarean operation if thefetus is alive or deadbut still
may progress in the 24 hours following operation.
fresh.
Furthermore,in sporadic cases thelarge vessels in
A variety of treatments have been suggested includ-
the broad ligament may be damaged,causing con-
ingparenteral antibiosis,intra-abdominal adminis-
siderableblood loss.Preventionis by careful inci-
trationofantibiotics through therightflank,surgical
sion of the uterus, supporting the genital tract
lavage of theperitoneal cavity and intravenous fluid
adequately during surgery and close attention 1o
therapy.
haemostasis. Treatment of severe haemorrhage is
Wound dehiscence.Asmany as 6%ofanimalsmay
by ablood transfusion.Inaddition 20-40iUoxy-
have complicationsrelated to dehiscence,abscess or
tocinmaybeadministeredrepeatedlytostimulate
seroma formation around the abdominal incision
uterinecontractioninanattempttoreduceuterine
(Dehghani & Ferguson 1982). Predisposing factors
haemorrhage.
for wound dehiscence include inadequate asepsis,
Blackleg. Dehghani &Ferguson (1982) reported thal
low abdominal incisions, trauma to tissues during
0.5%of casesdiedsuddenlywithin 24hoursof sur-
surgery,environmental contamination,tenesmus
gery as aresult of blacklegwithlesions located dis
andapoortemperamentoftheanimalaftersurgery.
tantfrom theoperativesite.
366
Chapter
20
 The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
Postoperativefertility
fetopelvic disproportion,particularly in primipa
rous animals withi a single fetus
Lndernormal circumstances, the three main goals of
the caesarean operation in cattle are survival of the
·fetal emphysema after protracted dystocia.
cow, survival of the calf and maintenance of post-
Lessfrequent indications are terine torsion,vulvove-
stibular stricture and faulty fetal disposition that can-
maintenance of body condition and an acceptable
notbe corrected because ofmaternal immaturity or
level of lactation but also the ability to conceive again
uterine contraction.Vaginal prolapse should initially
and sustain a developing fetus to term.Numerous
be treated conservatively by reposition and the inser-
data have been published on fertility rates affer a cae-
tion ofvulval retention sutures,in thehope that preg
sarean operation but their significance is qualified by
nancy will continue to term (see Ch. 5), but many
the fact that many animals were culled without being
cases uindergo carly labourwith incomplete dilatation
inserminated or served again. In 10 such series, the per-
ofthe cervix.Unfortunately,lambs fron suchi animals
centage of cows that subsequently conceived postop-
frequently die of prematurity, after showing charac-
eratively ranged from 48-80%,with a mean value of
teristicconvulsive limb movements and respiratory
72%for2368 aninals,c0mparedwith 89% after 11or-
embarrassment. Sadly, but not surprisingly consider-
mal calvings (data cited by Boucoumont et al 1978).
ing theeconomicvalue of most commercial ewes,the
Vandeplassche etal (1968)reported that 60%of1857
vast majority of caesarian operations are done as a
cows and heifers that had a caesarean operation were
last resort. In the study by Brounts etal (2004),116of
subsequenlly inseminated and 74% of these eventu-
the201 lambs and kids delivered were deador died
ally conceived with an average of 1.8 inseminations
shortly afterwards; this can be explained by the fact
per conception. However, there was an increased inci-
that42 of the 65 dams had been in the second stage
dence ofabortion,hydrallantois and failure of the
of parturition for more than 6 hours. In our experi-
cervix to dilate at the next parturition, probably due
ence,if hecaesarian operation isperformed quickly
to scar tissue in the uterine wall.Although the calv-
to relieve the dystocia, lamb survival rate is high.
ing interval is increased in cows following a caesar-
ean operation compared with normal calvings, the
Anaesthesia
principal cause of economic loss is the higher cull-
ing rates (Barkema ct al 1992). Interestingly, in the
flank incision under paravertebral, inverted-L nerve
latterstudythecalving-to-first-insemination interval
block or local infiltration analgesia with the animal
was similar between caesarean and control cows, but
in right lateral recumbency, using 2-3% lidocaine
ger. Reduced fertiliy may occur as a consequence of
hydrochloride with or without adrenaline(epineph-
increased incidence of retained fetal membranes and
rine). Care is essential in inducing local analgesia
endometritis,uterine adhesions that hinder involu-
in sheep because accidental intravenous adminis-
tration or the injection of an excessive quantity of
tion and adhesions that affect the ovary or uterine
anaesthetic agent may rapidly result in convulsions.
tube, and reduced endometrial tissue competence. ln
In addition,the body wall is much thinner than in
addition, there is an increased frequency of abortions
during subsequent pregnancies, possibly as a result of
the cow and thus care must be taken nat topenetrate
the abdominal viscera
scartissueformation within the uterinewall limiting
expansion of the uterus and/or nutrition of the fetus.
Operative technique
Sheep and goat
The left sublumbar region is close-clipped and the
slin is prepared for aseptic surgery.The slin is incised
Indications
in the mid-paralumbar fossa and the underlying mus-
cles are incised in the same way as described above for
The main indications for the caesarean operation in
the cow. However, it is important to stress that the
the ewe are:
failure of the cervix to dilate
be taken not to incise into the rumen accidently. It is
irreducible or severely traumatized vaginal
also important in a high paralumbar incision to rec-
prolapse
ognize the highly vascular mesometrial attachment
367
Part
41
Operativeinterventions
to the parietal peritoneun.A fetal extremity,pref
any otherspecies,ishighly susceptibletothetoxae
erably the hock,is grasped through the uterine wall
miceffects ofintrauterineclostridial infection,and
so that an incision can be made in the same way as
mostdeaths arefuetothiscomplication.
that described for the cow(Fig.20.16A): however, it
isimportantto stress thatmore than a singlefetus
Postoperative fertility
islikely to bethe norm.Often,thiscan make iden-
tification ofwhich extremitybelongs towhich fetus
Therearevery limiteddata on thefertility ofewes
difficult.It iseven moreimportanttoremember to
and doegoats aftercaesarianoperationssince often
explore the uterus, particularly the opposite horn
ewes, and to a lesser extent does, will be culled
tothat incised,to ensure that all lambs have been
because theyhavehad theprocedureperformedor
removed before suturing the uterine incision.It is
because of the cause ofthe dystocia.Brounts et al
always possible to remove all lambs through a single
(2004)foundthatofthe16ewesanddoesthatwere
incision.
rebred(avery smallpercentageofthe110 that had
Thefetalmembranesshouldberemovedifthey
acaesarianoperation to treatdystocia)allconceived
can bereadily detached;ifnot,then that which can-
andnonesufferedsubsequentlyfrom dystocia.This
not bereturned to the uterine lumen,thus interfer-
confirms our experience with experimental ewes,
ingwiththeclosureoftheuterineincision,should
that fertilitywasnotimpaired,probably becauseof
be excised.The uterus should be closed usinga
the seasonal pattern of reproduction,with a long
single,continuous inversion suture pattern such as
anoestrusthatallowedforrecuperationofthegeni-
Utrecht's, Lembert's or Cushing's, using an adsorb-
taltract.
ablematerial (Fig.20.16B).The sheep,more than
Horse
Becauseit snot often necessary, the caesarean oper-
ationin themare is still widelyregardedas a serious
and difficultprocedure.Infact,themarelolerates this
surgical interference as well as most other species,
and therecovery rates are generally good.Hlowever,
thereislittledoubtthatimprovedmethodsofgen-
eral anaesthesia andpostoperativecare havegreatly
improved the chances ofmaternalrecovery.Even
inspecialistequinehospitalsin areasofhigh stud
density,the caesarean operation is not a common
procedure.Perhapsareflectionofoverall inproved
anaesthetic and surgical techniques can be seen
by comparing the observations of Vandeplassche
etal(1977),who commented thatthey performed
15 fetotomies for every caesarean operation,with
those of Freeman et al (i999a). In the latter study,
performedattwouniversityveterinaryhospitalsin
theUSA 22yearslater,therewere 66caesarian oper-
ations and 50 per vaginam deliveries. In this latter
study,itwasshownthatthecaesareanoperationwas
preferableto delivery of thefoal bycontrolleddeliv-
tion of thedystociawasdifficult andprolonged.
If the foal is alive, the operation should be per-
formedwithminirmum delay.Ifthefetusliesin
Fig.20.16Caesarean operation in the ewe.(A)The exterior-
the maternal pelvic canal,it suffers fatal anoxia
izeduterusoverafetal forelimb.(B)Hysterotomyrepairwith
becauseofdehiscenceofthe allantochorionwithin
inversionsutures,
1-2 hoursof thebeginningof second-stagelabour.
368
Chapter
1201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
Thisobservation is corroboratedbythefactthat
recumbency mayinduce‘supine hypotension'if the
70%offoalsbornbyhysterotomyattheUniversity
gravid uteruscompressestheposteriorvenacava and
ofGhentwerestillborn ordied soonafterbirth
thusimpedesvenousreturn andreducescardiacout-
(Vandeplassche 1980). Intrepid surgery in the field
put.Themare should thereforebe placed in lateral or
may therefore be more expedient than referral to a
dorsolateral recumbency during preoperative prepa-
specialist hospital.
rationandretainedindorsalrecumbencyforasshort
aperiodoftime asiscommensuratewitheffectively
Indications
performingthe operativeprocedure.
The range of indications is more limited than in catle.
Cervical dystocia is not recognized in tie mare, and
Operativetechnique
fetomaternaldisproportion andfetalmonstersare
less common than in other species.The majorindica-
Theoperationcanbeperformedthroughamid
line,parainedian orventral flank laparotomy.The
tionin theGhent series,accountingfor39of71cases,
midline approach is now widely adopted for gas-
wasbicornualpregnancy or transversepresentation,
trointestinal surgeryand is evenmore satisfactory
followedbyotherfaultydispositionscomplicated by
for caesarean operation because this approach con-
injury, contraction or infection(13 cases) and uter-
siderably reduces intra-abdominal pressure,and
inetorsion（1o cases).lna much smaller series of
the wound can therefore be repaired easily with-
34cases attheUniversityofBristolveterinaryschool,
outexcessive tension on the sutures.Allother
uterine torsionwas themostfrequent indication.
approaches necessitate muscle division, which
Withconsiderableexperience ofequine dysto-
results in greater operative haemorrhage and post-
cia,Vandeplassche et al [1977) regard the following
operative oedema. Provided that the midline inci-
indications as absolute:
sion is properly repaired，the risk of incisional
·faultyfetal disposition thatcannotbecorrected by
hernia is negligible.
other means(e.g.transverse presentation)
The mare'suterusis seldom so tightly contracted
·vulvovaginaloruterinetrauma
that a fetal limb cannot be grasped through the uter-
vaginal oedema
ine wall and brought through the abdominal wound.
For thisreason a uterineincision of adequate length
·irreducibleuterine torsion
iseasilymadeonthegreatercurvatureofthegravid
·severe congenital deformities(wryneck，ankylo-
horn with little risk of tearing during manipulation
sed limbs,hydrocephalus).
of the fetus. The fetus is then extracted making max-
In these forms of dystocia,he caesarean is the pri
imum use of joint flexibility and gently supported
mary method of deliveryrather than a last resort.
outsidetheabdomenwithitsumbilicalcordintact
Significantly, these authors also specify forms of
（Fig.20.17).The equine fetus is less sensitive than
dystocia thattheyregard ascontraindications for
surgery; these include lateral deviation of the neck,
breech presentation of a dead fetus,twin dystocia
andprolapseofthematernalbladder.
Anaesthesia
Repositionofpreparturientuterine torsions can becar-
ried out by laparotomy in the standing animal under
local analgesiaornerveblock(Vandeplassche1980)
However,new and improved anaestheticagentsand
better patient monitoring have significantly reduced
the risk to the mare during a caesarean operation.
Fordetailsofanaesthesia in this speciesthereaderis
advised to consult a specialist textbook.lt is impor-
tant tostressthattheremaywellbeaconflictbetween
Fig.20.17Thefoal isremoved fromtheuterusby thesurgeon
and assistantpulling on the hindimbs.
theobstetrician and the anaesthetistbecause dorsal
369
Part
4
Operative interventions
the bovine fetus to‘pinching' stimuli in utero and,
-Sulure
unless thelacentaisseparated,etal viabilityshould
needle
be assumed until cord or heart palpation proves oth-
Continuous
erwise. If the foal is alive, the cord is left initact for
suture
several minutes until breathing begins.The cord is
Exteriorized
Uterine
ulerus
then ligated or preferably divided by stretching. If
incision
the foal is dead, the placenta may already have sepa-
rated and is then easily removed through the hys-
Bcdy wall
terotomy. In many cases, hysterotomy is followed
immediately by profuse haemorrhage from the sub-
mucosal plexus of arteries and veins, which are too
numerous to be ligated individually. As a means
of controlling such haernorhage, Vandeplassche
Visceral
(1973)recommends theinsertion ofa continuous
periloneum
suture through all layers of uterine wall along the
Myometrium.
edges of theincision,immediately after the placenta
has first been detached from thearea immediately
Mucosa
around the incision (Figs.20.18,20.19).However, its
B
value has been questioned and, in a study involving
Fig.20.19 The use of a continuous lock-stitch suure through
the whole thickness of the uterine wall, from serosa to endo-
metrial surface, as described by Vanderplassche(1973).
66 mares in which the suture was used in 31, and
not used in 35, the length of the surgical procedure
was significantly shorter (p<0.05) in the latter group
and there was no difference in the numbers of mares
that had anaemia postoperativelybetween the two
groups (Freeman et al 1999b). Since anaemia was
found to be five times more common following a
caesarian operation than after a vaginal delivery,
it is recommended that if the suture advocated by
Vandeplassche (1973) is not used, then a full thick
ness pattern should be used that is sufficiently tight
to compress thevessels in theuterine wall.
If the placenta remains attached to the endo-
metrium, it is better not to atenpt manual sepa-
ration because this procedure results not only in
diffuse endometrial bleedingbut alsoinretention of
microvilli, which predisposes to subsequent endo-
metritis. The uterine incision is repaired with poly
glycolic acid inversion sutures in one or two rows,
depending on whether the firstrow of stitches tears
through the uterine wall,which is sometines notice
ably fragile.After theremoval of clotted blood and
other debris,a soluble antibiotic preparation may be
sprinkled on the uterine incision.
After laparohysterotomy, the abdominal inci-
sion is easy to suturebecause of flaccidityofthe
Fig.20.18Physical separation of the allantochorion from the
stretched abdominal musculature. lt is impor-
endometriumfor several centimetresfrom the ecige of the
uterineincision
material in a continuous orinterruptedpattern.The
370
Chapter
1201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
peritoneum and subperitoneal fat need nor be
Aftermidlinelaparohysterotomy,diffuse subcu-
stitched. The laparotomy repair is completed with
taneous oedema may extend along the ventral
a continuous subcutaneous suture and appropriate
abdomen to thepresternalregionbut theswell-
stitchesin the skin.
ing slowly subsides over a period of 7-10 days.
The administration of diuretic agents appears to
dispersetheoedema morequicklybuttheneces-
Postoperativemanagement
sity for such treatment is questionable.Wound
infectionis treated by removal of appropriate skin
After all caesareanoperations,oxytocin should be
sutures to provide drainage.
administered toinduce uterine contraction even
when the placenta has been removed at surgery.
In the study by Freeman et al (1999a),the fetal
Foalsurvival,maternalrecoveryrateand
membranes were retained in 65% ofthe mares,
causesofdeath
whichincluded22outofatotalof116thathad
aper vaginam delivery to correctthedystocia;it
Ashasbeenmentioned above,placentalseparation
wasretained much longer in those mares that had
occursrapidlyinthemare,hencetheremovalofalive
elective surgery.Vancdeplassche et al (197i) recom-
foal atacaesarian operation is uncommon,unlessit
mend immediateoxytocintherapyfollowedbya
is elective surgery.Six out of 19 foals(Juzwiak et al
supplementaryslowintravenousinfusionof5oiu
1990) and 11 out of102foals were alive at the time
in saline if the placenta is not expelled within
ofdelivery,ofwhichonly5were alive atthetime
4hours.Thelattermethodofadministrationprob-
of discharge from hospital (Freeman et al 1999a).
ablyhas amorephysiologicaleffect.Experience
Foalsurvivalwasmuchbetter following an elective
suggests that oxytocin therapy in themare is some-
caesarian operation, with a survival rate of 90%,
times followed by excessively vigorous uterine con-
althoughitfellto38%ifdoneconcurrentlywith
traction and eversion of thecornua into thevagina,
surgery to treat colic(Freeman et al 1999a).
and threatened eversion throughthevulva even
If the dystocia is of short duration, the progno-
after theplacenta hasbeen expelled.After oxyiocin
sis for maternal recovery is good.In the Ghent
therapy,theplacenta isusually expelled within12
seriesof77operations,62mares（81%)recovered
hours but in occasional cases il may separate but
(Vandeplassche et al 1977).The Ghent data sug-
remainwithinthe uterus and anteriorvaginaand is
gest that most deaths occur duringor very soon
then easilyremovedpervaginam.Retentionforlon-
after, surgery and are attributable to shock caused
ger than 24 hours is no longer regarded as an indi-
by uterine haemorrhage or gross uterine infection.
cationforimmediatemanualseparationprovided
Haemorrhagecanbelargelypreventedbyhaemo
that antibiotic therapy is maintained, but removal
staticsuturing of theuterineincision,and theeffects
may still be justified in draught-type mares,which
offetal emphysema and other forms of shock can be
are particularly susceptible to systemic reactions.
countered byintensivefluid therapy during and after
After removal of the placenta,intrauterine antibi-
the operation.Juzwiaketal (1990)reported that 17
oticpreparationsmayhaveabeneficialeffectbut
outof19maressurvivedpostoperativelyuntil the
more important by far is siphonage of any uter-
time of discharge,themost common complications
inefluidsthataccumulate,especiallyinmaresthat
being abdominal pain (13 mares), anaemia (10
show signs of anaphylactic response or are not
mares)andretained fetal membranes(6mares)
recovering satisfactorily.Vandeplasscheet al (1977)
Becausemost deaths occur duringtheimmediate
havecomimentedon the2-3-daydelayincontrac-
postoperative period,the clinician is more likely to
tion after caesarean section and recommend divi-
beworriedbytwoparticularcomplicationsthatmay
sion of perimetrial adhesions perrectum at theend
develop within a few days after surgery.The onset of
of this period.
diarrhoea should beviewedwith thegreatestconcern
Antibiotic therapy is generally considered advis-
becausebodyfluidlossisrapid andsevere,andfluid
able pre- and postoperatively, especially if the
reserves are soon depletedeven ifthemare contin-
foal has been dead for some time, resulting in
ues to drink.The role of antibiotics in the pathogen-
putrefaction.
esisofthis disorderand theirvalueinitstreatment
Abdominal incisions in the horse are uisually
are unclear, but there is no argument about the
followedbylocaloedemaof varying severity.
necessity for immediate fluid replacement therapy
371
Part
41
Operative interventions
to maintain hydration and normal electrolyte status.
vaginal prolapse (32%), fetopelvic disproportion
The other complication is laminitis, which has long
including fetal gmphysema (32uo), secondary uter-
been recognized as a sequel ofplacental retention
ine inertia (23%) and, surprisingly, non-dilatalion
in aninmalsof ihe hieavy draught breeds.The earliest
of the cervix (10%).Preparturient vaginal prolapse
sign of this supposedly anaphylactic reaction may he
may be complicated by rectal prolapse and retrover-
severe pulmonary oedema with dyspnoea and nasal
sion of the urinary bladder and even of the gravid
regurgitation of fluids. Pedal pain is then mani-
uterus,'and often undergoes considerable trauma
fested by reluictance to move or even to stand and,
and marked oedematous swelling. Fresh prolapses
without careful clinical examination,ihe resuliant
at term need not interfere with parurition but,if
recumbency during the early postoperative period
manual delivery is necessary, oedema rapidly devel-
may easily be mistaken for terminal illness justify-
ops and the tissues then tear readily. Inertia of a
ing euthanasia. In such cases, accumulated uterine
primary or secondary nature is an important indica-
fluids shouldberemoved immediatelybysiphan-
tion for surgery and,because of delay. the fetuses in
age. Diuretics are indicated for severe oedema, and
such cases are often emphysematous.In secondary
the laminitis is treated by dietary restriction and the
inertia,in particular,it is not always easy tobe cer-
control of pain.
tain that fetuses remain in the uterus.If they can-
Postoperative fertility
or abdominal wall, and if fetal heart sounds can-
not be detected, radiography or ultrasonography
Juzwiak et al (1990) reported that 50% of mares
is advisable before surgery is undertaken. Less fre-
bred after a caesarian operation produced at least
quent clinical indications for a caesarean operation
one foal.Stashak&Vandeplassche（1993) found
are maternal immaturity and pelvic deformity, tor-
that,in a series involving 82 mares thathad a caesar-
sion of one or both uterinehorns andfetal defor-
ean operation, 34 (41.5%) were not bred again: of
mities such as hydrocephalus or conjoined piglets.
the 48 (58.5%) that were bred 28 (58.3%)became
Preparturientelective hysterotomy is alsoperformed
pregnant. In the same study, of the 28 mares that
as an alternative to gravid hysterectomy to obtain
becamepregnant,23(S2.1%)foaled at term and of
pathogen-free pigleis, whichi are thien fostered or
those that did not, most aborted at various stages of
reared arlificially.
gestation.Thus the caesarean operation in the mare
should not have too great an effect on subsequent
fertility provided it is performed quickly after the
Anaesthesia
onsetof dystocia and before thereisheavy bacte-
rial contamination of the uterus either from man-
Because of difficulties in restraint, the operation is
ual interference or from putrefaction ofthe foal. The
usually performed under deep sedation and local
alalgesia,or general anaesthesia.The best method
ceived after two elective operations suggests that the
under field conditions is the use of a combination
of azaperone (1.0 mg/kg) and ketamine (2.5 mg/kg)
hysterotomy per se isless important in this respect
than the state of the fetus and the uterus at the time
intramuscularly as a sedative,followed by intrave
of surgery.
nous ketamine(2mg/kg)and midazolam (100μg/kg)
about 15minutes later(Clutton et al 1997).The sow
can then be iniubated and anaesthesia maintained
Pig
with oxygen/nitrous oxide/halothane.Alternatively
The sow,like llie bitch, is a difficult obstetrical
it is possible to perform the caesarean operation
patient because, although the need for surgery may
using local infiltration and the ability to 'top up'
witli further doses of thelatter combination intra-
licular causeofdystocia even after theoperationhas
venously. Brodbelt & Taylor (1999) have reported
been performed.
the use of two combinations of substances injected
intramuscularly, which is a much easier technique
Indications
than thie intravenous route.The combinations were
azaperone（2mg/kg),butorphanol(0.2mg/kg)and
In a series of 57 operations reported by Renard et
ketamine (5mg/kg),or detomidine (100μg/kg),
al (1980),the major indications were irreducible
butorphanol (0.2mg/kg) and ketamine (5mg/kg).
372
Chaptei
1201
The caesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teaser males
These combinations allowed endotracheal intuba-
repaired with inversion sutures, using an absorbable
tion, although it is likely that a caesarean operation
suture material.The sow's uterus,like e ares, is
could be performed with local infiluration at the
apt to tear if the sutureispulled too tight,but thisis
surgical site.
of no consequence if rapid contraction is induced by
Renard etal(1980)recommend theuseofanterior
postoperative oxytocin therapy.
epidural analgesia but also reported a very high inci-
dence of postoperative hindlimb paresis, which they
Maternalrecoveryrate and causesofdeath
attributed to lateral recumbency on a hard surface.
Provided thattlie animal is adequately restrained
Lnless the fenus and uerus are grossly infected, the
under sedation,local analgesia or a paravertebral
Ilaternal recovery rate after a caesarean operation in
nerve block may also be successfully employed.
the sow is excellent. In a series of 78unselected cases,
Operativetechnique
rate of 72%.Deaths are usually due to the combined
effects of toxaemia and surgical shock, and occur dur-
The operation is performed through a vertical para-
ing the immediate postoperative period. Animals that
lumbar fossa orventral flank incision on either side
are lilely to die can often be identified before sur-
(Fig.20.20). Eacli gravid horn should be exterior-
gery because of a characteristic blotchy cyanosis of
ized in turn for incision outside theperitoneal cavity
the limbs, ears and udder. The adverse effects of peri-
in order to minimize peritoneal contamination. If
toneal contamination are more easily avoided in the
the fetuses are not emphysematous,it is usuallypos-
sow than in larger animals because the uterus can be
sible to evacuateboth horns through a singleinci-
totally exteriorized during the operation. Other fre-
sion in the centre of each horn,with the piglets a1
quent complications recorded by Renard et al (1980)
the ovarian poles and the base of the cornua being
include constipation, locomotory problems exacer-
squeezed down the horn and grasped tlhrough the
bated by the sow's tendency to remain recumbent,
incision.If thie fetuses are emphysematous multiple
and the mastitis-metritis-agalactia syndrome.Severe
incisions sited directly over or between them may
be necessary. The piglet's umbilical cord is long and,
and require the insertion of a temporary retaining
even without placental separation, forceps clamping
perivaginal suture.
or ligation is possible before division. Fetal mem-
branes that have not separated should be left in
situ and not forcibly removed by traction.Because
Surgical preparation of teaser bulls
the uterine horns are long, it is important to pal-
and rams
pate the genital tract in its entirety to ensure that all
piglets have been removed.The uterine incisions are
In intensively managed dairyherds, teaser bulls fitted
with marking devices are sometimes used to assist in
 oestrus detection (see Ch. 22). Teaser rams are used
for slightly different purposes: first, to concentrate
the lambing period by ensuring that all ewes in the
flock are undergoing cyclical activity before the stud
ram is introduced and second,to hasten the onset
of cyclical activity in anoestrus ewes and, to some
extent, synchronize cyclical activity.
Teaser bulls are prepared by surgical manipula-
tions of the penis or prepuce to prevent intromis-
sion,by vasertomy or by the occlusion of other
genital ducts induced by the injection of chemi-
cal irritant agents.Surgical procedures include
penectomy(Straub &Kendrick 1965),fixation of
the penis to the ventral abdominal wall (Belling
Fig.20.20 Position af skinincision in the left paralumbar
1961) and partial occlusion of the preputial ori-
fossafor a caesarean operationin a sow.
fice（Bieberly & Bieberly 1973）.However,these
373
Part
41
Operativeinterventions
techniques prevent protrusion of the penis and ejac-
The prudent clinician will always keep the excised
ulation and are thought,for these reasons, to lead
tisstte in a preservative in case there is a subsequent
to frustration and rapid loss of libido. Moreover,
history of cewsor heifers conceiving to the teaser
in the UK these procedures are considered to be
bull. lt is doubtful if the cost ofroutine histological
unacceptable mutilations. A more sophisticated
examination can be justified. This is certainly true
technique for surgically deviating the prepuce from
for rams.The effect of vasectomy on sperm quality
thieventral midline hasbeen described byRommel
is immediate (Table 20.1); in the bull, viable extra-
(1961) and jochle et al (1973),but would not be
gonadal sperm reserves can probably be completely
acceptable in the LiK.
exhaustedbyoneortwonaturalor artificialservices
Vasectomy is still the generally accepted method
but the ram may continue to ejaculate immotile
of preparing teaser bulls.With the reservations
sperm from ampullary reserves for a considerable
that coitus may transmit venereal diseases and
period afterwards.Vasectomy is not often requested
that vasectomized animals retain a normal mas-
culine aggressiveness and can lose libido because
by an inguinal or scrotal incision.
of overwork, teasers prepared in this way perform
A non-invasive method of chemical steriliza-
satisfactorily for an indefinite period of time. The
tionwithoutlossof libidowasdescribedbyPineda
technique is reviewed by Pearson （1978),with
et al (1977), who found that the injection of chlor-
particular emphasis on the possible legal impli-
hexidine in dimethyl sulfoxide （DMSO) directly
cations of improper surgery. In ruminants, which
into the epididymides of dogs induced long-lasting
have a pendulous scrotum,the spermatic cord is
and probably irreversible azoospermia. The effect of
exposed through an incision in the scrotal neck
this technique was tested by Pearson et al (1980) in
and, after splitting of the tunica vaginalis reflexa,
bulls and rams. Four bulls became aspermic within
the vas deferens is ideniified asa distinctively dense
2weeksof theinjection into each cauda epididymis
tubular structure lying in its own separate fold of
of 5 ml of a preparation containing 3% chlorhex-
mesorchium (Fig. 20.21].At least 3 cm of the vas
idine gluconate in 50% DMSO in aqueous solu-
is resected between non-adsorbable ligatures,and
tion,and remained aspermic throughout a trial
the scrotal skin is sutured after the testis has first
period of at least 54 weeks. Experimental and clini-
been pressed into the scrotum to draw the cord
cal trials of the same technique inrams are equally
back within the tunica, which need not be closed.
encouraging.
A
B
(B) The vas deferens is exposed after incision of the tunica vaginalis reflexa
374
Chapter
201
Thecaesarean operation and the surgical preparation of teasermales
Table20.1Effect of bilateral vasectomy (at dayO)on semenqualityof daily ejaculatesin abull
Semen
Daysbeforeand aftervasectomy
-2
-1
+1
+2
+4
+6
8+
Motility
5+
4+
-1
0
0
0
0
Density(x10%)
3605
2200
1465
70
10
5
0
Volume(ml)
3.5
1.5
1.5
3.0
1.0
1.5
1.0
Sperm ccunt(%)
Normal live
86
70
8
0
Alldead
Normal dead
14
20
84
78
92
80
Abnormal live
NR
NR
NR
1
4
Abnormal dead
NIR
NR
NR
20
4
20
NR,notrecorded
References
luzwiakJS,SloneDE,SantschiEM,Moll HD 1990VetSurg
19:50
Neal PA 1956Ve1Rec68:89
Anderson DE 1998 In:Proceedings of the 3ist Annual
Parish SM,Tyler JW,Ginsky IV 19951AmVetMed Assoc
Convention ofiheAmerican Association of Bovine
207:751
Practitioners,p101
ParkinsonJD 1974VetRec95:508
Arthur GH1975Veterinary reproduction and obstetrics,
PearsonH 1971Vet Rec89:597
4th edn.Bailliere Tindall,London
Pearson H1978Vet Annu 18:80
Barkema HIW,SchukkenYH,Guard CLet al 1992
Pearson H 1996The caesarean operation.In:Arthur GHI,
Theriogenology38:589
NoakesDE,Pearson HParkinsnT (ed)Vetrinaryo-
BellingTHI1961JAmVet MedAssoc138:670
ductionandobstetric7thedn.WBSaunders,London
BieberlyFBieberly S1973VetMedSmallAnimClin68:
Pearson H,Arthur GHRosevinkB,KakatiB1980VetRe
1086
107:285
BoucoumontD,LecuyerB,Rosenthiehl Det al 1978Point
PinedaMH,Reimers JHopwoodML,SeidelG1977Am
Vet8:15
JVe1Res 38:831
BrodbeliDC,TaylorPM1999VetRec145:283
Renard A,St-PierreH,LamotheP,CoutureY198MedVet
BrountsSH,Hawkins IBairdAN,GlickmanLT 2004IAm
Quebec10:6
Vet Med As5oc224:275
RommelW1961MhVetMed16:19
Campbell ME.Fubini SL1990 Comp Cont Educ12:285
Schuij G,Van derWeijden GC2000Cattle Pract 8:367
Cattel JH,Dobson H 1990Vet Rec127:395
SlossV,Dufty H1977Aust Vet」53:420
Caulkel N,Cribh PH,DukeT 1993 CanVet134:674
StashakTS,VandeplasscheM1993 Caesarean section.In:
ClutonRE,Blissitt KI,BradleyAA,Camburn MA 1997Vet
McKinnon AO,Voss JL ed) Equine reproduction.Lea&
Rec141:140
Febiger,Philadelphia
Cox IE 1987 Surgery of thereproductive lractin large
Straub OC,KendrickIW1965 IAmVet Med Assoc147:373
animals,3rd edn.Liverpool University Press,Liverpool,
VandeplasscheM1963SchweizArchTierheilk105:21
p145-169
VandeplasscheM1973Theveterinary annual.JohnWright,
DawsonIC,MurrayR1992VetRec131:525
Bristol,p73
Dehghani SN,Ferguson JG1982 Comp ContEduc4:S387
VandeplasscheM1980EquineVet J12:45
FreemanDEHungerford LL,SchaefferDetal1999aEquine
VandeplasscheM,BoutersR,Spincemaille1,Herman 」1968
Vet]31:203
Zuchthygiene3:62
FreemanDE,Johnston JK,Hungerford LL,LockTF1999b
VandeplasscheM,SpincemailleJ,BoutersR1971EquineVet
EquineVetJ31:208
13:144
GreenM,ButterworthS,Husband |1999InPract21:240
VandeplasscheM,BoutersR,Spincemaille,BonteP1977
JochleW,GimeneziT,EsparzaH,HidalgoMA1973VetMed
In:Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conventionof the
Small Anim Clin 68:395
AmericanAssociationofBovinePractitioners,p75
375
121
Chapter
GaryEngland
Genital surgery in the bitch and queen
Surgery ofthe genital tract of thebitch hasbeen
be stimulated by either progesterone or oestrogen.
commonformorethan50years.Despiteinnumer
ableadvances in surgicalmaterials and improved
onthedevelopimentofvaginal leiomyomatalaterin
anaesthetic and surgical techniques,ovariohyster-
life(Kydd&Burnie1986)
ectomyremains aprocedurethatisoften underes-
The most important clinical indication for ovario-
timated inits potential for complication,despite
hysterectomyisthetreatmentofpyometra(which is
being thesinglemost commonmajor suirgicalpro-
discussed in detail below).Surgery is still the treatment
cedureperformedin smallanimalpractice.The aim
of choice for this disorder,although there are reports
of this chapter is to review common surgical inter-
of successful treatment with prostaglandinsprolactin
ventions in thebitch and queen.
inhibitors andconbinationsoftheseproducts.
Ovariohysterectomy may also be performed at
the time ofcaesarean operation,either electively
Ovariohysterectomy
(for elective neutering) or as an emergency pro-
cedure,because ofuterinie trauma,infection or
Indications
infarction.It may alsosimply beneuteringdur-
ingregnancy.It isafact,paradoxically,hat mid
Inmany countries ovariohysterectomy is themost
to late pregnancy is the safest time for elective
frequentlyperformed electivemethod for prevent-
spayingbecausetheovarianattachments arethen
stretched andhaemostasisiseasily achieved
In some countriesovariectomyhasbecome amore
Anunusual indication forovariohysterectomy in
common surgical technique,particularly in young
thecat ispostparturient eversion ofthe uterus(Fig
animals(seebelow).Animportant clinicaljustifica-
21.1),which canberemovedin situbyexposure and
tionfor surgical neutering is theprotection against
ligation of blood vessels through a vaginal incision.
subsequent reproductive tract disease,including
Unless thetissues aregrossly oedematousortrau-
pyometra and ovarian neoplasia. Furthermore,
matized,theoperation isbetterperformed at lapa
when performed before thefirst or second oestrus
rotomy after the eversion has been reducedby gentle
there is significant protection against the develop-
traction.
mentofmammaryneoplasia(Schneideretal1969).
Rarely,the clinician may opt toperform an enbloc
Whileremovaloftheovarieshaslimitedeffecton
ovariohysterectomyasatreatmentfordystociaalthough
existing mammary tumours it is frequently per-
this method appears to have a relatively high rate of
formed in the hope thatremoval of the ovarieswill
postoperativecomplication,especiallytherequirement
reducetlhe developmentofnewlesionsthatmay
fortransfusion(Robbins&Mullen1994)
376
Chapter
21
Genital surgery in thebitch and queen
Fig. 21.1 Postparturient uterine eversion (u) in a queen
Fig.21.2Unilateral granlosa cell tumour inabitch,resulting
in a haemorrhagic vulvar/vaginal discharge and sexual
attractiveness.
Ovarian neoplasms are not comnon in thebitch
but granulosa cell tumours and ovarian cystade-
by ovariectomy provided,with the lalter tumour.
that metastases are not evident,either locally on thie
serosa or in thelymphatics on the domeof the dia-
phragm.Removal of the ovaries may also be hen-
eficial for cases of diabetes mellitus, which can
be difficult to stabilize during the luteal phase. In
both instances it is likely that ovariohysterectomy
wouldbe performed rather than simple ovariectomy
because, as both conditions occur in older animals,
there is usually some uterine thickening present,
which is unlikely to be left by most surgeons.
Time of surgery
Elective ovariohysterectomy is best performed during
Fig.21.3 Bilateral cystadenomata asscciated with haemoperi-
toneum in a bitch
anoestrus(generally3-5months after the end of the
377
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
previous oestrus) to avoid the risk ofiatrogenic psel-
assistance,through a small laparotomy incision.
dopregnancy, which can be induced by removal of
This is often pdt the case,and theroutine ovario-
the ovaries, which contain corpora lutea. While sur-
hysterectomy can be a technically demanding pro-
gery can be performed during pro-oestrus,he period
cedure, especially in large and obese animals.I is
ofoestrusisbestavoidedbecauseoftheincreased
essential tohave goodrelaxationof the abdominal
vascularity ofthesubcutaneous,uterineandovarian
musculature and an incisionofadequatelength.
vessels and thefriability of the genital tract at this
In obese,deep-chested bitches undergoing elective
time.A further window of opportunity isweeks3
ovariohysterectomy,itmay be impossible to expose
and 4 post-oestrus,which is a time when iatrogenic
the ovaries without significant traction.In such
pseudopregnancy is unlikely and the reproductive
cases,section oftheovarian ligament,which is eas
tract hasreturnedtobeinglessvascular andfriable.
ilyrecognizedifthemesovariumistensed,facilitates
Thereisincreasinguseofovariohysterectomyand
ligation,butthetissuesarethenmorelikelytotear
ovariectomyprior tothefirstoestrus(Salmerietal
on traction.
1991).This has a number of significant advantages,
The choice of suture material for ligation is impor-
includingthefact that oestruswillnever occur,the
tant becausetheuseof non-absorbablemultifilament
risk of subsequent mammaryneoplasia isminimal
ligatures,especiallyincombinationwithpoorsurgical
and thefact thatthe surgicalprocedureissimple and
technique,mayresultin theformationofretroperio
recovery isusually rapid.There have been minimal
neal abscesses and granuloma.In these cases,there is
adverseeffects（Howe2006),although therearemany
ultimatelyasingleornumeroussinustracts thatdis-
anecdotal descriptions of adverse effects including:
charge externally in the sublumbar region (Pearson
increased risk of urinary incontinence
1973).The chosen suture material must also be of
adequate thickness to allowproper tightening.
·development ofinfantilevulva
Thecorrect haemostatic techniqueforligation of
·poor hair growth
theovarianpedicleconsistsoftheapplicationofthree
delayedgrowthplateclosureandincreasedriskof
haemostatic forceps.The most proximal is subse
physeal fractures,especiallyin cats
quentlyremoved to allow theligature tobeplaced at
·increased risk of obesity.
thesiteofthecrushed tissue,ensuringa snugfitwith
good compression of the tissue However,in many
In my opinion,prepubertal neutering iswarranted
cases there is insuficient exposure,much fat is pres
in many animals,although there are some particu-
ent and the tissue is very friable.In these instances,it
lar contraindications,whichwouldresultinsurgery
may onlybepossibletoplacetwoforceps,with the
beingdelayeduntil after thefirst oestrus:
ligature beingplaced proximally to these. In these
bitches with existing prepubertal vaginitis (which
cases,theligature may be placed through some of
normally onlyregresses after thefirstoestrus)
the perivascular tissues in the manner ofa transfix-
·bitchesfrom abreedwithincreasedriskofurinary
ingligature.Acommon technicalfault is1o ligate
incontinence (e.g. Rotweiler, Doberman,Old
iminediately adjacent to forcepsplaced belowthe
English Sheepdog, some spaniels)
ovary;tissues fixedina clamp cannot be adequately
·bitches with existing signs of dominance aggression
compressedbyligationuntil theclampisreleased.It
is therefore essential to ligate well helow the clamp.
·bitches from a breed with increased risk of devel-
Once the ligature has been placed, the pedicle is
oping poor hair growth post-neutering(e.g.Welsh
transected betweenthetwodistalforceps,allowing
Springer Spaniel,Irish Setter,etc.)
the ovary to be lifted from the abdomen.The pedi-
·bitches with underdeveloped or poor perineal
cle should tien be graspedwith atraumaticforceps
conformation.
and theremaininghaemostaticforcepsshould be
These contentions,however,still remain to be
removed to allow inspection of thepedicle for hae-
proven in suitably controlled studies.
morrhage.The broad ligament isrelatively avascular
but should be ligated in cases of pyometritis and in
Surgicaltechnique
advanced pregnancy.The procedure is then repeated
Ovariohysterectomy is a routine operation in small
for the other ovary andwithgentletraction thecer-
animal practice and is often regarded as a simple
vix and vagina should bevisible in theincision.The
procedure that can be performedquicklywithout
lateraluterinevessels arenormallyligatedatthelevel
378
Chapter
211
Genital surgery in the bitch and queen
oftheproximalvagina usingeither a tightencir-
isextremelyusefulto allowcarefulexamination of
cling ligature or a transfixing technique.Transfixing
thesite.Theright ovarianpediclecanbestbelocated
ligaturesmaybecomecontaminatedinthevaginal
by identifying the duodenum (lying against the right
lumen and subsequently act as a focus of infection
lateralabdominalwall)andretractingitacrosstothe
and predispose to secondary haemorrhage. In cases
left side.This moves all abdominal contents away
ofpyometritis and gravid hysterectomy,it is a wise
from theright side(since they are trapped in the
precaution to ligate each pair of uterine vessels sepa-
mesoduodenum)and allows an unobstructedview
rately closetothemainvaginal ligature.Thetissue is
oftherightovarianpedicle.A similarprocedurecan
then transected at the cranial vagina and the stump
be performed on the left side using ihe descending
is lifted through the incision to inspect for haemor-
colon. The vaginal stump is best approached by ret-
rhage before replacement in the abdomen.The cut
roflexing the urinarybladder through theincision
end doesnotrequire closure orinversion.The ovar-
allowing inspection of the vagina dorsally.The broad
ianpediclesandvaginalstumpshouldbeinspected
ligament can be identified in the dorsal abdomen.
prior to routine closure of the incision.
New ligatures should be placed on any site where
Whiletherehasbeenconsiderabledevelopment
haemorrhage has been identified. If there are mul-
in theuse of laparoscopic surgery insmall animal
tiple sites of haemorrhage theremaybea clotting
practice, for neutering the most common proce-
disorder.
dure isstill laparoscopicovariectomy andthis is
Insomecases,theremaybea haemorrhagicvulvar
discussed below.
discharge some time after ovariohysterectomy.This
may be due either tonecrosis aroundvaginal stump
Complications
ligatures or to infection at this site.Rarely,thehae-
morrhageissevereandrequiresimmediateresection
The complications of ovariohysterectomy
are
of the stump.Many cases resolve spontaneously and
well documented（Pearson 1973,Dorn &Swist
are supported by antimicrobial and fluid therapy
1977, Burrow et al 2005). Total rates of intraoper-
until thattime.
ative,postoperative and total complications were
In some cases, there may be inclusion of a distal
6.3%,14.1% and 20.6%respectively (Burrow et al
ureterinthevaginal stumpligatures,or of the prox-
2005). Haemorrhage is the most common cause of
imalureter in the ovarian pedicle ligature.Usually
deathandmostfrequentlyresultsfromligaturefail-
this is unilateral and resultsin renal enlargement and
ureat the ovarianpedicle,vaginal stump orbroad
hydronephrosis.If diagnosed shortly after surgery the
ligament vessels.In most cases,careful inspection
ligaturemayberemovedwithsomerecoveryofrenal
of theseprior to closure of theincision will reveal
function.Otherwiseanimals becomeilland renal
blood leakage,although in some cases haemoperi-
function is lost,necessitating a nephroureterectomy.
toneum develops immediaiely post-surgery.
This
Rarely a uterine stump granuloma（Fig.2l.4)or
shouldalwaysbeconsideredintheanimal thattakes
pyometramay
develop followingovariohysterec-
longer thanexpected torecover from anaesthesia.In
tomy.The latter only occurs if the hysterectomy
addition,there may be a tachycardia,tachypnoea,
isperformedtoalevelproximaltothecervixand
pale mucous membranes,weak pulseand a pro-
either an ovary is leftinposition or exogenous repro-
longedcapillaryrefill time.Bloodmayleakfrom the
ductive steroids are administered tothebitch.The
wound and there may be abdominal distension. In
clinical signs are similar to thoseofa conventional
thepostoperativeperioditmaybedifficult todecide
pyometra. In most cases leaving an ovary or a por-
whether to manage these cases conservatively or to
tionofovaryresultsinrecurrent oestrousbehaviour,
intervene surgically. If the condition is progressive,
which is discussedbelow.
the animal should bestabilizedwith intravenous
A serious potential long-term complication of
fuid therapy prior to laparotomy.In this instance,
spaying isurinary incontinence.Themostcommon
the abdomen should be approached throughthe
cause of incontinence in bitches after ovariohys-
initial incisionbutthisshouldbeextendedtoallow
terectomy is sphincter mechanism incompetence.
careful inspection of thepedicles and vaginal stump.
The exact aetiology is poorly understood but the
Oncetheperitoneumisopened,itisbesttoexteri-
condition appearstobemultifactorial,andovario-
orizethesmallintestineontosaline-soakedswabs
hysterectomy appears to be a contributingfactor.
lo allowinspectionoftheovarianpedicles.Suction
Ruckstuhl(1978)recorded anoverallincidence of
379
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
of feeding and exercise regimes by the owner can
preventobesity.rs
Someworkers have suggested thatnormal endo-
crine status can be maintained for at least a short
periodoftimebythetransplantationofovariantis-
sueintoan areaofsplanchnicvenous drainage(Le
Bladder
Roux&Van der Walt 1977）.This technique has had
limited study but transplantation of segments of
oneovaryintothewallofthestomachcausedtheir
secretions tobemetabolized in theliver in such a
waythat cyclicalsignsof oestruswanedafter a cur-
tailed pro-oestrus phase.More importantly,there
was a highincidence ofneoplasia at thesiteof trans-
plantation (Arnold etal 1988),such that the tech-
niquecannolongerberecommended.
Ovariectomy
Fig.21.4Ultrasound appearance of stump granuloma
In theUKanduSA,ovariectomyisanuncommon
(arrows)post-ovariohysterectomy.Thegranulomahasamixed
procedure for surgical neutering of biiches and
of gas (white).
queensanditisfrequentlyanderroneouslythought
thatremovalof theuterusisessentialforiheneuter-
ing procedure(Schaefers-Okkens &Kooistra 2002).
12% in 79animals within 1 year of surgery and a
In fact,ovariectomyaloneiswidelypractised among
frequency in larger breeds of almost 18%.The exact
veterinary surgeons in rmany European countries.
relationshipissomewhatcontentiousbutThrusfield
Removal of the ovaries alonehas several advantages
(1985),analysinga first-opinion clinic population,
over ovariohysterectomy,includingthefollowing:
foundapositive associationbetweenall forms of
·The procedure is faster and less traumatic
acquiredurinaryincontinenceand ovariohysterec-
·The incision canbe made more cranially, allowing
tomyinbitchesaged 6monthsormore.Inareview
good exposureof the ovarian pedicle
ofsphinctermechanism incontinencein thebitch,
Holt（1985) found that 35of 39adult inconti-
Thereis some evidence,although anecdotal,that
suggests a lower incidence of postsurgical urinary
nent bitches inhis series had been surgically neu-
tered. Most cases develop clinical signs within 1
incontinence.
yearofsurgery.Arnold(1993)alsofound that20%
Afterremovaloftheovaries,theuterusbecomessmall
ofbitchesbecame incontinent after ovariohyster-
andatrophicandsubsequentdisease isunlikely
ectomy, and showed that in 12 bitches there was a
unless exogenous reproductive steroids are admin-
reduction in urethralpressureprofileandurethral
istered to the bitch.In fact,the only common spon-
closure pressure after surgery, although none of
taneously occurringuterinedisorder,pyometritis,is
those dogs developed incontinence.Once an accu-
dependentoncyclicalovarian activity.Thetechnique
rate diagnosis of the condition has been made,it
of ovariectomy also prevents operative haemorrhage
maybecontrolledbyincreasingurethraltone either
duetoinadequateligationofuterinevessels,and the
by the administration of exogenous oestrogen or by
delayed but occasionally fatal bleeding associated
α-adrenergic drugs such as phenylpropanolamine.
with infection of the vaginal stump ligature.It also
Surgicaltreatment includesurethropexy or colpo-
obviatestheriskofaccidental inclusion ofureters in
suspension techniques designedto increase the
theligatureanddelayeduterine stumpadhesions
effective length of the urethra (White 2001).
The procedure has similar advantages to ovariohys-
A further adverse effect ofovariohysterectomy is
terectomyin thatitcanprotectagainstpyometra
that bitches may losethe ability toregulate food
andotheruterinediseaseand,ifperformedbefore
intake.Thiscanbecontrolled,andcarefulmonitoring
thefirst or second oestrusit canpreventmammary
380
Chapter
21
Genital surgeryin thebitch and queen
neoplasia.In my opinion, ovariectomy is a procedure
ofchoiceinayounganimalbut in a mature animal,
Abalanced electrolyle is normally administered and,
where uterine changes may already exist,ovariohys-
since the most common acid-base abnormality is
tercctomy should beconsidered.Adiscussion of the
metabolicacidosis,Hartmann'ssolutionisprobably
benefitsofthetwotechniqueswasrecentlypublished
most useful.Ideally,the electrolyte andpH status
(van Goethemetal 2006).
shouldbemonitoredsincebothsevereacidosis and
hypokalaemiamaydevelop.Similarlyrenal function
shouldbeassessed andfluidinput shouldresultin
Laparoscopicovariectomy
a urine output ofmore than 1 ml/kg/hour. In such
an environment renal fumction will correct many of
Therehasbeen significant developmentoflaparo
the acid-base imbalances.Hypoglycaemia is a com-
scopicsurgical techniques andboth ovariectomy and
monsequelatosepsisandanyconcurrentacidosis
ovariohysterectomyhavebeendescribed(Austinetal
will impair gluconeogenesis such that it is impor-
2003,Mayhew& Brown 2007).Ovariectomy is pre-
tanttoestablishbloodglucoseconcentrations and
ferredas a lessdemandingprocedurewhich in the
to treat hypoglycaemia.Inmostcasesofsepsisthe
young animal can be quickly and safely performed
commonly isolatedorganismsincludeEscherichia
withrapidrecovery times post-surgery(Davidson et
coli,Staplylococcns spp.andStreptococcuspp,sothat
al 2004).Thereisno doubt that therewill be signifi-
cephalosporins are often the first-choiceantimicro-
cant developments andincreaseduse ofthis surgical
bial agent.
procedure in coming years.
The surgical technique is similar to that for elec-
Live neutering,although the uterus is more friable
and there is an increasedrisk of rupture during
Ovariohysterectomy for pyometra
exteriorization （Fig.21.5).Once exteriorized,the
uterus should be packed off from the abdomen
Therehavebeen advances in themedical treaiment
using saline-soaked swabs.The ovarian pedicles are
of caninepyometra including theuseofprostaglan-
ligated in the normal manner. Often vessels within
dins, prolactin inhibitors combined with prosta-
the broad ligament are large and require ligation
glandin and progesterone receptor antagonists such
rather than simple tearing as in an uncomplicated
asaglepristone.Non-surgical treatment by catheter
ovariohysterectomy.There is some debate over the
drainage of the uterus per vaginam has also been
optimal excision at the uterine stump.Normally,
described (Funkquist et al 1983,Lagersted et al
thepedicleshouldbetransectedthrough thecranial
1987).Despitethese, surgery remains the first-line
treatmentformostcases.
The surgical technique for ovariohysterectomy for
pyometra is similar to that for surgical neutering.
There are,however,a number ofproblems that are
frequently encountered,including:
·presence of vomitingresultinginfluid electrolyte
and acid-base imbalances
·renal dysfunction
·sepsis(the peritoneal cavity may be contaminated
withpus)and significant elevatedendotoxins
·hypo- or hyperglycaemia
hepatic damage
cardiac dysrhythmias
clotting abnormalities (White1998,Hagman et al
2006)
Fig.21.5 Exteriorized uterus of bitchwith pyometra.Note the
In all casesintravenous fuid therapyismandatory
grossly distendeduterine horns causingincreased fragilityof
and,where the animalhas collapsed,initial infu-
theuterirewal.
381
Part
41
 Operative interventions
vagina using absorbable suture material, and the
large anuclear epithelial cells (red blood cells may
stump shouldnot be oversewn or inverted.If it is
be absent).Alternatively in the bitch, plasma pro-
thought that the stump is contaminated, omentum
gesierone corcentrations can be measured 2 weelks
shiould be sutured over thestumpprior to closure
after the clinical signs of oestrus have disappeared.
of the abdomen. If there is gross contamination of
fA high concentration of progesterone indicates tie
the abdomen with pus,this should be removed by
presence of luteal tissue from an ovarian remnant. In
suction and the abdomen should be lavaged using
the queen, progesterone will only be produced after
several litres of warmed physiological saline. Open
ovulation,which can be stimulated by the adminis-
peritoneal drainage may be necessary in severe cases.
tration of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
Postoperative complications following removal of
during the signs of oestrus (England 1997).
a pyometra are similar to those following routine
Surgical exploration is besi performed during
ovariohysterectomy.
oestrus orin the early lutealphase when the ovary
Ovariohysterectomyfor thetreatment ofpyometra
is at its largest size. Uisually the ovary can be pal-
is occasionally complicated by incarceration of a
pated within the fat of the ovarian pedicle. If no tis-
segment of one horn in an inguinal metrocele (see
sue can be detected,it is prudent to relnove both
Fig.10.4). Simultaneous herniorrhaphy and laparo-
ovarian pedicles,which usually contain theremnant
tomy may be necessary but preoperative aspira
material.
tion ofpus should first be attempted to relieve the
incarceration and allow the uterus tobe excised in
Caesarean operation in the bitch
the normnal way. Conversely, it may be possible to
remove the entire uterus at herniorrhaphy but this
approach is not to be recommended.
A common concern of many owners is that, when
pregnancy length exceeds 65 or 66 days, parturition
Ovarian remnant syndrome
is'overdue' However, there is often a misunderstand-
ing of the normal reproductive physiology. since
while he‘endocrinological' length of pregnancy is
In both the bitch and the queen, ovarian remnant
fixed at 63+ 1 day from ovulation to the onset of
syndrome is usually a result of incorrect surgical
parturition,thereis alarge variationin theapparent
technique where a whole ovary(most commonly the
length of pregnancy. The latter, which is the interval
right ovary) or a portion of it is left behind (Sontas
from the day of mating to the day of parturition, can
et al 2007). In my experience seeding of the abdo-
vary from 56-72 days in normal bitches of all breeds
men with ovarian cells is very rare,probably because
(Krzyzanowsli et al 1975). This variation is associ-
of tlie presence of the ovarian bursa in these spe-
ated eitherwith breeding early such that spern wait
cies.Ulsually the female exhibits a regular return to
in the female tract for oocytes (resulting in a long
Oestrus, although in the bitch there may be no red
apparent pregnancy) or breeding towards the end of
the fertilization period such that oocytes are waiting
performed. Where a uterineremnant is present there
to be fertilized (resulting in a short apparent preg-
may also be the development of a stump pyometra.
nancy) (Fig. 21.6).
In any bitch when the ovaries have been removed
There are few causes of true prolonged gestation
during theluteal phase,a sudden clinical pseudo-
and these are generally associated with unnoticed
pregnancy may develop, which may be misinter-
primary uterine inertia or dystocia. In other cases,
preted by some clinicians as indicating the presence
pregnancy is not overdue,rather a pseudopregnant
of an ovarian remnant, which of course it does not.
bitch is thought to be pregnant.
Signs of oestrus may however be useful for the
Bitches that are within their physiological preg-
diagnosisofovarian remnant syndrome although
nancy length, and those that are not pregnant, do
some bitches demonstrate sexual behaviour at vari-
not have abnormal clinical signs.Those birches with
ous stages of the oestrous cycle as well as after sur-
primaryuterineinertiamay havepreviouslyhiad a
gical neutering, and others may be attractive to
small-volume vulval discharge and may have exhib-
males because of the presence of a low-grade vagi-
ited uterine and possibly abdominal contractions
nitis.Accurate diagnosis requires the examination of
that were unnoticed by the owner. Subsequently,
a vaginal smear during oestrus,This denonstrates
therewill be placental separation and the onset of a
382
Chapter
211
Genital surgery in thebitch and queen
Ovulation
Progesterone
Fertiizatlion
Ovulation
Parlurilion
Fertilep
period
Latemating (short apparent pregnancy)
=56days
>Ovulation toparturition=63days
Preparlum
decline
>Early mating (long apparent pregnancy)
=72 days
Fig.21.6The time fromovulation toparturitionis constant
Fig.21.7Schematicrepresentation of the changes in plasma
mating occurs towards thebeginning of thefertileperiod,or
progesterone concentration duringpregnancyin thebitch
appear to be short ifmating occurs towards the end of the
and the significantprepartum declineinprogesterone that
fertilization period.
occurs24-36hourspriorto the onset of parturition(arrow)
green-colouredvulval discharge.Damsthenbecome
plasma progesterone concentrationindicates that
systemically ill as the fetuses die and deconipose;a
parturitionisnotimminent(England &Verstegen
large-volume vulval discharge may then be present.
1996).Plasma progesterone canbe easily measured
Initially,rectal temperaturemay benormal but his
in the practice laboratory by the use of enzyme-
may subsequently increase,and terminally it may
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test kits.
become subnormal.
The major obstacle to rational assessment of appar-
There are severalmeihods thatmaybeusedto
ent dystocia is the physical impossibility of carrying out
predict thetime ofexpectedparturition inthebitch.
a proper intermal examination of more than just the
If thebitch was monitored during oestrus thetime
caudal reproductive tract.Exceptin the smallest breeds,
fromovulationtoparturitionis tightlyregulated
even the cervix isbeyondreach on digital vaginalexplo-
(63+1 days),and thereforemeasureinentofplasma
ration,andevaluationofthecervixcanonlybemadeby
progesteroneconcentrations to detecttheoptimal
endoscopy.The clinician must therefore rely greatly on
mating time may be useful for determining the
behavioural signs, the nature of the vulval discharges,
time ofparturition(Kutzleretal 2003).Similarly,
plasmaprogesteroneconcentrationsandrectaltemper-
thestudyofvaginalcytologyduringoestrusmay
atureandinterpretationofhieseobservationsonthe
be useful sincethe onset ofthemetoestrusvaginal
basis of experience of normal parturition.
smearprecedes parturitionby areasonably fixed
Failure of cervical dilatation is not recognized in
timeperiod(58+4days),althoughnotasprecisely
thebitchor queen.Innormalparturition,theonset
as thetimeofovulation.Athirduseful assessment
of voluntary abdominal straining signifies cervical
istoinstructtheownerlorecordtherectaltempera-
relaxation andstimulationofthepelvicreflexbythe
ture twice daily during the last third of pregnancy,
conceptus in the cranial vagina.As the second stage
since a declinein rectal temperature precedes par-
ofparturition progresses,the nature of abdominal
turition by approximately 12-36 hours. In many
contractions changes.Initially, episodes of strain-
bitches, however, none of these procedures has
ing are brief,but as the fetus passes into thevagina
been undertaken and therefore itis important to
the duration and intensity of straining increase. As
perform a fullclinicalexamination toensure that
the fetus distends the perineum,strainingbecomes
the dam is clinically well and that she is pregnant.
forcefully sustained. The pattern of straining,in
Measurement ofplasma progesterone concentra-
cases of apparent dystocia, may therefore indicate
tioncan thenbeusedto assesswhetherparturition
thelikely siteof thefetusinthebirthcanal.
is imminent.Progesterone concentrations decrease
Primary orsecondary uterineinertia isacommon
approximately 24-36 hours before whelping (Fig.
cause of dystocia in the bitch.Abdominal anduter-
21.7). Detection of a low progesterone concentra-
inecontractionsareroughly synchronousbut are
tion therefore indicates that parturition is immi-
notnecessarily ofequal intensity.Thecontinuation
nent,orshouldalreadyhaveoccurred,whileahigh
offorcefulinvoluntary straining cannot therefore
383
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
be taken as evidenceofcontinuinguterinecon-
requiresexperience andsoundclinicaljudgement.
tractions.This consideration is important,because
It is thereforemore realistic toindicate when surgi-
uterine contraction is by far themore effective of
cal interferencemay justifiably be considered than
these expulsiveforcesandisessentialfor delivery,
tocataloguethevariousmaternal andfeialcausesof
irrespective of the degree of abdominal straining.
dystocia,allofwhichmay,on occasion,constitutea
Uterinecontraction is involuntary,but strainingcan
validreasonforcaesareanoperation.
beinhibited consciously,usuallyin anticipation of
In discussing dystocia in thebitch,Freak （1975)
painimmediatelybeforethebirthof thefirstfetus.
described three forms of delay to parturition;(1)
It is important to realize that during normal parturi-
delay in the initiation of parturition,（2） delay in
tionthereareperiodsofrest,indeedofsleep,when
propulsion and(3)delayindelivery despitevigorous
abdominal and presumably uterine contractions
straining.Clinical experience shows thatmost cases
stop. Such behaviour does not necessarily indicate
of dystocia present inexactlytheseways.
the onset of inertia.In this respect,it is interesting
Delay in the initiation of parturition. This may be
toconsidertheintervalsbetween birthsin normal
duetoseveralcauses.hremayorexamlebey
parturition.Ina series of50normalwhelpings,the
chologicalinhibitioninbitchessuddenly transferred
shoriest interval was 10 minutes and the longest
to a strange environment not conducive to the nor-
360minutes(England,unpublished observations).
mal progress of parturition.There may, in individ
Inpolytocous species,it isunrealisticto expect all
ual animals,simply bea longbut nornal first stage
the fetuses to beborn alive.Most commonly,the
ofparturition.In such cases,it is helpful to know if
last pups tobe delivered are stillborn.Inmany nor-
allantoic fluid has been lost but it ismore important
malbitches,theperiod of strainingbefore thebirth
to appreciate thesignificanceofthedarkgreenish-
of the first puppy maybeconsiderably longer than
black discharge that arisesfrom marginal areas of the
the intervals between birthis, and 2 hours may fre-
placenta.Thisfluid isnotreleased untilat least one
quently elapsebetweenrupture of the allantocho-
placenta has separated,and its appearance before
rion and birth of the presented fetus.In general,the
straining or the birth of a pup signifies primary uter-
incidence of dystocia is lowest in young,primipa-
ine inertia.In many such cases,itis the only sign f
rous animals.Manybitches thatareaffected with
cervical dilatation andjustifies immediate surgeryif
primaryinertia laterinlifehavehad anormal first
more than one or two fetuses arepresent.After the
parturition.
birth ofone pup,dead or alive,this discharge has
lesssignificance unless thebitch showsother signs
of inertia.In these cases careful endoscopic exami-
Indications
nation of the cervix may allow appreciation of the
In larger animal species the cause of dystocia can
degree of cervical dilation as well as thepresence of
usually beidentified but this is often not possible
fetal membraneswithin the cranialvagina.
in the bitch.Frequently the decision to operate is
Delay in propulsion during parturition.In bitches
therefore based largely on a subjective assessment of
that haveundergoneanormalfirststageofparturi-
the circumstances of the case including:
tion,vigorous unproductive straining formore than
the breed
approximately3hoursmayindicatedystocia;such
cases should be carefully assessed by diagnostic
the duration andprogress ofparturition
ultrasound or possibly abdominal auscultation to
thenumber andviabilityoffetusesbornand
confirmfetalviability.Detectingfetalhearibeatscan
unborn
Teveal theviabilityoffetuses;thenormal fetalheart
·the nature of vulval discharges
rateis moreihan twicethatof thematernal rate
·changes in the pattern of straining
(Verstegen et al 1993) and in cases of fetal distress
(hypoxia) there is commonly a bradycardia that can
·ihedegreeofwellnessofthebitch
be easily detected.Carefulvaginal examinationis
·the often uninformative findings upon vaginal
essential to detect obstructive dystocia.These cases
examination.
may be difficult to assess and offer ample scope
Itissometimesdifficult tobesurethat dystocia has
for errors of judgement: a live fetus may well be
supervened; the correct management of these cases,
born during preparation for surgery.Without posi-
without resorting always to caesarean operation,
tivesigns ofdystocia,such animalsshould beleft a
384
Chapter
21
Genital surgeryinthebitch and queen
little longer unless straining abates ora placental
In sone brachycephalicbreeds,caesarean opera-
discharge appears.
tion isperformed as a routine,largely on account
Delay in delivery despite vigorous straining.An
oftheexhaustivelengthofparturition andthehigh
excesively longinterval since thebirth of thelast
incidence of dystocia and stillbirths.Elective surgery
fetus may also be difficult to interpret.In bitches
may alsobeindicatedfor otherreasons such aspel-
pregnant with only one or two fetuses, a delay at
vic deformity or gravid inguinal metrocele.Whatever
this stage may be normal but if it exceeds 3 hours
the reason, surgery should normally be delayed
andis associatedwithvigorous straining,there is
until the onset of first-stageparturitionin order to
probably obstructive dystocia,the cause ofwhich
avoidtheriskoffetalprematurity.Prolongationof
may be obvious onvaginalexamination,abdomi-
pregnancy beyond its ‘expected’ length is not an
nal palpation or even radiography and ultrasonog-
indicationfor immediatecaesarean.Providedfetal
raphy.An alternative explanation for continued
movements andheartsounds aredetectableandthe
straining without birth is the onset ofa primary
bitchremainshealthywithnoabnormalvulval dis-
or secondary uterine inertia.The management of
charge,the case should be observed carefully but
delay during the second stage of parturition is dif.
left until other signs develop.Alternatively,surgery
ficultbecause ofproblems in recognizing the signs
can be planned upon the detection of a decline in
ofinertia,largely because abdominal straining
plasmaprogesteroneconcentration,measuredusing
may continue after inertia develops.Unfortunately
an ELiSAmethod,or following thedetection ofa
thisfactis often overlookedby theinexperienced
decline in rectal temperature (Smith 2007).
breeder and veterinary surgeon.A tentative diagno-
Prolongation of pregnancy. sometimes up to70
sis of uterine inertia is more convincing if abdomi-
days or even more,in bitches carrying only one or
nal straining stops or is reduced in frequency and
twofetuses is aparticularcauseforconcern.In the
intensity,but thisdoesnot always occur.Better still
'single-pup syndrome'fetal endocrine secretion may
istheuseofexternalmonitoringdevicesthat mea-
be inadequate to initiate the process of pariurition,
sureuterinecontractility（Davidson &Eilts2006).
andthefetusmaybelargerthannormal and there-
The assessment of these cases should be based on
forelesslikelytopasseasily throughthebirthicanal
the assumption that, in primary inertia, the lon-
when parturition begins.These cases are best man-
gerthe delay,the morelikely thefetuses are todie.
aged by performing a caesarean operation to avoid
Theclinicianlearnsby experiencethatitisbetter
the risk of fetal death followingprimary uterine
to perform an occasional hysterotomy unneces-
inertia.
sarily than to delay until all the fetuses are dead.
Primary inertia is occasionally due to hypocalcae-
Anaesthesia
mia or hypoglycaemia and responds spectacularly
to appropriate therapy.Apparent inertia towards the
When considering anaesthesia forcaesarean opera-
endof the second stage ofparturition is likely to
tion,it should beremembered that:
be secondary in nature andmay respond quickly
thedammaybe'normal',orshemaybedebilitated
tothe intramuscular administration ofoxytocin
and require careful anaesthetic management
(Bergstrom et al2006a).
·there is often no time for pre-anaesthetic
There is a clearbreedpredilectionfor dystocia
preparation
(Bergstrom etal2006b),whichmayhelpin clinical
·the dammayhaverecentlybeen fed
decision-making about treatments.Thenon-surgical
reliefof dystociawas admirablyreviewedbyFreak
The general aims of the procedure are therefore to
(1975).Certain forms of fetal dystocia may be cor-
ensure adequate oxygenation by intubation and
rectedeasilybyfinger,forcepsorvectismanipulation
provision of inspired oxygen),to maintain blood
per vaginam(see Ch.13).Vaginal forceps delivery,
volume andprevent hypotension(by the adminis
under general anaesthesia if necessary,is particu-
tration ofintravenous fluidtherapy)and tomini
larlyindicated inbitches inwhich thelast one or
mize maternal and fetal depression during surgery
twofetuses,usually dead,cannot be expelled natu-
and after delivery(by reducing the dose of anaes-
rally.In fact,in such cases,it is sometimes possible
thetic agents used). A number of factors are impor-
to‘milkthefetusintothebirthcanal bymanipula-
tant when considering themost appropriatefluid for
tionthrough theabdominal wall.
intravenous administration:forexample,theremay
385
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
beincreased alveolarventilation(aneffect ofpro-
While theanaestheticregime chiosenwill depend
gesterone) causing respiratory alkalosis,although
upon personal preference it is important that the
the enlarged abdomen may produce a decreased
effecttheregimeislikely tohave upon theneonate
tidal volume causing respiratory acidosis;there may
isrecognized(Lunaetal2004).Whichever regimeis
beloss of acid becauseofvomiting:and theremay
chosen animals should be protected throughout
be loss of blood as a result of the surgery.The best-
surgery from the risk ofhypothermia (Waterman
choiceagentisprobablylactatedRinger's solution
1975).
administered ata rate of 10-20ml/kg/hour.
Itis notpossible to discuss all the anaesthetic
Surgical technique
options for caesarean operation in this text and ref
erenceshouldbemadetoothersources(e.g.Gilroy
The uterus is conventionally approached by a ven-
&De Young 1986);however,there are a few points
tralmidlinecoeliotomy,althoughsome usea flank
worth considering.For premedication,atropine is
incision.Largemammaryveinswill normallyham-
bestnotgiven routinely since itblocksthenormal
per the midline incision bui,once these are ligated
bradycardicresponse ofthe fetus to hypoxia,and
there is nohaemorrhage from deeper tissues.Care
itrelaxes the lower oesophageal sphincter, mak-
shouldbetalen toensurethat themammary tissue
ingaspirationmorelikely.Phenothiazinetranquil-
itself is not damaged.The ventral approach allows
lizers arevery useful agents since they smooth the
theincision tobemade as cranially asnecessary and
anaestheticinduction and reduce the subsequent
allowsequalexposureof thetwouterinehorns.The
dose of induction and maintenance agents; they are,
length ofincision depends upon the expected size of
however, rapidly transported across the placenta. α-
the fetuses;ideallyit should be sufficiently large to
adrenoceptor agonists suchasmedetomidine and
enabletheuterustobeexteriorized.
xylazine arecontraindicatedbecause of theirsevere
Speedof thesurgeryisimportantfor lworeasons:
cardiorespiratory depressant effects.Similarly,the
to ensure minimal fetal hypoxia and to prevent
respiratory depressant effect of opioids makes them
hypotensionofthedamcausedbycompressionof
unpopular.Metoclopramide may be administered
the caudal vena cava by the gravid uterus. In large-
intravenouslypriortoinductiontoreducetherisk
breed dogs,tilting laterally on the operating table
ofvomitingduringtheprocedure.For theinduction
may reduce therisk of compression of thisvessel.
ofanaesthesia,dissociative agents such as ketamine
Once the linea alba hasbeen incised,care should
arebestavoidedbecausetheyproduceprofound
be talen not to damage theuterus,which may be
depression of the fetus.The ulra-shori-acting barbi-
lying inclose apposition tothis structure.Oncethe
turates andpropofol appeartobemost useful,since
uterushasbeenidentified,it should ideallybe exte-
they are either rapidly redistributed or aremetab-
riorized andpackedoff usingswabstoprevent con-
olized,andthereforehavelimitedeffect upon the
taminationoftheabdomenwithfetalfluid.However,
fetuses after delivery.
caremust be takenwhen manipulatingthegravid
For maintenance of anaesthesia,the volatile
uterus, which has a thin wall and is liable to tearing.
agents are preferable,especially those with low par-
On some occasions,it is only possible to exterior-
tition coefficients such as isoflurane （Funkquist
izeonehornatatime.Theuterus shouldbeincised
inarelatively avascular areaof thedorsal surface of
nationanditmayhave abettercardiovascularmar-
theuterine body,althoughin somecasesaventral
ginofsafetythan themore solubleagents such as
incision may bemade.Thelatter isusually neces-
halothane.
sary when thereis impaction of a fetus that prevents
Whilenitrous oxidemay be used to reduce the
exteriorization;a ventral incision leads tomore peri-
dose of other anaesthetic agents,it is rapidly trans-
toneal contamination withfetal fuid.When making
ferred across the placenta and, although it has mini
theuterineincision,care must be taken not tolacer-
maleffectsupon thefetusin utero,itmayresult in
atetheunderlyingfetusesanditisbestto extendthe
a significant diffusion hypoxia after delivery. In cer-
incisionwith scissors.liisconventional toremove
tain cases, inhalational agents are used for anaes-
thefetuseswithin theuterinebodyfirst,and then to
theticinduction and in this case nitrous oxide is
‘milk'downremainingferusestothesameincision
useful forspeeding the induction of anaesthesiavia
(Fig.21.8).During this procedure,the membranes
thesecondgaseffect
ofproximallypositionedfetusesnormallyrupture
386
Chapter
21
Genital surgery in thebitchand queen
lesions should be identified for subsequent repair.
Theuterus should rapidlybegin to contract and
involute.If the uterus is compromised,an ovario
hysterectomy may be considercd,although some
suggest that this should be avoided because of the
increasedfluid lossand surgical time
Theuerineincisionis usuallyclosed usinga two
layer inverting continuous pattern such as Cushing
orLembertwithan absorbable suturematerial
(polyglactin 910, polyglecaprone 25, polydioxanone
or glycolic acid).There should have been minimal
peritoneal contamination but if this has occurred
theperitoneumshouldbelavagedwithseverallitres
Fig.21.8 Removal of fetus through an incision in the uterine
ofwarmedphysiological salinepriorto closure of
body.
thecoeliotomy.Omentum maybeplaced ontothe
region of theuterineincision toreducethelikeli-
hood ofadhesion formation.lf there isno evi-
andfetalextremities(either thehead or thepelvis)
denceofuterineinvolution at the timeofclosure
can be grasped through the incision to apply trac-
oftheabdominalincision,thenoxytocinshould be
tion.Once at theincision,the amniotic sacmay be
administered,althoughcare should betaken in the
ruptured andfetalfluidsshouldideallyberemoved
hypovolaemic animal since itmay produce periph-
by suction.Theumbilicalvessels shouldbeclamped
eral vasodilatation and hypotension. Oxytocin may
approximately 2cm from the ventral abdominal
be required especially if halothane anaesthesia has
wallofeachpupandtheumbilicalcordcanthen
been used,sincethis agentisknownto delayuterine
be severed distally.In some cases -for exanple,pri
involution.Thecoeliotomyshouldbeclosedinthe
maryinertia with two fetuses,or secondary inertia
normal manner, although some use buried subcu-
when most of the lirter has been delivered natu-
ticular suures,since the suckingpups are less likely
rally-thefetusesmaybepositionedwithinthetips
tointerferewith them.
ofopposite uterine horns.In these cases,bilateral
Occasionally, a caesarean operation reveals unex-
cornual incisions areindicatedrather than a single
pected findings such as uterine torsion (which is
uterinebodyincision.
morecommoninthecatthaninthedog)oruterine
Oncefetuseshavebeendelivered,theyshouldbe
rupture.Thelattermaycauseserioushaemorrhage
passed to an assistantforresuscitation.At thistime,
andhypovolaemic shockbut iftheuterusinvo-
the pups should be inspected for congenital abnor-
malities such as clefl palate, and if necessary the
ruptureprobablyaccounts formostrecordedcases
cordcanbeligatedwithsuturematerial.Aftereach
of so-called ‘extrauterine' or pseudoectopic preg-
pup is delivered,the associatedplacenta should be
nancy in the bitch. Such fetuses are encapsulated
removedbygentletractionorbygenilesqueezing
by theomentumandperitoneumandsubsequently
of the uterine wall and twisting of the cord;those
become heavily calcified,without apparent detri-
thatarefirmlyadherentshould beleftinposition,
ment to the dam.
since forceful removal will result in haemorrhage.
After protracted,neglecied dystocia,paricularly
Suchhaemorrhagemaybesignificant,especially in
withfetal putrefaction,the uterus may beirrevers-
toybreeds.Attachied placentaswill be expelled by
ibly infarcted or infected with gas-producing coli-
uterine involution,supplemented by exogenous
form or clostridialorganisms.Localizedareasof
oxytocin administration aftertheterminationofthe
ischaemia can be inverted by oversewing. but evi-
procedure.It is important to ensure that all fetuses
dence ofmore extensiveinfarctionor deepinfection
are removed,and careful inspection ofboth uter-
indicates the need for hysterectomy.The progno-
inehornsup to the ovaries and theuterine body is
sis in such cases is serious, and intensive fuid and
essential.
antibiotic therapy is essential.The widely adopted
The uterus and the broad ligament should be
andvalid view that a singleretained fetus,no matter
assessedafterdeliveryofallpups;small traumatic
how decomposed,is best removedwith forreps per
387
Part
41
Operativeinterventions
vaginammightseem to disregardthefactthatthe
voided as a result ofuterineinvolution.Acontinu-
uterusisan idealmedium fortheproliferation of
ingvulval dischargeofbloodmayindicateserious
anaerobic organisms. The high recovery rate after
haemorrhage from areas ofplacental attachment,
especiallyifplacentashavebeenforciblydetached.
tivechanges in this species are due more often to
This is a life-threatening complication,especiallyin
coliform than clostridial infection.
animals,of a small size,and indicates theneed for
Elective hysterectomyisoftenrequestedforbitches
further oxytocin therapy immediately.Monitoring
that require a caesarean operation.Whether the
pulseandrespiratoryrates shouldcarefullyassessthe
additionalriskiswartanted isentirely a matter for
animal'scardiovascularstatus,andparticular atten-
clinical judgement,althoughwith proper supportive
tion should bepaid topallor ofmucous membranes
therapy therisk isnotgreat.Incaseswherecaesarean
andpalpableuterinedistension.Packedcellvolumes
hysterectomyisplanned,a preliminaryhysterotomy
havelittlemeaninginrapidbloodlossofthissort,
incision should be avoidedwherever possible and
andparenteral haemostaticagents areineffectivein
theuterus andovariesshould beremovedenbloc
arresting thehaemorrhage.Theonlybeneficial treat-
（Robbins&Mullen1994).In somecases,however,
mentforthesecasesisimmediatebloodtransfusion
itisnecessary to removean impacted fetusbefore
orfluidreplacement therapy if whole bloodisnot
thevagina can beligated.The major problem with
available.If the blood loss continues, such therapy
theenblocprocedureis theavailability ofa suffi-
mayhaveonly a temporary effect,andtheneedfor
cientnumberofassistantstoremoveandrevive all
hysterectomymayhavetobeconsideredoncethe
fetuses at the same time.
animal's circulatory status has been stabilized.This
Most caesarean operations result in uterine adhe-
is an avoidable,butnotuncommon,cause ofdeath
sions.Thesearenotalwaysconfined tothearea of
aftercaesarean operationinthebitch.
incision. Such adhesions may seriously interfere
Thesecond causefor concernmaybe thepersis-
withexposure andexteriorization oftheuterusifa
tenceofcompulsivepantingorhyperventilation,to
subsequent caesarean is necessary.
theextentthatitinterfereswiththebitch'snatural
inclination to suckle the puppies or even to sleep.
It is occasionally caused by the unnecessary provi-
Postoperative management
sion of extra heat from an overhead lamp or other
After caesareanoperation,most bitches accep thei
appliance,butmostoftenitdevelopsspontaneously
puppies and lick and suckle them, particularly if
in bitches,especially of the brachycephalic types,
one or two were born naturally before surgery.
whichhavebehavedina similarwayduringthefirst
Occasionally,when the litter was delivered entirely
and second stages ofparturition.Blood calciumcon-
by caesarean operation,the bitch may belessrecep-
centrationsshouldbemeasured,sincesomeofthese
tive and behave aggressively towards the pups.Such
cases are hypocalcaemic.When values are normal,
bitchesshouldinitiallybegentlyrestrained toallow
littlecanbe donetoallaythis exhaustingcondition
the pups to suckand most setle quickly.If the
except to sedate the bitch,but sedative drugs may
aggression persists,it may be necessary to protect the
be excreted in ihe mill and thus affect the young.
pups in a cage in the whelping box and place them
Igenerallysuhsidesover aperiodof2-3days.
on thebitch everyfewhoursorsoforfeedinguntil
Like all other species,the bitch is susceptible o
she shows signs of normal maternal acceptance.The
infective peritonitis after caesarean operation,but
neonate'sprimerequirementimmediatelyafterbirth
goodsurgicaltechnique androutineantibiotic
is not food but warmth and the maintenance of an
therapyminimizetheriskofthis complication.
ambient temperature of30-32C.Delay in feeding
Intermittent uterine bleeding generally attrib
for up to 6 hours or so after birth is ofno conse-
uted to subinvolution,may follow naturalparturi-
quence.Bitches that are allowed to eat their placen-
tion orcaesarean operation andpersistforseveral
tas usuallyhave some degree of diarrhoea for a day
weeks afterwards.It haslittle effect on thebitch's
ortwoafterwards
packed cell volume and is best lefi to resolve sponta-
Two particular problems may require veterinary
neously becausehormonal therapy isineffective,the
attention during the initial postoperative period.It
uterus by this stage being no longer sensitive to oxy-
is normal after caesarean operation for a consider-
tocin.In somecountries,occasionalanimalswith a
ablevolumeofblood and otheruterinefluidstobe
haemorrhagic vulval discharge during the suckling
388
Chapter
21
Genitalsurgeryinthebitch andqueen
periodwill befound,oncloser examination,tohave
lesionsof transmissiblevenereal tumourcontracted
at coitus.
Maternalrecoveryrate,causes of
death and postoperative fertility
Maternal mortality ratesfollowingcaesarean oper-
ation are approximately 1% (Moon et al 1998).
Deaths during or immediately after caesarean sur-
geryaredueprincipally tothecombinedeffectsof
toxaemia andsurgical shock,or touterinehaemor-
rhage (Mitchell 1966). The choice of a safe anaes-
thetictechnique,routinefluid infusion andproper
management of the placenta will reduce maternal
deathstoaminimum.
There are no data on postoperative fertility in the
bitch, but it is certainly high, probably because
theovary and oviductare completelyprotectedbythe
bursa and areunlikelytobe affected byadhesions.
Caesarean operation in the queen
Prolonged gestation does not normally occur in the
queen unless there has been unnoticed uterine iner-
tiaordystocia.Prediction of thetimeofexpected
parturition cannormallybe achieved by counting
thenumberofdaysfrommatingalthoughinmany
Fig.21.9Unicornual torsion in a queen.
non-pedigree queens the owner often does not
observe this.Nevertheless,measurement ofplasma
progesterone concentration using an ELiSA method,
described above. The surgical approaches and tech-
as described above,can be clinically useful:queens
nique described for the bitch are equally suitable
that are still within their normal physiological preg
for the queen.Except in animals intended for fur-
nancy length will have high plasma progesterone
therbreeding,gravid hysterectomy may be consid-
concentrations,whilequeensthathavehadprimary
eredpreferabletohysterotomy,andisgenerallywell
uterineinertia will have low plasma progesterone
toleratedinthisspecies.Antibioticand supportive
concentrations.
fluid therapy is advisable after protracted dystocia
The indications for caesarean operation in the
orif theuterus is grossly infected.The presence of
queen are not well documented,and it is likely
fetusesintheperitonealcavityasaresultofuterine
thatgravidovariohysterectomyisperformedmore
ruptureisusuallyf littleconsequence,andaffected
frequently than hysterotomy,except in pedigree
animals may survive indefinitely without surgery,
animals. Joshua (1979) suggested that inertia and
the fetalremnants becoming encapsulated by the
oversize are less common in this species than faulty
omentum ormesentery.
disposition, or fetal deformities such as hydro-
cephalus and anasarca. Maternal causes of dystocia
includepelvicdistortion afterfracturesanduterine
References
torsionaffectingeither theentireuterusoronlyone
horn (Fig.21.9).
ArnoldS1993|ReprodFertil Suppl47:542
The operation is performed under general
Arnold S,Hubler M,Casal M etal 1988 Schweiz Arch
anaesthesia using similar considerations to those
Tierheillkd130:369
Part
4
Operativeinterventions
AustinB,LanzOl,Hamilton SMetal 2003AmAnim Hosp
LagerstedA-S,ObelN,StravenbornM1987Small Anim
Assoc39:391
Pract28:215
BergstromA,FrassonB,LagerstedAS,OlssonK00a
LeRouxPH,Van-defWaltLA1977JSAfrVetMedAssoc
JSmall Anim Pract47:456
48:117
BergsuomA,NodtvedtA,LagerstedtAS,Egenvall A2006b
Luna SP,Cassu RN,Castro GBetal 2004 Vet Rec 154:387
Vet Surg35:786
MayhewPD,BrownDC2007VetSurg36:541
BurrowR,BatchelorD,CrippsP2005VeRec157:829
Mitchell B,1966Vet Rec79:252
Davidson A,EiltsB2006JAmAnin HospAssoc42:10
Moon PF,Erb HN,Ludders IWetal 1998IAmVeiMed
Davidson EB,MollDHL,PeytonME2004Vet Surg33:62
Assoc213:365
Dorn AS,Swist RA1977IAmAnim HospAssoc13:720
PearsonH19731Small Anim Pract14:257
England GCW1997VetRec141:309
Robbins MA,Mullen HS 1994 Vet Surg 23:48
England GCW,VerstegenJP1996Vet Rec139:496
Ruckstuhl B1978SchweizArchlierheillkd120:143
FreakM 1975Vet Rec96:303
SalmeriKRloombergMcruggsSLhille99m
Funkquis B,LagerstedtA-S,LindeC,Obel N1983ZentbIet
Vet MedAssoc198:1193
MedA30:72
Schaefers-OkkensACKooistra HS2002Tijdschr
FunkquistPM,NymanGC,LofgrenAIFahlbrinkEM1997
Diergeneeskd127:590
JAmVet Med Assoc211:313
Schneider R,Dorn CR,Taylor DON 1969 1 Nau Cancer Inst
Cilroy BA,DeYoung DI 1986Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
43:1249
Pracl16:483
SmithFO2007Theriogenology 68:348
Hagman R,Kindahl H,LagerstedtA2006ActaVetScand47:55
Sontas BH,GurbulakK,Elici H2007Arch MedVet39:2
Holt PE1985J SmallAnimPract 26:181
ThrusfieldMV1985Vet Rec116:695
Howe LM 2006 Theriogenology 66: 500
Van Goethem B,Schaefers-Okkens AC,Kirpensteinjn2006
Joshua JP1979 Cat ovner's encyclopaediaofveterinary med
Vet Surg 35:136
icine.TEM Publications,London
VerstegenI,ilvaLDM,OninKDonnay993Rd
Krzyzanowski J,Malinowski E,Wojciech S1975Med
Feril Suppl47:175
Wet31:373
WatermanAE1975Vet Rec96:308
KutzlerMA,MohammedHO,LambSV,Meyers-Wallen VN
White RN 199s Manual of smallanimal reproduction and
2003Theriogenology 60:1187
neonatology.BSAVA.Cheltenham,p184
KyddDM,BumieAG1986JSmall AnimPract27:255
WhiteRN2001I Small AnimPract42:481
390
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
22  Infertility and subfertility in the cow:
structural and functional
abnormalities, management 
deficiencies and non-specific
infections.
E68
Tim Parkinson
23
Specific infectious discases causing
inferlili.y and  subfertility in ca.le....476
Tim Parkinson
24Veterinarycontrol of herd fertility......517
TimParkinsonandDavid Barrett
25 Infertility and subfertility in the ewe
and doe (female goat)..
..559
Keith Smith
26 Infertility and subfertility in the mare....582
Dale Paccamonti and
JonathanPycock
27  Infertility and subfertility in the gilt
and sow...
....632
OlliPeltoniemi and Bas Kemp
28  Infertility and subfertility in the bitch
and queen ....
...646
Gary England
—
22
Chapter
Tim Parkinson
Infertility and subfertility in the cow: structural
and functional abnormalities, management
deficiencies and non-specific infections
reported from North America (Milian-Suazo et al
General considerations
1988, Ribeiro et al 2003), Italy (Bagnato 2004) and
Germany （Frerking 2003), with figures of around
Fertility is one of the key determinanis of the life-
15% reported from New Zealand (Xu & Burton
time performance of a cow. For beef cows and for
2000), Brazil (Silvaet al 2004) and Estonia (Suurmiaa
pastoral dairy cows, it is necessary for a calf to be
etal 2oo1). Involuntary culling forfailure to conceive
produced every 365 days. For intensively-managed
and other fertility-related culling is one of the most
dairy cows, which can maintain long periods of high
comnoncauses ofremoval ofcows from dairy herds;
lactational yield,he need toproduce a calfeachyear
culling for lameness and mastitis occur at approxi-
is less of an imperative(Dijlkhuizen et al 1985), yet,
mately equal frequencies to that for fertility (Dohoo
even for these animals, regular calving is necessary
el al 1983,Gardner et al1990,Miller& Dorn 1990,
for the establishment of lactation.
Forbes 2000) and, in consequence, there is relatively
Regular breeding depends upon the normal func-
litle opportunity to cull for other production-related
tion of the reproductive system. In order to breed
traits.
regularly,the cow has to have functional ovaries,
One criticism of using culling rates as a crite-
display oestrous behaviour,mate,conceive,sustain
fion for assessing levels of infertility is that not all
the embryo through gestation, calve and resume
cows that are culled as being 'infertile' actually are:
oestrous cycles and restore literine fiunction after
abattoir surveys of cows that have ostensibly been
calving.Management,disease and the geneticmake-
culled for fertility consistently record that a signifi-
up of the animal can affect each of these aspects
cant proportion of animals are pregnant (Singleton
of reproductive function.Sterility, meaning an abso-
&Dobs0n 1995,Sheldon1&Dobson 2003).Criteria
lute inabiliry to reproduce, is rare,but subfertility is
that are regarded as being more reliable than culling
rate include conception rates to first service and days
open (or calving to conception interval); these to0
Prevalence and cost of infertility
show similar trends in fertility.
Prevalence
Indeed, the decline in first-service conception
rates over the same period of time has been pro-
Many studies published in the last 20 years hiave
found. Butler(1998) reviewed data from New York
reported a decline in the fertility of dairy cattle.
dairy cows, in which a decrease of first-service con-
In the 1950s and 1960s, culling rates for infertil-
ception rate from 65% in 1951 to 40% in 1996
1occurred (Fig.22.1). Lucy (2001) showed a simi-
1960). Today the figure is around 20% in the UK
lar trend in a review of literature over the same
(Forbes 2000,Esslemont 2003), with similar rates period. Thus, much contemporary literature quotes
393
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
performance. All agree that infertility is expensive,
100-
although also highly dependent upon the produc-
B000
tion system. Infertility leads to a loss of milk produc-
tion, a loss ofincome from calf sales and an increasc
yeld(
in the replacement rate of cows with first-calving
40-
4000
heifers. Its effects may, to some extent be mitigated
by the income that is derived from cull animals,
20-
2000
although this mitigation is largely a matter ofper-
ception rather than actuality,because the costs of
0
1951
1975
1965
1996
replacing mature cowswithfirst-calvingheifers are
Conceplionrate
substantial.
△Yisld
In the early 1990s, LISA data suggested that tle
total cost of breeding problems was $24.46 per
Fig.22.1 The relationship between milk yield and conception
cow per year, compared with $35.54 for masti-
rate of Holstein dairy cows in NewYok.(With permission
tis（Kaneene& Hurd 1990）.In theUK,Esslemont
from Butler 1998.)
(1992) calculated that for dairy herds,at1992prices
ofmill, feed,calves, replacement heifers,culled
cows,eic.,the cost to the farmer for each day's exten-
first-serviceconceptionratesofaround 40-45%
sion of the calving-intervalbeyond 365 dayswas
（Dransfield et al 1998, loorritsma et al 2000,
as much as E3.35.Data from France over the same
Esslemont 2003, Bousquet el al 2004), with even
period showed that an improvement of 1% in con-
lower figures （=35%) when fixed-iime insemina-
tion is used (Pursley et al 1998).
cow per year (Boichard 1990).Estimates from the
Infertility is a considerable problem in beef herds,
USA also suggested that a 1% increase in conception
althoughrelatively few data exist detailing its prev-
Tate was worth up to $7.36 per cow per year (Pecsok
alence. Nevertheless, postparturn and lactational
et al 1994a). Improvements in oestrus detection
anoestrus are significant problems in beef herds,
rates have alsobeen associated with improved herd
which, if animals are culled on the basis of calving
economic performance: Pecsok et al (1994b) con-
pattern, can lead to significant losses of animals due
sidering thiat an inprovement from 60% to 70%
to conception failure.New Zealand data indicates
detection efficiency was worth $6 per cow per year.
that between 7% and 11% of beef cows fail to con-
More recently,Esslemont(2003) estimated that
ceive (Morris & Cullen 1998). Under the range con-
the cost of subfertility to the UK dairy herd was
ditions of Northern Australia,75%pregnancyrates
veiy much greater than the foregoing estimates,at
can be achieved,although this can drop to as low
aroundf180for everycowin thenational herd.In
as 15%(O'Rourke et al 1991). However, for feedlot
an attempt to give farmers a better understanding of
and intensively managed beef cattle, pregnancy rates
hie costs of fertility, and a better tool for controlling
of up to 98% have been reported (e.g. Warren et al
thiese costs, Esslemont and co-workers have devel-
1988),with first-service conception rates of between
oped the Fertex Score. The Fertex Score places an
about 75%and 80%(Brown el al 1991,Mann cl al
economicvalueonvarious aspecis ofreproductive
1998).
performance, such as days open, involuntary cull-
ingservicesper conception and the effects of chang-
ing voluntary wait periods. In combination with the
Economicconsequencesofinfertility
Hlealex Score, which gives an estimate of the eco-
Bozworthet al（1972) stated thal'infertility is one
nomic consequences of reproductive (and other)
of the important economic losses in high produc-
diseases (Kossaibati & Esslemont 1997), it is pos-
ing herds and ... modern feeding and management
sibletounderiakereasonably accurate cost-benefit
practices in large herds may accentuate the problem'
analyses of interventions to improve fertility. A sim-
This comment is equally true today.
ilar approach has been talen by the Australian In
Studies of the consequences of the losses due
Calf project (InCalf 2000). I is notable that, in the
to inferility upon dairy herds have attempted to
model of Esslemont (2003),while the costs associ-
quantify its effects upon production and financial
ated with culling have the highest unit value[=f800
394
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
per replacement), it is extension of the calving inter-
systems or pharmacological interventions to main-
val thathasthegreatesteconomicimpact attheherd
tain acceptable conception rates.
level.
One of the consequences of the decline in fertil-
ity of dairy cows is the realization hat,for a dairy
Overview of the causes of infertility
industry to be sustainable, fertility musi be main-
tained at an acceptable level.Thishas led to the real.
Domestic cattle are not a particularly fertile species.
ization that, since fertility has declined through a
Per-service conception rates are rarely over 55% and,
negative genetic relationship with selection for milk
in dairy cattle,they canbeverymuchlowerthan that.
yield, it can also beimproved though genetic selec-
Whether this is a consequence of domestication has
tion.Hence, many rattlebreeding organizations are
been widely debaied:certainly wild Bovidae have
now includingbreeding values forfertility and lon-
much betterfertility than domesticcattlebut they
gevity alongside yield,which appears to be halting
arealso under fewer demands forproduction.
(albeit not yet reversing) the decline in the genetic
For domestic cattle, there are many factors that
components of fertility. It has also created opportu-
impinge upon ferility.At one extreme, venereal dis-
nities for veterinarians to work alongside the dairy
eases(suchasTritrichomonsfetus,Campylobacter feus
industry,not just to apply‘sticking plasters'for sub-
subsp.venerealis) can have extremely detrimental
fertility but to become more deeply involved in the
effects on fertility in situations thatdepend upon nat-
management of fertility (with consequent involve-
ural service mating.Hence,beef-breeding industries
ment in feeding, housing, labour-skills, etc.), in
ofmany countries are bedevilled by these diseases
order to ensure that fertility is maintained at a level
which require extensive vaccination and control pro-
at which the industry itselfis sustainable.
grammes to maintain acceptable fertiliry levels.In
dairy cattle, artificial insemination (Al) hasbeen an
Infertilityintheindividualcow
effective means of controlling these diseases (pro-
vided they are effectively excluded from stud bulls)
but inAl-bred dairy cows ureaplasrnosis has emerged
Both congenital and acquired abnormalities of the
as a new venereal disease that is difficult to man-
genital system can influence ferility. Congenital
age. There are also the non-specific infections of the
abnormalities aremuch less common thian those
uterus that cause meiritis-complex diseases. Ofien
which are acquired:Kessy (1978) found that, in
this results from unsanitary calvingconditions,iatro-
2000 genital tracts thatwere examined fromabat-
genic dystocia (eg. through fetal oversize), produc-
toirs, only six specimens （0.3%) had evidence
tion and metabolic diseases and other nutritional
of congenital abnormalities compared with 194
accidents.The much higlier conception rates in heif
(9.65%) with acquired lesions.Similarpatierns have
ers than in cows suggests thiat these noni-specific
been demonstrated byAl-Dahash &David (1977a)
infections and the‘wear and tear'on the uterus
Anatomical abnormalitiesusually affectindividual
through successive parities are significant limiting
cows or heifers and are thercfore unlikely to have a
factors on ferility.
major influence on fertility in a herd.
The most serious impairment of fertility is seen in
Most of the acquired lesions areidentified in tracts
dairy cows. There is now no doubt that reproduc-
from parous cows, emphasizing the importance of
tion is adversely affected by high yield,as a result
conditions that occur during pregnancy, parturition
of metabolic stress, feed imbalances and negative
and the puerperium. The results of Al-Dahash &
geneticrelationships between yield and reproduc-
David (1977a) are summarized in Table 22.1.
tion.As a result, nearly all aspects of dairy cattle
reproduction are affected, ranging from the expres-
sion of oestrus,mechanismsrelated to follicular and
Lesions of theovaries
luteal fuinction,uterine environment and embryonic
Congenital lesions
development.Added to which,the stockmanship of
the labour that is available to dairy farms is declin-
Congenital lesions of the ovaries are rare.A few
ing throughout much of the developed world.In
reports exist of instances in which one or both ova-
consequence, oestrus detection rates are declining.
ries are absent (ovarian agenesis), accompanied by
often necessitatingtheuse ofautomated detection
an infantile genital tract and an absence of cyclical
395
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
totherecognitionand cullingofcasesofunilateral
Table22.1 Incidenceof reproductive abnormalities(from
Al-Dahash&David1977a)
hypoplasia,theingidence ofgonadalhypoplasia in
Swedish-lighlarrdcattlewasreducedfrom17.5%in
Abnormality
No.
%
1936t07.2%in1952(Lagerlof&Boyd1953)
Total specimens
8071
Ovarian hypoplasia also occurs as an occasional
1885
23.36
finding in most breeds of cattle. No inherited basis
Totalpregnant
for the condition has been demonstrated in these
Non-pregnant
6186
Percentage of
animals although,interestingly, Arthur (1959)
non-pregnant
specimens
reported a small number of cases in white Ayrshire
3.23
heifers,which were acyclical and had hypoplastic
Cystic ovaries
200
Ovarian cysts withnormal
ovaries.
1.52
corpus luteum
Cysticovarieswith
13
0.22
Acquiredlesionsoftheovaries
mucometra
The most common of the acquired lesions of the
Ovaricbursal adhesions
148
2.39
ovaries,cystic ovarian disease,is considered to be
Uterine adhesions
19
0.31
afunctionaldisturbance of ovarian function(see
Non-involuted uterus
136
2.20
D.439-448).
Pyometra
68
1.10
Ovaritis （oophoritis; Fig.22.2) is a very rare
lesionof theovary.Wehaveseenoneor twocases
Hydrosalpinx
65
1.05
as adventitious findings atpostmortem examina-
Mucometra
14
0.23
tion.McEntee(1990) describescasesof tuberculous
Mummified fetus
22
0.36
oophoritis,brucella-inducedoophoritis andovarian
Macerated/emphysematous
8
0.13
abscessation in animals that that have had general.
fetus
ized pyaemia.He further suggests enucleation of the
Ovarian tumours
14
0.23
corpus luteum(CL) as a cause ofovarian abscesses,
Segmental aplasia
3
0.05
possibly when it has been undertalken in cows
sufferingfromperimetritis.
Granulosa cell tumours（Fig.22.3)andfibromas
are generally themost common neoplasms of the
behaviour.Fincher(1946) saw an apparenily hered-
bovine ovary.Lagerlof &Boyd(1953） found three
itary condition of'virtual absenceof ovaries'in three
maternal half-sister heifers.
veyofover6000bovinereproductivetracts;while
Ovarianhypoplasia isa littlemorecommon.In
Al-Dahash & David (1977a)found seven fibro-
thiscondition,one orboth ovaries are small,func-
masandrwogranulosacelltumoursamong8o00
tionless and composed of largely undifferentiated
parenchyma. Oocytes and follicles are virtually
absent.Ovarianhypoplasiaisgenerallya sporadic
condition,except in the gonadal hypoplasia syn-
dromeoftheSwedishHighlandbreed.Ahighinci-
denceofgonadalhypoplasiawasrecognizedinmales
and femalesofthis breed:Lagerlof(1939) found an
incidence of13.1% of ovarian hypoplasia among
8145cows.Wherebothovarieswerehypoplasticthe
genital tract was infantile and oestrous cycles did
not occur.Eriksson （1943)concluded that the con-
ditionwasinherited as an autosomalrecessivewith
incompletepenetrance.Therewas amarked associa-
tion ofgonadal hypoplasia with white coat colour.
Bytheadoptionofavigorouscontrolprogrammein
Fig.22.2Infectionand inflammationof the ovary（oophoritis)
of an infertile cow.
which veterinary examination of breedingcattle led
396
Chapter
22
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
Fig.22.3 A granulosa celltumour (t) invclving the right cvary.The left ovary (o) is normal
bovine tracts. Lagerlof & Boyd (1953) also found
one Friesian cow had a granulosa cell tumour that
three carcinomas in their survey. In fact, most of the
weighed 24kg;the cow showed successive phases
large cystic neoplasms of the bovine ovary are granu-
ofnymphomania,anoestrus and virilism.Another
losacell tumours.These tumours havebeen seen in
cow had an ovarian carcinoma that had enlarged to
pregnant as well as non-pregnant cattle. Granulosa
occupy the caudal third of the abdomen and had
cell tumours can produce any of themain ovarian
metastasized widely throughout themesenteries.
steroids, although reports of oestrogen or androgen
production arethemost common in theliterature
Abnormalities of the genitalia
(McEntee 1990). Tumours that secrete oestrogen
Congenital abnormalities
causeanimalsto displaypersistent oestrousbehav-
iour, at least in the earlystages of the tumour.In long
Segmental aplasia of the paramesonephric
standing cases virilism may occur. Progesterone- or
ducts
androgen-secreting tumours are more commonly
associated with anoestrus. The non-affected ovary
Developnmental defects of the parainesonephric
is regressed and inactive, although Roberts (1986)
(mullerian) ducts lead to a wide range of anomalies
reported that conception had occurred in a cow with
of the vagina, cervix and uterus. Depending upon
a unilateral,non-steroidogenic tumour. Granulosa
the site of the aplasia, the cow may be subfertile or
cell tumours are generally regarded as benign,
sterile. However, the ovaries develop normally and,
although,inoneseries,nine out of13tumourshad
consequently, affected animals show normal cyclic
metastasized (Norris et al 1969).McEntee (1990),
behaviour. Moreover, since the ovary produces nor-
on the other hand,considered metastasis lo be very
mal levels of steroid hormones,thereisa significant
uncommon.
level of secretory activity within the tubular parts
Other tumours of thebovine ovary have orcasion-
of the genital tract. Hence, when a developmental
ally been reported.These include carcinomas,fibro-
obstruction of thetubulartract occurs,cyclical secre
mas, thecomas and sarcomas. These tumours are
tions distend the lumen of the isolated portion of
generally benign and are often massive. For example,  the tract.
397
Part
151
Subfertilityand infertility
Aplasiaofeachpartof thetubulargenitaliahas
side.Amore serious type of aplasia occurs when iso-
been reported.In some cases,the whole of the
lated sections ofuterinehorn arepresent.Uterine
vagina,cervix and uterine horns may lack patency.
secretion accurmiulates and causes sac-like dilata-
In these cases,as in the freemartin,thegenital tract
tion ofsuch isolatedportions ofthetract.Thesecan
is difficult to locate per rectumbut,unlike the lat
becomeverylarge and can be confusedwithearly
ter, the ovaries are normal. More commonly, par-
pregnancy during examination per rectum (Figs.
tial or segmental aplasia of theparamesonephric
22.5,22.6).Animals with this deformity are sterile.
ducts occurs.In Kessy's survey(1978), the uterine
Abnormalitiesofthe cervix also occur,usually as
tube wasidentified as a frequent site of congenital
aresultoffusionof bothparamesonephricducts.In
defects:unilateral aplasia was identified in 0.1% of
the condition of uterus didelphys (Figs.22.7, 22.8),
the specimens and segmental aplasia in 0.05%.
failure of fusion is complete so there isa double cer
Inthe case ofuterusunicornis,only oneuterine
vixandeachuterinehormconnectswiththevaginaby
hornhas a lumen,the other appearing as a narrow,
a separatecervical canal.Thereisoften also a division
flat band. (Fig.22.4）. It is more common for the
of the cranial portion of the vagina,as this is also
righthorn to be absentthantheleft.Providedthe
derived from the paramesonephricducts.Such ani-
remainderofthegenital apparatusisnormal,these
mals may conceive, providing insemination takes
animalsmayconceivetoovulationsfromtheintact
placeinto thehorn ipsilateral tothe ovulation,and
D
Fig.22.4Uterus unicornis.Note ncrmal left andright ovaries
Fig.22.5Genital tract from a heiferwithwhite heifer
(o)and complete right horn (h).The left horn comprises a
cisease'.Note that both ovaries(o)are normal with a corpus
flat band of tissue withno lumen(b)anda blind residual
luteum present in theright and horns(h) distended with
segment.
accumulatedfluid.
398
Chapter
22
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
Fig.22.6Genital tract from a heifer withwhite heifer clisease'.Notenarmal left ovary (o)and isolated portion of therght horn
(h) greatly distended with accumulated fluid.
a number ofreporis exist of them carrying calves to
term and giving birth normally.A more common
lesion is partial duplication of the cervical canal,
often with a single internal os and double external
ostia.Affected animals conceive normally but may
show dystocia due to fetal limbs entering both cervi-
cal canals.The expulsion of the afterbirth may also be
impeded. A similar complication may arise in cattle
showing a dorsoventral postcervical hand.
A furtier developmental aberration of the female
tubular organs involves a variable degree of persistence
of the hymen. This may appear as a vaginal constric-
tion in front of the urethral opening, as a partition with
a central aperture or as a completepartition between
thevulva and vagina.The first type is likely to be dis-
covered at parturition, when it causes dystocia.The
second and third types are likely to be found when
investigatingheifers that either strain forcibly after ser-
vice or cannot be inseminated artificially. Where hyme-
nal obstruction is complete, there is an accumulation of
secretions cranial to the obstruction.This may be pres-
ent on palpation per rectum as a fluctuating swelling
ofvariable size or,in more extreme cases, may bulge
from the vulva as a white, glistening, fluid-filled mass.
Followingservice,thisretained secretion may become
infected bypyogenicorganismshelesssevereformsof
Fig.22.7Uterus didelphys shcwing twocompletely separate
hymenal obstruction may be rendered suitable for
cervicelcanals
breeding by making cruciform incisions into the
399
Part
5
Subfertilityandinfertility
of cows. Tiny parovarian cysts, of a few millime-
tres in diameter,are common incidental findings
in slaughteredcatle.Larger cystsof between 1 and
3cm indiametermaybefeltduringexamination
of the tract perrectum when they may be confused
with ovaries.Parovariancysts areofnoconsequence
tothereproductiveperformanceoftheanimal,
except in therareinstances when they impinge on
theuterine tubeandreduceitslumen.
Freemartinism
Frcemartinism （Fig.22.9) is a distinct form of
Fig.22.8Doubleexternaloscervix,showing twocompletely
intersexuality that arises asaresultofavascular
separatecervical canals.
anastomosis ofthe adjacentchorioallantoic sacs
of heterozygous fetuses in multiple pregnancies
partition.Heiferswithcompleteobstruction that areill
becauseofretainedpuscanberelievedby trocarand
cannula and then fattened for slaughter.However,it
shouldbenoted that,inviewof the probableherediary
originof these developmentaldefectssurgical interven-
9
tion in order to make breedingpossible isnot advis-
able.The genital organs of most heiferswith hymenal
constriction are otherwise normal,but occasionally
segmental aplasias of other parts of the tubular organs
or ascending infections of the urinary tract are present.
中
Theforegoingdevelopmental anomaliesmay arise
in allbreedsofcattle.Historicallysegmentalaplasia
was particularlycommon intheShorthornbreed,
in which itwas associated with white coat colour.
Hence,syndromes associated with segmental apla
大
sia aresometimesreferred toas‘whiteheifer disease
Originallywhiteheiferdisease'wasusedtodescribe
the syndromeofstraining and illness after servicein
animalswithretentionofthehymen.Segmentalapla-
siaoftheparamesonephricductsin theShorthornis
due to a sex-linked recessive gene with linkage to the
gene for white coat colour.In other breeds, devel
opmental defects of the paramesonephric ducts are
probably also due to either sex-linked or autosomal
wheninbreedingispractised.For example,Fincher&
Williams(1926) reported that 56% of heifers were
affectedamongtheprogenythatresultedfromthe
matingofaFriesian sirewithhis daughters.
Parovariancysts
Fig.22.9 Reproductive tract froma freemartin heifer.Note
the vestigial gonads(g),underdeveloped structures derived
Parovarian cysts are remnants of the mesonephric
from theparamesonephricducts and rudmentary vesicular
glands (v).
ducis that aresometimespresentin themesosalpinx
400
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
(Lillie 1916).As a result, although the external geni-
Themost accuratemethod of diagnosis,although
talia of freemartin heifers may appear normal,the
not absolute,is the demonstration of sex chromo-
internal genitalia are grossly abnormal.The gonads
sone chimerism in cultured lymphocytes.Heifer
aretypicallyvestigialbutin aminorityofcaseshave
calves that are born co-twins to males and show
undergone masculinization.The structures derived
morphological changes in their reproduciive tracts
fromtheparamesonephricductsare almostentirely
invariably showsex chromosomechimerismin
absent or are grossly hypoplastic. In animals that
blood and blood-forming tissues.Unfortunately
have undergone a significant degree of masculiniza-
the distribution of male cell percentages infreemar-
tion,the gonads resemble testes,to the extent that
tins appears to be random;hence those with low
theirparenchyma contains recognizabletubules and
male percentages in theblood will be ascommon
interstitial tissue.Developmentof themesonephric
as those with high male percentages (Wilkes et al
(wolffian)ductsisrelatedto thedegree ofmasculin-
1981).lt is also possible to identify the presence
izationof thegonad.Inextremecases,therearewell
oftwopopulationsoferythrocytesbyhaemolytic
tests using a series of specific blood group reagents
ular glands (Short et al 1969). Conversely,in the
(long 1990).More recently,diagnosis by a poly-
leastaffected cases,the femalegenital tract may be
merasechainreaction(PCR)testfor thepresence of
small,with a persistent hymen and hypoplastic ova
Ychromosomes inbloodcells hasbeen described.
ries(Wijeratne etal 1977).These animals may have
This is a definitive test for the presence of the Y
someoocytespresent intheirgonads and may even
chromosome but doesnot provide an absolute
have small follicles andluteal-liketissue(Rajaoski&
differentiationbetween freemartinismandother
Hafez 1963).More typically, the vestigial gonads of
abnormalities ofsex differentiation inwhich aY
freemartins are devoid ofoocytes and,hence,fol-
chromosomeispresent.
licles but have parenchyma that consists largely of
The economic importance of early diagnosis of
degenerating sex-cords.
freemartinism has been shown by the survey of
Itisgenerally assumed thataround95%of heifers
David et al (1976),who found that a large num-
that areborn asco-twins tobulls are sterilefreemar-
ber of heifersthatwere sold inmarketsforbreed-
tins(Biggers&McFeely1966).Vascularaniastomosis
ing were freemartins.Very high incidences of
occurs as early as 30days of gestation;thus if thiere is
freemartinism can sometimesbefound,therefore,
death of themale twin of a heterozygous pair afler
in herds of heifers-most commonly those of
this time with the other being carried to term,it is
heifer rearers -thal are purchased from markeis.
possible for a single-born freemarin to occur.This
This could also becomeimportant if induction of
hasbeendemonstratedasacauseofinfertilityinheif-
twinningby superovulation or embryo transfer
ers with apparentlynormal external genitalia but with
becomes popular. Incrcased emphasis on animals
sex chromosome chimerism (Wijeratne et al 1977).
being sold on the basis of being'fit for purpose' is
Thenewborn freemartin can sometimes berecog-
putting pressure on farmers to declare if a heifer
nized byits prominent clitoris with an obvious tuft of
wasbornco-twin to a bull to avoid subsequent
hairattheventralcommissureofthevulva,although
litigation.
these signs arenot always reliable.Freemartins can
Very occasionally,otherforms ofintersexualityare
beidentified on the basis of the length of the vagina
found.Afewcasesofpseudohermaphroditism have
and the absence ofthecervix.In the adult,thevagina
been reported,ashave rare cases ofxYsexreversal
isnormally30cminlengthcomparedwith8-10cm
andtruehermaphroditism.
in the freemartin.Rectal palpation will fail to iden-
tify the cervix. In calves of 1-4 weeks of age the
Atresia of thevulva
vaginaisnormally13-15cminlengthcompared
with 5-6cn in a freemartin.Diagnosis at this age
An abnormally small vulva has been described as a
can be madeusinga blunt probe,which should be
cause of dystocia inFriesian and Jerseyheifers.In
insertedinitiallyatanangleof45°belowthehori-
such cases episiotomy or caesarean operation may
zontalfor5cm and then angled downwards to avoid
berequiredto allowdelivery.Thedefecthasbeen
impingingon thehymen (Long 1990).Itis easier
seen to affect many of the progeny of a particular
when comparisonscanbe madeamonganumber
Jersey bull (Hull et al 1940), indicating that it is
of animals (see Ch.4).
likelytobeof hereditaryorigin.
401
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Acquired lesions
thatsuchlesionsinterfere withfertility.Intermediate
Ovariobursal adhesions andlesionsof the
casesofovarigbffsaladhesionsshowfibrinous or
fibrous strands of varying thicknesses connecting
uterine tubes
thefimbriae,orbursae,to the ovary.These strands
Acquired lesions of theuterinetubes and adnexa are
areoften attached to theovaryat thesite ofascarof
common in cattle.In1921,Carpenter et al showed
aregressedcorpus luteum.
that15.3%ofcows thatwereexaminedatroutine
Of the remaining more severe types,between
clinicalworkhadsuchlesions oftheuterinetubes
25%and50%arebilateralandlikelytointerfere
and adnexa.Many subsequent studies have con-
with ovulation or to impede sperm or egg trans-
firmed thishigh frequency ofoccurrence.The per-
port through the uterine tube.Of the unilateral
centage incidence ranged from 0.95% in an abattoir
cases,the right sideis more frequently involved
study in Australia(Summers 1974) to 100% in a
Conception is unlikelyto occurto ovulations
from the affected side.Where the bursa is dif-
themostfrequentlyobservedlesionsofthebovine
fuselyappliedtotheovary,ovulationisprevented
reproductivetractis adhesionbetween theovaryand
and luteinization of the follicle occurs, the orange
the ovarian bursa(Fig.22.10).The incidence of ovar-
rim of the follicle being severalmillimetres thick.
iobursal adhesions in the surveys described above
Ovariobursaladhesions arenotinfrequently asso-
ranged from 0.43%(Summers 1974) to 46%(Afiefy
ciated with cystic ovarian disease, although it is
et al 1973).Al-Dahash &David (1977a)reported
not clear which lesion is causal.In such animals,
an incidence of1.83%.The condition isuncommon
regressed luteinized follicles from past cycles are
in heifers but itsincidence increaseswith the age of
oftenpresentin thesameovary.
the cow.
Wheretheuterinetubeisinvolvedin theadhe
Much variation exists in the extent of the adhe-
sions,its lumen may become occluded.A conse
sions thatarepresent,ranging from fine,web-like
quenceofsuchocclusionis theaccumulation of
strands in the depth of the bursa,which do not
secretions,which causes distension and ihinning
involvetheuterinetube,throughtocompleteenvel-
ofthe wall,described as hydrosalpinx(Fig.22.11)
opment of the ovary within aclosely applied fibrous
Quiteoftena hydrosalpinxbecomes secondarily
bursa.Infectionsof the ovarianbursa,which invari-
infected byArcanobacteriun pyogenes,to producea
ably result in large-scale adhesions between the
pyosalpinx or pyobursitis.Intraovarian and peri-
ovary and bursa, also occur, often in association
ovarian abscesses have also been seen (Arthur &
with metritis or salpingitis.
Bee 1996)inassociation withovariobursaladhe-
Edwards(1961)found theweb-like adhesionsin
sions.Similarly,Kessy (1978)found four specimens
62%of slaughterhouse catle; however,it is unlikely
outof2000wheretheuterine tubeipsilateralto
0987654321012345678
Fig.22.10 Ovariobursal adhesions.Note that the ovarian
Fig.22.11 Hydrosalpinx.Note distended ampulla of the uter-
bursahas completelyenveloped theovary.
ine tube（t);the ovary(o) is unaffected and containsa corpus.
402
Chapter
221
Infertilityand subfertilityinthecow
ovariobursal adhesionswasoccluded.Two ofthese
lesions that cause infertility are diagnosedby
cases were associated with pyometra and iwo with
rectal palpation.Nielson (1949) described a tech-
the presence of a macerated fetus.Indeed,the most
nique ofrectalpalpation that wasdesignedto
lilely cause of ovariobursal adhesions in the pluri-
identifythe normalovarian bursa and to detect
parous cow is puerperal infection,which arises from
theuterine tube.Ulsing the left hand,the method
ascendinginfection of theuterus or,in severecases,
involvesrotationoftherightovarysoastofree
perimetritis. Because infection can be forced up the
ifrom thebursa;thenwhile thisis held lightly
uterine tubes during irrigation of the uterus (e.g.in
between thumb and forefinger,the other three
an animal with metritis),care should be exercised
fingers are extended forwardmedially and down-
during this procedure.
wards to engage the anterior free edge of the ovar-
The strand-like adhesions arising from scars of
ian bursa onthe dorsal surface ofone or moreof
oldcorporalutea(which morecommonlyaffecl
these fingers.The fingers are then extended into
therightovary)mayberegarded asphysiologi-
thebursa and spreadfanwisetodetectthepres-
cal hazardsthat originateasslighthaemorrhages
ence ofadhesionsbetween the ovary and bursa
from the siteofovulation.Interestingly,ovariobur-
By turning thepalm of the hand upwards the uter-
saladhesions arealsorelatively comimon inthe
ine tube may then berolled between thefingers
sheep,a species that has a similar ovulatingmecha-
inside thebursa and thethumb outside thebursa.
nism (see Ch.25）.It is possible that a proportion
Theleftbursa maybeexaminedby holding the
ofovariobursal adhesions can occur as a resull of
leftovaryberweenthelasttwofingersandthumb;
roughipalpationof the ovaries,particularlyif a cor-
by extending the forefinger and second finger for-
pus luteum is accidentally enucleated or an ovarian
wards, downwards and medially it is possible to
cyst is burst.
engage theedge of the bursa and then to explore
Other causes ofovariobursaladhesions include
thebursaanduterine tubeas describedfor the
local or diffuse peritonitis(including tuberculous
rightside.
peritonitis).Salpingitis and ovariobursal adhesions
In the more gross cases of ovariobursal adhe-
can alsobe caused byMycoplasna and Llreaplasma
sions,the periphery of the ovary loses its clear
infections（Yaeger &Holler 2007）.Ovariobursal
definition,The ovarian outlineis morebully and
adhesionsareafeatureoftheviralepididymovag-
irregular and the ovarian mass lacks mobility.In
initisofcattle in east Africa.
occasional difficult cases,laparotomy with direct
Thereisnodoubtthatovariobursal diseaseisone
visionorendoscopicexamination oftheovaries
ofthemajorcausesofindividualcowinfertilitychar-
may be used. Palpation of distended uterine tubes
acterized byregular return to oestrus.There is no
perrectum is usually indicative of the presence of
satisfactory treatmentfor thecondition,although
advanced lesions of hydrosalpinx or pyosalpinx but
promptattentiontocasesofdystociawithaviewto
most casesofimpatency oftheuterinetubes can
preventing puerperal metritiswouldalsoreduce the
onlybe determined by undertakingfunctional tests
incidence ofovariobursal disease.
ofthetube.
Several other acquired abnormalities ofthe uterine
Twofairly simpletests are availableto assess thie
tubescan also causeinfertility.Acondition described
patency of theuterinetube.Thefirst isbased on a
as pachysalpinx has been identified in three genital
technique that wasfirst described for use inwomen
tracts from parous animals(Kessy 1978).The gross
(Speck1948).He demonstrated thatifphenolsul-
appearance of the tube resembles hydrosalpinx or
phonphthalein (PSP)was placed in the uterine
pyosalpinx but no fluid is contained within the
lumen it wasnot absorbed but,if the uterinetubes
lumen; instead there is a mass of connective tissue.
werepatent,it passed along theminto theperito
Enlargement and distensionof the uterine tube can
nealcavity.Fromthis siteit wasreadily absorbed
alsooccur asaresultofthepresenceofmultiloc-
intothecirculation.ThePSPwasthenexcretedby
ular mucosal cysts containing periodic-acid-Schiff
thekidneys intotheurine,where it produced ared
(PAS)-staining gelatinous material.
Orpinkcolourif alkaline.lf theuterinetubeswere
Diagnosis ofovariobursal diseaseand impatency of
occluded therewas nopassage of dye and henceno
the uterine tubes.Diagnosis ofovariobursal adhe-
discoloration ofthe urine.The test has been used
sions in the live animal is difficult.In conse-
inthecow(Bertchtold &Brummer1968,Kothari
quence,only about one-third to one-half of the
etal1978);thelalterauthorwasableto
403
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
demonstrate,usinglaparoscopy,the escape of the
Uterinetumours
dyefrom iheostium.Thetestinvolvestheinfusion
Tumours of theiterus arerarein cattle,although in
of20mlofa0.1%sterilesolutionofPSPintothe
the UsA lymphosarcoma of the uterus is not uncom-
uterinelumen,using a Nielson's catheter.This has
to be done carefully so as to avoid any trauma to
mon. In all countries leiomyomata and fibromyo-
the endometrium enabling absorption to occur.
the neoplastic uterus.The larger uterine tumour may
Thebladder should then becatheterizedanda
small sampleofurinekept fora control.A urine
beconfusedonrectalpalpationwithamummified
fetus（Figs.22.12,22.13).
sample is then collected30-60 minuteslater.The
Benign tumours of mesenchymal tissues are the
urine ismadealkalinebythe addition of0.2ml
volume of 10% trisodium orthophosphate buf
mostcommon oftheoccasional uterinetumours of
cattle.Ina2-year abattoir surveyinDenver(Anderson
fer to10mlofurine.In thepresenceofPSP,the
&Davis 1958),24%ofthe cattle tumours(excluding
liquidbecomesred orpink;inits absence theurine
cancer eye)were in the genitalia.Among thesewere:
remains the same colour as the control.The test
should beperformed during the luteal phase of the
adenocarcinoma of theuterus,26 cases;lymphosar-
cylerferablyabout ay10,sincefalsenegatives
comaoftheuterussix;leiomyoma of thelterus,four;
can be obtained during the follicular phase (Kessy
&Noakes 1979a,b).False positives can arise if
thereisendometrialerosionduetoinfection and
inflammation;itis not veryeffective in differentiat-
ingbetweenbilateral andunilateralpatency(Kessy
&Noakes 1979a,b).
A more accurate method of evaluating the patency
ofeachuterinetubeseparatelyhasbeendescribed
by Smith (2004）.A Foley-type embryo-flushing
catheter(see Ch.35) is introduced into one horn,
thecuff is inflated anda smallvolume ofdye is
infused into the tipof thehorn.If thetube is patent
the dyewill passvia that uterine tubetotheperito-
neal cavity and hence to theurine(thecuffprevents
refluxof thedyeto theotherside).Theprocedure is
repeated on the other side several days later.
The second testinvolvestheuseofstarchparti
cles to simulate the transport of the oocyte or zygote.
This method was first described for the cowby
McDonald(1954)andsubsequentlyusedbyKessy&
Noakes (1979a). Briefly, starch grains are spread
overthesurfaceoftheovaryandarepickedupby
the infundibulum.They are transported thenceto
thevagina,from wheretheycanberecovered after
staining with iodine.
The prognosis forthe condition is, at best, guarded.
In cases ofbilateral occlusion of theuterine tube,the
animalisnormallyirreversiblysterile.Methodshave
been described for‘unblocking’uterine tubes by
insufflation of the uterus with carbon dioxide but,
because oftheriskofinducinguterinerupture,these
arenowrarelyused.Manualruptureofovariobur-
saladhesions has,likewise,been described,and a
proportion ofanimalsmay manage toconceive after
Fig.22.12Fibroma(t)involving the base of the uterine horns
this procedure.
poqpue
404
Chapter
221
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
Uterineadhesions
A roublesome sequel to thecaesarean operation is
adhesion of theuterus to theomentum,intestines or
abdominal wall.A similar lesion may follow uterine
rupture.Such lesions may accompany ovariobursal dis-
ease andmayfollowtardyinvolutionof the uterus and
metritis.They arefrequently associatedwithsterility.
Lesionsofthe cervix
The most common congenital lesions of the cervix
are those that occur as part of thewhite heifer'syn-
drome(seep.400).
Therole of the cervix as themainbarrier between
the uterine lumen and the external environment
makesitvulnerabletobothinfections andtotrauma.
Inflammationofthecervixislikelytofollowobstet-
ric trauma incurred during therelief of difficult dys-
tocia.Cervicitis almost invariably accompanies
puerperal metritis(seepp.410,411)and iscommon
in cases of delayed involution of the uterus and/or
retention of ihe afterbirth. The organisms present
in suchinfections arethosenormallyfoundin the
caudal vagina,including Escherichia coli, strepto-
cocci, staphylococci and A. pyogenes.The last organ-
ismismostprominentin establishedinfections.
Rarely,parturient laceration of the cervix is fol-
Fig.22.13Fibroma（t)involving the left uterine horn.
lowedby fibrosis andobstructionofthecervical
canal,resulting in infertility.Fibrosis ofthe cervix
may very occasionally prevent proper dilatation of
the organ at parturition but most cases of failure of
granulosa cell tumours ofthe ovary,six;cystadenoma
cervical dilatation areoffunctional origin.
ofthe ovary,one;and squamousepithelioma of the
Prolapse ofoneormoreofthecervical folds is
vulva, one. In a meta-analysis of abattoir surveys of
commonly seen in the plurigravid cow. It is a physi
reproductiveabnormalitiesRoberts(1986)found that
ological hazard of parturition and is not a cause of
leiomyomas,fibromyomas and fibromas accounted
infertility.
for 77% of tumours. These benign tumours are often
Tumours of the cervix (Fig.22.14) occur very
incidental findingsatthetime ofslaughter,although
occasionally.Leiomyomasand,toalesserextent,fibro-
they affectfertilityif theyoccludeoroccupy asignifi-
masarethemostcommonoftheselesions,whereas
cant proportion oftheuterinelumen.Occasionally
adenocarcinomas (themostcommon human cervi-
the tumours aremassive.
cal tumour)areveryrareindeed.Thebenign tumours
However,other series ofcases have reported ade-
of thecervix are only of clinical significance as space-
nocarcinoma andlymphosarcomastobethemost
occupying lesions or when they cause mechanical
importanttumoursofthebovineuterus(Brandley&
interference.
Migaki 1963, Smith 1965).Adenocarcinomas pres-
Conditionsofthe vagina,vestibule
ent asmoderatelyenlarged,firm,constrictedlesions
of the uterine wall (McEntee 1990) and have ahigh
and vulva
rateofmetastases tothelungand abdominal struc-
CystsofGartner'scanals
tures.Affected animals often present clinically as
having chronic wasting disease.These tumours are
Cysts inlinear series,whichmay be6-8cm in diam
veryrareinEurope:mostcaseshavebeenreported
eter,oftenoccuron thefloorofthevagina.Theycan
from North Anerica.
be easilypunctured andarenot a cause of infertility.
405
Part
Subfertility and infertility
closure of the vulval sphincter and aspiration of
air. These sequelae are similar to, but less severe
than,those of rupture of the perineum.Some of
thesecows areinfertiletonaturalservicebut con-
ceive to intrauterineinsemination.At subsequent
parturition,dystociaowingtofibrosis ofthevulva
may arise.Grossfibrosis of the vagina may alsofol
low pyogenic infection of lacerations. It will cause
a narrowing of the birth canal and dystocia.A cae
sareanoperationmay thenberequiredatsubse
quentbirths.
Obstetricdamagetotheperineum
Lacerations of the perineum can also result in
impaired fertility ofaffected cows.Second-degree
perineal lacerations maygiverisetoapneumovagina
iftheconformationofthevulva iscompromised.
Surgical correctionofsuchmalconformation of the
Fig.22.14Fibroma of the cervix （the cervix is arrowed)
vulvaispossiblebyperformingCaslick'soperation
(see Ch. 17).
A third-degreeperineal rupture may occur at calv-
ingusuallyasaresult of dystocia and severecalving
trauma.Inthissituation,thewholethicknessofthe
vaginaandrectalwallruptures,sothattherectum
Obstetricdamageto thevagina
and vagina are confluent [i.e. thecow has a cloaca).
Third-degree perineal tears do not heal; thus air and
Parturient trauma of the tubular genital tract is a
faecesareaspiratedintothevaginanevitablyresult
frequentconsequence ofdystocia.Fetomaternal
ing invaginitis,cervicitis andmetritis.Affected cows
disproportionisthecommonestcauseofdystocia
havea chronicmucopurulentvulval dischargebut
in catle,particularly in the Friesian breed.Delivery
their general health is not impaired.Normal cyclic
of large calves by forced traction can damage the
behaviourresumesbutconceptiondoesnotoccur
birthcanal tosuch anextentthat the animalisren-
because of themeuritis(seebelow).The condition
dered sterile.Obstetric contusion of the vagina,
can be cured only by surgical reconstruction of the
especiallyinfatheifersofthebeef breedssparticu-
perineum usingthetechniquesdescribedelsewhere
larlylikelytobefollowedbynecroticvaginitis asso-
(see Ch.17).
ciated with Fusobacterium necropliorum infection.
Rupture of theperineum maybeprevented by
Likewise,in other instancesinvolving theremoval
sound obstetric technique,including episiotomy.
ofdead,emphysematous calves in unhygienic cir-
cumstances,parturient traumamaybefollowedby
Urovagina
severetoxaemia duetoinvasionbyanaerobicbac-
teria.Treatment of such animals requires the use
An increasing number of cows are being diagnosed
ofparenteralbroad-spectrum antibiotics and,in
as having vaginal urine pooling or urovagina.In
severe cases, supportive fluid therapy. Some practi-
such animals,urine accumulates in the anterior
tioners have found that local emollient creams are
vagina, where it impinges upon the cervix and causes
also helpful. Since vaginitis causes persistent strain-
inflammation ofbothcervixandvagina.Theinflam-
ing,particularly if severe,caudal pidural anaesthe
mation then extends into the uterus,causing endo
sia will provide temporary relief.
metritis. There seems to be a greater prevalence in
Othersequelaeofdystociaincludelaceration
certainbreeds,particularly CharolaisandHolsteins
or bruising of the vulva, which may be followed
The cause of the condition is not known, although
by cicatrization and distortion,with imperfect
406
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
tract as a result of several pregnancies may be a fac-
Table 22.2 Postpartum bacterial contamination of the bovine
lor. Surgical treatment has been described (Hudson
uterus (from Griffin et al 1974)
1972, 1986), although the proredure is far from
Days after calving
straighuforward.
Proportion of uteri with.
bacterial contamination
present(%)
Tumours of the vagina and vulva
1-7
92
Fibropapillomata of the vagina and vulva of cat-
8-14
96
tle are not uncommon. They do not cause infertil-
15-21
77
ity but may interfere with birth. They are usually
22-28
64
pedunculated and may be removed surgically.There
is a possibility that one form of vaginal fibropapil-
29-35
OE
loma is ofviral origin and is transmittedvenereally.
36-42
OE
It occurs in young cattle and undergoes spontaneous
43-49
25
resolution.
All other tumours of the vagina and vulva are
rare. A squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva occurs
endometritis.Uterine infections,whether mild or
in unpigmented areas of the skin of cattle that are
severe, are usually associated with subsequent impair-
exposed to high levels of solar radiation (McEntee
ment of fertility, unless they are actively treated
1990). Lymphosarcomas have also been occasionally
found in the vagina.
The metritis complex: definitions
Metritis,endometritis, pyometra
It is common for the terms metritis, endometritis and
pyometra to be used interchangeably without much
andretained fetalmembranes
reference to eithera pathological or clinical definition.
This creates confusion both among practitioners and
One of the most significant causes of infertility in
in the literature.To resolve these difficulties, Sheldon
cattle is the metritis complex of diseases: retained
et al (2006) proposed the following definitions:
fetal membranes, metritis, endometritis and pyo-
Endometritis
metra.These diseases share common aetiological
·Infection is confined to the endometrium and
factors, predispose to one another and, to a large
stratum spongiosum of the submucosa
extent, share common treatments.
Affected cows showno systemic signs ofillness
·Clinical signs are confined to the presence of purl-
Metritis complex
lent material (clinical endometritis) or the pres-
Bacterial contamination of the uterus occurs after vir-
ence of leukocytesbut no overt pus in uterine or
cervical discharges.
tually every calving (see pp. 198-200). A wide range
ofmicroflora proliferates within the uterus over the
Metriis
firstfew daysaftercalving.Mosl cows eliminate this
·Infectionextendsintodeeperlayeisoftheuterus, which
contamination during involution of the uterus, so
may include extension though the serosa (perimetri-
that the lumen of the titerus is sterile within a few
tis) or into the broad ligament (parametritis)
weeks of calving (Table 22.2). In a minority of ani-
There are systemic signs of illness, which may vary
mals, infection develops from this contamination,
from relatively mild tovery severe: the life-threaten-
as adherence ofpathogenic bacteria to the mucosa,
ing cases that occur within a few days of calving are
penetration of the epithelium and colonization of
often known as'puerperal metritis.
uterine tissue occurs. Depending upon the species
of pathogens that are present, the degree of colo-
Pyometra
nization that takes place and the ability of the cow
Chranic infection ofthe uterus,with accumula
to mount an immune response, the results of such
tion ofpurulent exudate in the uterinelumen.
infection may range from a severe, life-threatening
Infection may be confined to luminal layers, or
metritis through to mild, non-persistent or chronic
may extend deep within the wall of the uterus
407
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
No signs of systemicillness
the vulva and/or cervix. Thus,obstetrical damage
·Acorpus luteum ispresent (by definition).
to the vulva impairs its ability to act as an effec-
tive sphincter,causingaspiration ofair,ballooning
Together these condlitions are known as the'metritis
of the vagina, dehydration of the mucosa and the
complex.
development of vaginitis.Likewise, damage to the
cervix may allow heavy contamination of the uter-
Aetiologyandpathogenesis
inelumenespeciallyif thereisconcurrent damage
to thevulva.Sincethe main cause ofboth these con-
All theconditionsinthemetritiscomplexshare sim-
ilar aetiological factors.In general terms,all depend
ditionsispoorobstetricpractice,theyshouldlargely
ontheabilityofthenormalperipartumbacterial
bepreventable (see Ch.12).It is possible to restore
thebarrierfunctionofthevulva afterinjuryoreven
contaminantstooverwhelmthehosi'sdefencesand
after perineal laceration/rupture (as described in
establish infection.(Fig.22.15).
Ch.17),enabling thecowtoeliminate theinfection.
Surgical repair of the cervix is virtually impossible.
Hostdefencemechanisms
Third, dystocia can also result in terine inertia
Undernormalcircumstances,thereareseveral mech-
impairingtheexpulsion of thedetritusofparturition
anismsthatpreventopportunistpathogensfrom
and delaying theonset of parturition.
colonizing the genital tract.First, the uterus is pro
Dystociaalsopredisposes toretention of the fetal
tectedbythephysical barriersof thevulva andcer-
membranes.In viriually every survey of the factors
vix.It shouldbenoted that,although thevulva may
causinguterineinfections,retainedfetal membranes
appearflitensequnceasbarritsnt
has been identified as ofmajor importance in the
remarkably efficient at preventing faecal contamina-
aetiology of the metritis complex (e.g. Sandals et al
tionofthetubulargenitalia
1979,Kaneene&Miller 1995,Eiler&Fectau2007）.
Many factors impinge upon the effectiveness of
Conditionsthatpredispose toretainedfetal men-
thesebarriers.Dystociaisparamount amongthese.
branes(e.g.multiple births,abortion and induced
First, the obstetrical interventions io correct he
calving) are therefore important in the pathogene-
dystociaincreasetheloadofpathogenswithinthe
sis ofthemetritiscomplex.Other accidents ofthe
uterus.Second, dystocia can result in tissue dam-
pericalving period,especially recumbency,are also
age and/or devitalization and contusion of thebirth
potential predisposing causes for uterine infection.
canal resulting in tissue that is susceptible to bac-
Hypocalcaemia does not of itself appear to be a
terial contamination)and physicaldeformity of
major predisposing factor(Curtis et al 1983,Faye
etal1986,Morton2000a),although therecumbency
that is a consequence ofhypocalcaemia probably is
Calving
of significance.
Secondly,theuterus isprotected bythe action of
Relainec letal membranes
Beneficial
its immune defence system.The reproductive ste-
Dysloci
Oestrous cycles
roids oestrogen and progesterone significantly influ-
Mutatior
encethelocal immunesystem ofthereproductive
evitalizedtissue
tract.In general,it is considered that the genital
Immunesystem
tract ismoreresistant to infectionwhen it isunder
Species
oestrogen dominance,while under progesterone
Protein
Bacteria
dominance it is more susceptible.
Fattyliver
>Eupeo7-
Nutrition
The resumption of oestrous cycles isgenerally held
Hypo Ca
Vulva/cenix
to be a positive factorin thespontaneous resolution
I-nutrients
ofuterine infections,because the uterine defence
Invelution)
mechanisms are stimulated by elevated oestrogen
Matritis
concentrations duringoestrus（Rowsonetal1953).
Cellular defence mechanisms are potentiated during
Fig.2z.15 Factors associated with the development of uterine
oestrus （Frank et al 1983),resulting in changes in
infection from parturient bacterial contamination.(Redrawn
the numbers and proportions ofcirculating white
withpermission fromParkinsonetal2007.)
bloodcells,with a relativeneutrophilia.Theblood
408
Chapter
221
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
supply to the uterus is also increased,which,cou-
underfeeding is also associated with endometritis.
pledwith the migration ofwhite cellsfrom the cir-
Markusfeld（1984)found that postpartum metritis
culation to theuterinelumen,enablesvigorous and
was more prevalent in first calvers that yielded less
activephagocytosisofbacteria to occur.Oestrogens
in the last 5months before calving than those that
alsocause anincreaseinthequantity andnature of
yielded average or above,which is also probably a
vaginalmucus,which alsoplays an important role
reflection ofundernutrition（i.e.rather than ofmilk
in defenceof the uterus against bacteria by provid-
yield per se）.Curiously,Kaneene& Miller (1995)
ing a protective physical barrier and byflushing and
found thatthe incidenceofendometritiswasasso-
diluting thebacterial contaminants.Hence,a num-
ciatedwiththeintensityofveterinary attentionthat
ber ofstudieshave shownthat a delayin return to
the herd received;however, this was considered to
cyclical activity predisposes cows to endometritis.
represent an increased rate of diagnosisrather than
For example,Andriamanga el al（1984)reported
more affectedanimals
that34%ofthecowsthatwerecyclicalby37days
Traceelementdeficiencies,notablyselenium,have
postpartum had endometritis comparedwith 49%
alsobeen variously associatedwithpredisposition
thatwere acyclical bythe same stage
touterineinfections.
Hlowever,if the infection is noteliminated dur
ing the follicular phase and remains during the fol-
Bacterial loading
lowing dioestrus, the corpus luteum can become
persistent due to a failure ofendometrial PGF
Bacterial load depends upon two main factors.Firs,
secretion.In the presence of long-terms elevations
it depends upon the level ofcontamination that
of therelatively immunosuppressivehormone,pro-
takes place during calving.Hence,dystocia (espe-
gesterone,chronic infections(typically endometritis
cially internal mutation)and environmentalcon-
or pyometra) can ensue. Cowswhosefirst ovulation
tamination (faeces,soil) are major aetiological
occurssoon aftercalvingappeartobeatparticular
factors.Surprisingly,however, despite the aetiolog-
riskof this:for example,Olson et al (1984)found
ical association ofunhygienic calving conditions
thatthe averageinterval fromcalvingtofirst ovula-
withtheincidence ofuterine infection,Noakesetal
tionwas15.5days incows that developedpyometra
(1991)observedno qualitativeorquantitative dif
(see p.201) compared with 21.8 days non-infected
ferencesinthebacterial floraintheuteriofpostpar-
animals.
tum cows from farmswithhygienicorunhygienic
calving accommodation,despite vastly different
incidences of endometritis (2% vs 15%;Noakes
Managementfactors
etal1991）
Many management factors affect the development
Second,bacterial loading depends upon the
ofuterine infections.
species of bacteria. Many species of bacteria (eg.
Season oftheyear may affect theincidence of
streptococci,staphylococci and coliforns)can be
endometritis.Cows calving during the winter or
isolatedfrom the postpartumbovineuterus,many
springaremorepronetoendometritis than those
of which are of little significance. Isolationof A.pyo-
calvingatothertimes.Moreover,theenvironmentin
genes,Mammheimia hnemolyica or E.coliisassociated
which theparturient andpostparturient cowiskept
withreducedreproductiveperformance(Bondurant
affectstheincidence ofendometritis.In particular,
1999],especiallywhen they are still present more
a dirty,unhygieniccalving environmeni predisposes
than 3 weels postpartum.The presence of A.pyogenes
to the disease.This is probably the explanation for
isassociatedwiththepresence ofendometritis in a
theeffect of season ofyear,sincecowscalvingin the
veryhighproportion(97%:Hartiganetal1974a)of
winter orindoorsinthespringarelikely tobein a
infected uteri.AnaerobessuchasFnecroplorunand
moreheavilycontaminatedenvironment.
Prevotellamelaninogenicusarecommonlyco-isolated
Highmilkyieldhasbeenassociatedwith an
increased incidence ofendometritis(Grohn etal
gisticallytocauseseveremetritis and/ortissuedam-
1990).Disturbances ofcarbohydrate metabolism
age, as well as endometritis and infertility (Ruder
(e.g.fatty liver,fat cow syndrome (Reid et al 1979))
etal 1981,Olsonet al 1984,Dohmen ei al 1995)
and overfeeding (Markusfeld 1985,Kaneene&
Fnecrophorun produces a leukocidal endotoxin
Miller 1995) can also be responsible. Conversely.
which interfereswith thehost's abilitytoeliminate
409
Part
51
Subfertilityand infertility
A.pyogenes,while Prevotella spp.also produce sub-
degeneratingfetalmembranesand other detritus.
stances that interfere with the phagocytosis and kill
This fluid is discharged from the vagina accompa-
ing ofbacteriaf theafterbirthisretainedtsroting
niedbyfrequenfexpulsivestrainingefforts.Vaginal
creates an anaerobic environment that facilitates
exploration of anaffectedcase shouldnot be
establishment of thesemore serious pathogens.
attempted,as it causes acute discomfort and isfol
Grosscontamination oftheuteruscanbepresent
lowedbythemost severeandpersistentexpulsive
in animals that have aborted(eg.with Salmonella
efforts.Many animals arerecumbentbythe time
Dublin or S.Brandenburg).Rarely, Clostridia spp.
veterinary attention is sought,bywhich time they
maybepresent,inwhichcase the diseaseis usually
are usually anorexic.Itis common for theinfection
rapidlyfatal.
to extend through the uterine wall into the peri-
toneum, causing a localized or generalized perito-
nitis.Many animals with puerperal metritis also
Metritis
developmastitis,particularlyiftheyarerecumbent,
Metritisisasystemicillnessof the earlypostpartum
andmany alsohaveconcurrenthypocalcaemia.
period that ischaracterizedbyafetidwatery uter-
The main differential diagnoses are metabolic
ine discharge,initial fever,often accompanied by an
disorders (although many cows may develop second-
atonic,grosslyenlargeduterus,inappetence,mark
aryhypocalcaemia),ruptureduterus,retainedfetus
edly reduced millyield,dullness and other signs
diffuse peritonitis, acute toxicmastitis (although this
consistent with toxaemia （Sheldon etal 2006).
looisacommoncomplicationofacutemetritis),
Clinical signs can range from peracute (so-called
salmonellosis and post-calving injuries(e.g.obtura-
puerperal)metritis,which occurs in the first few
tor paralysis) (Parlinson et al 2007).
days after calving,to less severe cases in which the
Treatment and prognosis. The prognosis for peracute
systemicreaction isrelativelymild.
metritis is never beter than guarded.Lnless treat-
mentisinitiatedearlyinthecourseofthedisease,or
Puerperal metritis
ifperimetritisorparametritisispresent,itisrelatively
poor.Hence,before initiating treatment,a decision
Puerperalmetritis occurs within a fewdays of
shouldbemadewhether theanimal hasareason-
parturitionIt usuallyfollowsanabnormal firstorsec
ablechance of recovery orwhetherit wouldbe more
ond stage of labour,especiallywhen there hasbeena
cost-effective to slaughter the animal (Parkinson et
severedystociathathasrequiredprolongedtraction
al2007)
orresulted in damage tothevulva and/orbirthcanal.
Ifattempted,treatmentrequiresbothgoodnursing
The conditionis also associatedwith uterine inertia,
care andvigorousmedication.Thecow should first
premature calving (includingabortion or induced
be kept warm and made as comfortable as possible
calving),twin births, retention of the fetal mem-
by,forexample,transferringittoawell beddedand
branes.Bacterial invaderscolonizethe uterusresult
warmloosebox.Itshouldbefedandprovidedwith
inginpyaemia.Toxinsproduced by thesebacteriaare
water.Thefirst step in treating these casesis to stabi-
also absorhed from the uterus resulting in toxaemia.
lize thecirculatory system by giving fluids and non-
Affected animals show both local and general
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (Smith 2005).
symptoms.The temperatureofaffected cowsmay
Fluids can be given as 2.0-2.5 litres of 7% v/w saline
beelevated to40-41Cbut ismoreoften subnor-
intravenouslyfollowedby25litresofwater（drunk
mal by the time veterinary attention is sought.
or administeredby stomach tube),or24-40litres
Toxaemia induces endotoxic shock, resulting in
ofisotonic electrolytes by stomachtube(Frazer
a fast weak pulse (in the region of 100/minute),
rapid respiration,a sluggish capillary refill time
the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug of choice
and,usually,a moderate to severelevel ofdehy-
because of its anti-endotoxic effects.
dration anda characteristic‘toxaemic diarrhoea
Thereafter, antibiotic therapy should be initiated.
The vulva and vagina are typically swollen and
Intrauterine antibiotics areoflittle use,sotreatment
deeply congested.The cotyledons are swollen and
shouldbeparenteral.Thechoiceofantibioticremains
thefetalmembranesoftenremainfirmly attached.
contentious and there are many arguments put for-
The uterus contains a large volume of toxic, fetid,
wardinfavourofoneantibioticover another,with
reddish,serous exudate that contains fragments of
lintlehelpfromlarge-scaleclinicalurials.Somefavour
410
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
bactericidal antibiotics to control systemic infection
The major sequelae of this condition include local-
and pyaemia. Broad-spectrum penicillins and cepha-
ized or generalized peritonitis, ascending infection
losporins are the most efficacious choices. Ceftiofur
of the urinary tract (cystitis or pyelonephritis) and
achievesconcentrations in uterine tissue and fluid that
pyosalpinx and ovariobursal adhesions. Other com-
exceed the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
plications of metritis include pneumonia, polyar
for most of the common metritis pathogenis (Drillich
thritis and endocarditis. In pyaemic cases, abscesses
et al 2006), and appears to be effective in treating
may develop in the lungs, liver, kidney or brain. The
acute postpartum metritis (Chenault et al 2004).
fertility of cows thatrecover from the condition is
Others prefer bacteriostatic antibiotics,as they linit the
likely tobepermanenuly impaired,soconsideration
risk of further endotoxic damage during the killing of
should be given to culling the animal at the end of
bacteria.Oxytetracycline has the advantage that it can
the lactation.
be given at high dose intravenously. However, the MIC
of tetracyclinefor intrauterineinfections is high and is
Less severe cases
probably not attained in uterine tissue/lumen (Smith
et al 1998). Pessaries are of no value in these cases.
Most cases are lesssevere than the acute toxic form,
Oestrogens are contraindicated,as they increase
occurring a little longer after calving and being less
the rate of absorption ofendotoxinfrom the uterus.
life-threatening.All are typified by an enlarged
Oxytocin may be of some benefit, but only within
uterus, fetid vaginal discharge and a degree of tox-
72 hours of calving.Prostaglandin Fis of liule
aemia,inappetence and signs of systemic illness.
or no benefit despite a short-term ecbolic effect
Temperature can be elevated,normal or subnormal.
Calcium should be given to treat/prevent second-
Suich cases may require only the parenteral admin-
ary hypocalcacmia. Fetal membranes should not
istration of broad-spectrum antibiotics,in combina-
be removed and vaginal examination should not
tionwith othersupportive/syinptomatictreatments
be attempted.If the cow is continually straining.
as appropriate to the severity of the condition.
caudal epidural anaesthesia can be given; this only
gives transicnt relief for 1-2hours but sometimes it
Endometritis
willbreak the cycle'and stop the straining which is
often self-perpetuating and debilitating.
Endometritis is a common condition of thecow.
Oncethecirculationis stabilized and the cow shows
LInlike metritis, it does not affect the general health
some signs of improvement,uterine lavage can be
of the cow, although it does have a profound effect
attempted by infusing normal saline through a wide-
upon its fertility. Most of the specific pathogens
bore tube(not a stomach tube as they clog with detri-
causinginfertility(such as Campylobacter fetus subsp.
tus).Althoughthisprocedureiscommonlyundertaken,
venerenlis and T. foeus)do so because of the endo-
it should benoted thatit is associated with significant
metritis that they produce (see Ch. 23). However,
risks of uterine wall damage and toxin absorption as
thie most common initiating cause of endometritis
the uterine wall may be extremely friable(Montes &
is non-specific, opportunist pathogens that contam-
inate the uterus during the pericalving period, with
saline shiould be infused at a time, as the uterus is too
subseqjuenl overgrowth of pathogens A.pyogenes
friable tocope with anybuild-up of pressure.Thefluid
(usually in association with F. necrophorum and/or
is then syphoned from the uterus.Parenteral antibi-
Prevotella spp.) that penetrate only as far as the stra-
otics should be continued. Intrauterine antibiotics
tum spongiosum.
are inadequate as the sole route of antibiotic admin-
istration,althiough there may be some advantage to
Incidence
the infusion of soluble antibiotics(e.g.5g oxytetracy-
cline in=100mlnormal saline) onceuterine flushing
World-wide figures for the prevalence of endo-
is completed.
metritis are varied, ranging from 43-35% in France
Recovery is marked by a return of appetite, ressa-
(Andriamanga et al 1984,Martinez & Thibier
tionof diarrhoea and achangein thecontentsof the
1984) and 37% in Israel (Markusfeld 1984) to
uterus to a less fetid, thicker, more obviously puru-
10% in Belgium (Bouters &Vanderplassche 1977)
lent material.Parenteral antibiotics should becon-
and 6.25% and 10.3% for Jersey and Hlolstein
tinued for several days.
cows respectively in the USA(Fonseca et al 1983)
411
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
In theUK,an incidencerate of10.1%wasrecorded
methodforaccuratediagnosisofendometritis,astoo
by Borsberry&Dobson（1989a).A further study
manyotherfactorsinterferewith therateofchange
involving 20000 cows in 63 herds (1989-1990)
ofsizeoftheuterinehornsoverthepostpartum
recorded a mean incidence of 15% of cows having a
period.Hence,relianceshould not beplaced upon
vulval discharge.Thelowestand highestquartileval-
thismethod as theprimarymeans of diagnosis.
ueswere3.7%and26.9%,respectively(Esslemont &
Thepresenceofpurulent dischargescan bedem-
Spincer 1992).In Australia,a large-scale survey of
onstratedina numberofways.Manual examination
reproductive disorders ofcows recorded an inci-
of the vagina is no longer recommended, since it
dence of 0.9% of cows with a visible purulent vag-
causesconsiderablediscomfort to thecowandhasa
inal discharge (InCalf 2000), however since this
lowspecificity.Itisthereforeof little clinical value
excluded cows with retained fetalmembranes
Alternatively,avaginoscopecan beusedtoexam
(RFM)(4.7%)itprobably significantly underesti-
ineforthepresence of discharge around the cervical
mates the incidenceofendometritis.Some ofthe
os or in the cranial vagina.‘The method is of bet
differences between these figures relates to the cri-
ter diagnosticvalue thanrectalpalpation ormanual
teria that areusedto estimatetheincidenceofthe
examination of thevagina.Themost recently devel-
disease:there are many diagnosticcriteria,differ-
opedmethodis arubberdiaphragmontheendof
ingfrom eachotherin sensitivityandspecificity,so
a stainless steel rod(Metricheck),which is inserted
providing different estimates of incidence.
into the vagina to collect a sampleof discharges from
the external cervical os/cranial vagina.This method
Clinical signs
appears tobe as effective asvaginoscopy,but has the
advantage of being quick and causing minimal dis-
Endometritismaybeclinical or subclinical.Clinical
comfort to thecow.TheMetricheckinstrumentand
endometritis ischaracterizedbythepresence ofa
examplesofpurulent dischargescollected duringits
whiteorwhitishyellowmucopurulentvaginaldis-
use are shown in Figures 22.16and 22.17.
charge （known as leukorrhoea orwhites’） in the
Uterinebiopsyhasbeenusedto studyboth the
postpartum cow.Thevolume of the dischargeis vari
incidence ofclinicaland subclinicalendometri-
ablebutfrequentlyincreasesatthetimeofoestrus
tis.Biopsies can be collected (Ayliffe 1979),using
when the cervix dilates and there is copious vaginal
an instrument (Fig.22.1s) modified from that
mucus.Affected cows donot showany signsofsys-
described by Hartigan et al (1974b). Lterine biop-
temicillness.Subclinicalendometritis is character-
siescollectedfrom infertilecowsrevealsliatmany
ized by neutrophils in uterine luminal fluid,but
havesubclinicalendometritis.Forexample,Sagartz&
without visiblepurulentmaterial.
Hardenbrook(1971) reported that 77%ofinfer-
tilecowshadendometritis:bacterialinfectionwas
found in 64% of these cows and 80% had lesions
Diagnosis
ofendometritis evidentin biopsies.Similarly high
Diagnosis on the basis of physical abnormalities.The
figures have been reported by Morrow et al (1966)
presence ofendometritis can be determined by
andSchmidt-Adamopolou(1978),whorespectively
transrectalpalpation oftheuterus,examinationof
foundthat63%and92%ofinfertilecowshadevi-
thevagina and cervix for thepresence ofpurulent
dence of endometritis on uterine biopsy. Likewise,
discharges and examination of cervical swabs for
Hartigan et al (1972) showed that 50%of the geni-
the presence ofneutrophils.ltcan also beinferred
tal tracts obtained from an abattoir showed histo-
fromhistory ofrelevantaetiological factorsinthe
logical evidence of endometritis,yet only 12.5%
peripartumperiod of individual cows.
showed gross lesions.
Rectal palpation frequently shows a poorlyinvo-
Hence,theevidence of such biopsy studiesishat
luted uterus,which has a‘doughy'feel.Studer &
many cases ofendometritis are subclinical,with
Morrow(1978)foundaclosecorrelationbetween
aclosed cervix,so no purulent discharges are evi-
size and texture ofuteruis and cervix,the nature of
dent.Collection ofcervical swabs for examination
the purulentexudate and thedegreeofendometritis
for thepresence of neutrophilsis areasonablyeffec
determined by biopsy and the nature of the bacte-
tivemeans ofdiagnosingchronicinfectioninsuch
rial isolation.Nonetheless,rectal palpation is now
animals as,even if the cervix isclosed,neutrophils
regarded asbeing neither a sensitivenora specific
arelikely tobepresent within thecervicalcanal.
412
Chapter
1221
Infertility andsubfertilityin thecow
Fig.22.16 The Metricheck device for examning cows for the presence of purulent vaginal discharges
Fig. 22.17 Samples of vaginal mucus collcted by the Metricheck device. (A) Grossly purulent material.(B) Scanty ourulent dis-
charge.(C) Normal cervical mucus.(Courtesy of J. Mamo.)
Sheldon et al (2006) proposed criteria for the diag-
Effectson fertility
nosis of subclinical endometritis at different stages
post-partum based upon the proportion of neu-
Endometritis reduces fertility by reducing thechances
trophils present in cytology samples from cervical
of conception. Consequently there is an increase in
swabs (Table 22.3).
calving-conception interval, the number of services
Diagnosis on epidemiological factors:the'atrisk'caw.
per pregnancy and the proportion of cows that fail
The Australian'InCalf survey of reproductive perfor-
toconceive
mance of dairy cattle (InCalf 2000, Morion 2000b)
Extension of the calving-conception interval has
identified a number of epidemiological factors that
been shown to be an average of 12 days (Tennant &
were associated with subfertility due to endometri-
Peddicord 1968),20 days (Erb et al 1981), 10 days
tis (Table 22.4). Identification of the cows in which
(Bretzlaff et al 1982)and 31 days (Borsberry &
these events occur allows them to be managed and/
Dobson 1989b), while the services per concep-
tion have beenincreasedfrom1.67 and 2.16to
term'at risk'cows has been proposed (Morton 2000)
2.0and 2.42,respectively(Tennant &Peddicord
for these animals.
1968, Breizlaff et al 1982). In ihe surveys of
413
Part
51
Subfertilityand infertility
Table22.4Factors associated with subfertility due to
endometritis(Morto2000a,Stevens etal 2000)
Assistedcalvingsespeciallywhere internalmanipulatinis
required
Retained fetal membranes
Purulent vaginal dischargesintheintervalbetween calving
and the start of mating
Premature calving (including twins,abortion） Induction of
calving before termhas adverse effectsonfertilityinsome,
but not all studies
BUT NOTuncomplicated cases ofhypocalcaemia
pathological evidence ofendometritisincows culled
for infertility, particularly the repeat-breeder cow
(Brus 1954,Fujimoto 1956,Dawson 1963).Recent
studiesinNewZealand(Xu&Burton2000)showed
that theproportionof cows that failed to conceive was
increasedfrom9%innormalcowsto24%incowsthat
hadvisiblepurulentvaginaldischarges.Thesurvey of
Morton(2000a)inAustraliahighlighted thatpurulent
dischargesintheearlypostpartumperiodarenotpar-
ticularly significant in terms oftheireffectsupon fertil-
itybutthatthcircontinuedpresencelateraftercalving
had a highly deleterious effect（Table22.5）
B
The stateof theuterus,and itscontents,hasbeen
used as a prognostic indicator for cows with endo-
C
C2
metritis.For example,Studer & Morrow (1978)
A
found a significant correlation between the state of
Fig.22.18Uterine biopsy instrument.(A)Whole instrument
theuterus,asdetermined byrectalpalpation,and the
showing window with cutting edge.(B) Close-up with edge
calving-conception interval,especially inrelationto
partialy withdrawn (arrowed）.Close-up views(C,C,)show
the amount of pus in the discharge.Similarly,obser-
vations of the nature of purulent vaginal discharges
have also been used as a prognosticindicator.LeBlanc
et al (2002a) demonstrated that the presence of a
Table22.3Criteria for the diagnosisof subclinical encometritis
purulent discharge and cervical diameter more than
from cervical swabs(Sheldonet al 2006)
7.5cmwasassociatedwithimpairedfertility.There
Days after calving
%PMN in cytology
tended to be an increasing impairment of fertility
samples
with increasingly purulent discharge.Mucopurulent
discharge tended (p = 0.09) to increase time to preg-
20-33
>18
nancy.Purulent or foul discharge was consistently
34-49
>10
associatedwitha20%reductioninpregnancyrate
>50
>5
(Sheldon et al 2006;Table22.6).
Endometritis thereforereduces theprofitability
PMN,polymorphonuclearleukocytes.
ofa dairy enterprise;the costcan be calculated by
Tennant & Peddicord（1968)and Bretzlaff etal
relating it to the increase in the calving-concep-
(1982）,culling for failure to conceive was 14%
tion interval(see p.527）.Esslemont &Kossaibati
and 21%respectivelyin cows withmetritis,com
(1996) calculated a total cost of f166per cow.
pared with an average of6%or 5% for unaf-
Losseswere mainly due to an extendedcalving
fected animals.Other workers have demonstrated
conceptinntrvalneasedcullingrateseduc
414
Chapter
22
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
Table22.5Effectofpostpartumvaginal dischargeonsubsequentfertility(derivedfromMorton2000a)
Not affected (%)
Discharge<2weeks
Discharge>4weeks
post-partum (%)
post-partum (%)
Cowssubmittedforservicewithin
69
65
67
3weeks of the start ofmating
First service conceptionrate
49
38
32
Proportionofcows conceived within
58
45
34
6 weeks of the start of mating
Emptyrate
11
0
45
Table22.6Associationbetween cervical discharges and
Stimulating uterine immunity.Three main meth-
effectonfertility(derived fromSheldonetal2006)
ods have been used:（1) stimulation of oestrus
with PGF、in animals that have an active corpus
Flecksofpusassociatedwithnon-specificbacterial growth;
luteum,(2)administration oflow doses ofestradiol
little effecton fertility
and（3)stimulation ofoestrus in animalsthat are
MucopurulentdischargeassociatedwithF.necrophorum
anoestrous.
Purulentdischargeassociatedwith.pyogenesProteus.
When there is a mature CLon the ovary,PGF
Fetid odourassociatedwithA.pyogenes,E.coli,M.haemo-
(or an analogue) is generally regarded as being an
lytica and streptococci
effectivemeans oftreatnent.Administration of
Presence of A.pyogenes is theprimary cause of increased
PGF, causes luteolysis, thereby reducing proges-
time toreconception
terone concentrations andstimulating thereturn
of oestrus.The cow will return to oestrus 3-5 days
milk yield and the cost of treatment. This equated
aftertreatment,oftenwithamild tomoderatepuru-
tof833per100cows ina herd.Mostofthieselosses
lent vaginal discharge.It is preferable that animals
can beobviated byinstigating effectivetreatment
should be treated before the end of the voluntary
ofaffected animalsbeforetheendofthevoluntary
waitperiodbut,if treatmenthasbeendelayeduntil
waitperiodor start of thebreedingseason.
after the start of the matingperiod,it isprobably
advisable to serve or inseminate at the induced
oestrus unless the discharge is severe.Some cases
Treatment
ofendometritispresentwithleukorrhoeawhenthe
Few aspects oftheriogenologyhave attractedmore
cow isinoestrus:forthese animalsPGFmay need
debatethan the treatment ofendometritis.Two
to be given=8days later when a responsive corpus
problems that impede the study of iis treatment are
luteumwould be present.TheresponseloPGF
thehighspontaneousself-curerate,which hasbeen
treatment,in terms ofconception atthe induced
estimatedasbetween33%(Steffanetal1984)and
oestrus and final pregnancy rate,is generally good
46%(Griffinetal 1974)and thevariablecriteria
(Gustafsson et al 1976,Coulson 1978,LeBlancet
that have been used for its diagnosis.
al2002b),and markedly better than in untreated
There is,however,consensus on thefollowing:
controls.Somehave advocated intrauterine admin-
·There is little merit in performingroutine swabbing
istration of PGF,but this appearstoconfer no par-
andbacterial sensitivity testsbefore treatment
ticular advantages.Whether PGFadministration
to cowswithouta CLisbeneficialisnotclear:apos-
·Intrauterine infusion of antiseptics is at best use-
itiveresponsewasrecordedbySteffanetal (1984)
lessand at worst injurious to theuterus
andanegativeresponsebyLeBlancet al (2002b).
·Treatment should be delayed until at least 4weeks
Historically,intramuscularinjection of 3-5mg of
postcalving(LeBlancetal2002b)
estradiolbenzoatetocowswithnoCLhasbeenused
Rational therapy is based upon either hormonal
withsomesuccessto treatendometritis.Therational
stimulation of uterine defences or the use of
for the use of oestrogens is that they increase uter-
antibiotics.
inebloodflowandstimulatetheimmunesystem,
415
Part
5
Subfertilityandinfertility
as occurs during oestrus. The recent withdrawal
can cause granulomata; and chalky bases,whicli
in theEuropeanLInion of licensingfortheuseof
can causeirritaion andblockageofglands
oestrogens in food-producing animals means that
Treatment must not reduce ferility hy producing
this treatment is nolongerusablein animals that
irreversiblechangesinthereproductivesystem
are to supply milk or meat to those countries. High
doses of oestrogens have always been contra-
·Treatment must be cost-effective by enhancing
fertility
indicated,astheyresultinlong-termdownregula-
tion of the hypothalamo-pituitary axis,resulting in
·Detailsofitsabsorptionfrom theuterus and excre-
anoestrus and ovarian cysts.
tioninthemilkmustbeknownsothatappropri-
Induction of oestrus with gonadotrophin-releas-
ate withdrawal times can be followed.
inghormone(GnRH) has also beenadvocated as
In consequence,several antibiotics areinappropri
a means of treating endometritis in acyclic cows,
ate. Nitrofurazone is irritant and has an adverse
althoughthis isseldomundertaken now.It is theo-
effectonfertility.Aminoglycosides arenoteffective
retically possible to induce oestrus with intra-
in thepredominantly anaerobicenvironment of the
vaginal progesterone-releasinginsertsbut,as many
infected uterus. Field urials have also provided evi
carry a contraindication for use in animals with
dence fora lack of effectiveness of these drugs in the
vaginal or uterine infection,this practice is not
treatment of endometritis.Sulphonamides are inef-
recommended.
fective because of the presence of para-aminoben-
Antibiotics.A wide range of antimicrobial agenis
zoicacidmetabolitesin thelumenoftheinfected
has beenused in the treatments of endometritis.
uterus.Penicillinsaresusceptibletodegradation by
Whileparenteral treatmentisneededfor treatment
the large numbers of penicillinase-producing bacte-
of metritis,it is generally considered to be prefer-
ria that are present.
abletotreat endomeiritisviatheintrauterineroute.
Antibioticsthat havebeen formulated for intra-
Provided an adequate doserateisused,thiswill
uterine use include oxytetracycline(as an infusion
result in effective MlCs reaching the endometrium
orin the form ofpessaries) and cephapirin (as an
andbeingestablishedintheintraluminal secretions.
infusion).Parenteral oxytetracyclinepenetratesthe
Thelatterpointisimportantfortheeffectivetreat
uterine wall and lumen（Ayliffe &Noakes 1978,
ment of the disease,since subtherapeutic doserates
Masera et al 19so),but the MiC for many organ
are frequently used.Hlence, some clear principles
isms is higher than can be achieved（Risco etal
underliethechoiceofantimicrobialand/orantisep-
2007).Intrauterine oxytetracycline does notpene
tic agents:
tratethewalloftheuteruswell,isnotparticularly
It must be effective against the widerange of aer-
effective against A.pyogenes and can have a direct
obic and anaerobic, Gram positive and Gram-
irritant effect upon the endometrium (Cohen et al
negativebacteria that arepresent
1995).Themain role for tetracycline is therefore as
It must be effective within the generally anaerobic
a prophylactic intrauterine antibiotic after assisted
calvings.
environmentoftheuterus
Cephapirin has been widely studied as an intra
·Whether aneffectivebactericidal(or bacterio-
uterine treatment for endometritis,with positive
static)concentration can beachieved atthe site
results(LeBlancet al 2002b;Drillich etal2005,
ofinfectionby theintrauterineroute of adminis-
Kasimanickam elal2005).Recently,blanket treal-
tration.When theintrauterineroute isused,the
ment of‘atrisk cowswith intrauterine cepha-
substancemustbe evenly andrapidly distributed
pirin (Metricure,Intervet) has been advocated
throughouttheuterinelumenwithgoodpenetra-
(McDougall2001)as a cost-effectivemeansoftreat-
tionintothedeeperlayersof theendometrium
ing endometritis at a herd level. All 'at risk'cows are
·lt must not inhibit natural uterine defence mecha-
drafted 2-3weeks before the endof thevoluntary
nisms,particularly thecellular component
wait period(orcalendardateforthestartofmating)
Itmustnot traumatizetheendometrium.Several
andeither all thesecows,orthose that haveany evi-
ofthevehiclesusedin theformulation ofphar-
dence ofpurulent materialinihe cranialvagina,are
maceuticalpreparationscan damage theendome-
treated.While the former approach probably over-
trium.Examples include propylene glycol,which
treats(asitignores the self-curerate),and thelatter
can cause a necrotizing endometritis;oil,which
probably under-ireats(as it misses subclinical cases
416
Chapter
22
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
and animals with a closed cervix), this particular
treated withPGF,theresults of the two treatments
approach to the management of uterine infections
were similar.Laven (2003) also showed similar
appears to have much to commend it.
cureratesforcows treatedwiththePGFanalogue
Alternatively,all cows intheherd that have calved
luprostiolorcephapirin.
iniheprevious30dayscanbeexaminedusingthe
In all of the foregoing treaiments, the severity of
Metricheck device,and all Metricheck-positive cows
thecase adversely affected the curerate.
treatedwithintrauterinecephapirin7-30daysaffer
calvingRecent trials suggest that this approachresuilts
Pyometra
ina15%improvementin the6-weekin-calfratewhen
compared withuntreated,Metricheck-positive cows.
Pyometra is defined as a progressive accumula-
Prostaglandin F2
versus intrauterine antibiotics.
tion ofpurulentmaterial within theuterusinthe
Sheldon(1997) compared the effectiveness of intra-
presence of an active CL (Sheldon et al 2006).The
uterineinfusion of1500mg oxytetracycline hydro-
condition occurs when uterine infecion is not
chloride,with intramuscular injection
of500μg
eliminated duringthefirst follicular phaseand the
thePGFanalogue cloprostenol,or 3mgestradiol
resultinginflammationmeansthattheuterusceases
benzoate,as treatments for endometritis.He con-
to produce PGE Consequently,the life span of the
cluded that,provided a corpus luteum was present,
CL becomes prolonged indefinitely. ln most cases,
PGFwas the most successful treatment,
both in
pyometra occurs as a sequel to chronic endometri-
terms of cure rate and calving to conception interval.
tis, in which case it is generally a condition of the
Oxytetracycline was moreeffective thanestradiol,
early postpartum period (up to=day 60).Venereal
but marginally less so than PGF.Pepper (1984)
infections that causeembryonicdeath(notably
producedvery similarresultswhenhecompareda
T.foetus) can predispose to a high incidence of pyo-
commercial antibioticpreparation with PGFand
metra in an infected herd aftermating,while occa-
estradiol,
sional cases also occurafterfetal death,maceration
In the trialof LeBlanc et al （2002b),the effect
and superinfection with A. pyogenes.
ofintrauterine cephapirin onfertility ofcowswith
Cows that suffer from pyometra show few or no
endometritiswas better thanforaprostaglandin
signs of ill health. Hence, the disease is generally
analogue[Fig.22.19)ifanimals wereunselected for
discovered (1)whenaffected cowsare exaimined for
thepresenceofa CLbut,when cowswitha CLare
the absenceofcyclicalactivityor(2)at the timeof
pregnancy diagnosisinacow thatwas thought(on
the basis ofnon-returm to oestrus) to bepregnant.
Because the cervix remains closed, the purulent
exudate accuimulates withintheuterine lumen,
although occasionallythere isa slightorinter-
Coniral
mittent purulent discharge.The uterine horns are
Cephapirin
enlarged and distended （Fig.22.20),quite often to
PGFanalogue
0.6
anunequaldegreeowingtoincompleteinvolution
of thepreviouslygravidhornoriorecentconceptual
death.Differentiationofpyometrafromanormal
0.4
pregnancy can sometimes be difficult,but there are
a number of distinguishing points:
The uterine wall is thicker than at pregnancy
·The uterus has a more‘doughy’and less vibrant
0.0
200
300
feel
0
100
400
500
Days in milk
·It is not possible to'slip'the allantochorion
Fig.22.19Survival curves of days topregnancy in cows with
·In some cases ofpyometra,no uterine caruncles
clinical endometritisdiagrosedand treated between20 and33
can be palpated.However,when the infection
Days inmilkwith one intrauterine infusionof500mg of cephapi-
occurred ina non-involuteduterus,involution
rin benzathine,one intramuscular injecticn of PGFor no treat
of the caruncles is delayed and they may remain
ment.(Recrawn with permission from LeBlanc et al 2002b)
palpable for quite a long time
417
Part
51
Subfertility and inferlility
and slippery, rather than sticly and tenacious, and
motile trichoryonads can generally be found in it.
Treatment
When the presence of pyometra is discovered at the
time of pregnancy diagnosis, the decision is often
made to cull the cow at the end of the current lac
tation. Treatment, if undertaken, is with PGF (or
analogue),which results in regression of the corpus
luteum, dilation of the cervix, cxpulsion of the puru-
lent fluid and oestrus 3-5 days later. Provided that
the condition is not too long-standing and therapy
is instituted quickly there is areasonable possibility
that the cow will eventually conceive again.However,
long-standing cases are associated with more severe
degeneration of the endometrium, reducing the
chances of subsequent conception. Roberts (1986)
d e m s  s oss
nosis,while the presence of perimetritis precluded
subsequent conception.Nielson (1949)and Roberts
(1971) quoted subsequent conceptionrates of51%
and 46% respectively. There may be advantages to
the use ofintrauterine cephapirin in conjunction
with PCF and multiple treaiments of PCF (± ce
phapirin treatment) at=10-14 day intervals has
been recommended if the cow is to be salvaged for
future breeding (Parkinson et al 2007).
Fig. 22.20 Cow's uterus with pyometra. Note the distended
Retained fetal membranes
horns and a corpus luteum present in the right ovary,
indicated by the arrow,anc fibrin tags over the dorsal surface
RFM is a recurrent theme in consideraiions ofthe
of the uterire horns and body.
metritis-endonetritis-pyometra conuplex of dis-
eases. lt is a common complication of bovine par-
turition and, although not of great consequence
per se,its role in predisposition to infections of the
·Transrectal ultrasonography will demonstrate the
uterus means that RTM is an important contributor
absence of a fetus and the presence of a 'speck-
to bovine infertility.
led' echotexture of the uterine contenis compared
with the black anechoic appearance of nornal
fetal fluids.
Aetiology and pathogenesis
If there is any doubt about the differentiation
RFM (Fig.22.21) occurs when the norinal processes
between pyometra and pregnancy, the cow should
of dehiscence and expulsion fail to take place.There
beleftuntreated andre-examined later for evidence
appear tobe three main factors involved in the sepa
ofchange.Pyometra associated with T. foetus
ration and expulsion of the fetal membranes:
infectionpresents features that are different from
·maturation of the placenta
those previously described. Uterine pus is, as a rule,
much more copious and may attain a volume of
·exsanguination of the fetal side of the placenta,
many litres.It is generally more fluid and is greyish-
when the umbilicus ruptures, which causes collapse
white or white. The uterus undergoes much greater
and shrinkage of the trophectodermal vili and their
dlistension.The mucus occupying the cervix is noist
physical separation from the maternal crypts
418
Chapter
221
 Infertility and subfertility in the cow
Table 22.7 Publ shed incidenres of retention of afterbirth
Study
Country
Incidence (%)
Muller&Owens(1974)
USA
7.7
Pandit et al (1981)
India
8.9
Arthur & Abdul-Rahim
SaudiArabia
6.3
(1984)
Bendixen et al (1987)
Sweden
7.7
Mee(1991)
4.1
Zaiem et al (1994)
Tunisia
15
Esslemont&Peeer
UK
(1993)
Esslemont & Kossaibati
UK
3.6
(1997)
Xu&Burton（2000)
NewZealand
1.6
Morlon(2000b)
Australia
4.7
McDougall (2001)
New Zealand
1.7
the feto-maternal interface.The surrounding and
engulfing of the caruncle by the cotyledon pro-
vides physical anchoring(Liler &Fecteau 2007).
Detachment of the membranes requires release
ofthe cotyledon fromthe caruncle by disruption
of the physical and cellular arrangements that are
present during pregnancy.
Fig.22.21 Cow with retained fetal membranes.(Courtesy of
Preparatory changes for the release of the fetal
J.Malmo.)
membranes arenotconfined totlie peripartum
period but begin during the last stages of gestation
·uterine contractions,which aid in the exsan-
guination of the fetal side of the placenta and
dependent upon a critical sequence of changes in
aid in thephysical separation of theplacenta by
ihe concentrations ofprogesterone and oestrogen
distorting the shape of the placentomes (thereby
and theratiobetween theirconcentrations(Agthe&
causing‘unbuttoning' of the cotyledon from the
Kolm 1975,Chew et al 1977,1979,O'Brien &Stott
caruncle) and attempting to expel the dependent
1977,Stott&Rheinhard1978)andsteroidreceptors
and detached parts of thefetal membranes.
(Boos etal 2000).'1hepresenceof subnormaloestro-
Hence the factors that causeRFM are those thatinter-
gen (Laven & Peters 1996, Wischral et al 2001a) and
fere with the detachment of the fetal microvilli from
oestrogen receptor (Boos et al 20o0) concentrations
the maternal cotyledons and those that interfere
is therefore considered as a key component of the
with the patterns of uterine contractilityparticularly
mechanism that leads to RFM.
of third-stage labour. The main aetiological factors
Physical changes that occur in association with the
associated with RFM are summarized in Table 22.7.
release of the fetal membranes include flattening of
the maternal crypt epithelium (Bjorkman & Sollen
Detachment of the placentome
1960) and, in the last week of gestation, a reduction
in thenumber of binucleatecells in theurophecto-
The primary mechanism by which the caruncle
derm (Gross et al 1985, Gross & Williams 1988).
and cotyledon of the placentome are anchored to
Relaxation of the superficial layers of the cotyledon is
each otheris theinterdigitation offetal and mater-
induced by proteases(Eiler&Fecteau 2007) and col-
nal villi and the presence of adhesive proteins at
lagenase, whichbreak down the type I and Ill collagen
419
Part
Subfertility andinfertility
thatprovidesthe tensile strength to the caruncu
damage to lipids,protein and nucleic acids
larcrypts (Booset al2003).Likewise,the anchoring
(Kankofer&Guz2003).ltis probably for this rea-
attachmentsbetweenthefetalandmaternalvilliare
sonthat dietafydeficienciesofantioxidants such
alsodisrupted bycollagenases.Failureofproteolysis
asselenium andvitaminEpredisposetoretained
isconsideredtobe akeyfactorinfailureofmem-
membranes(Brzezinska-Slebodzinska 2003,Mee
brane detachment although,curiously,there is no
2004,Bourne et al 2007).Excess PGE synthesis
differenceinthedistributionof typesI,IIIorIVcolla-
maybea response to maternal stress and oxida
genincowsthatdoordonotretaintheirmembranes
tive injury(Wischral etal200ib);and,as PGE is
(Sarges et al 1998, Boos et al 2003). Inhibition of col-
apotent immunosuppressive agent,its secretion
lagenase activity by exogenous glucocorticoids(Eiler
adversely affects theimmunological environment
& Hopkins 1993) appears to be a major contribuuing
ofthepostpartumuterus.
factor totheretentionofthemembranesassociated
There is increasing evidence that the immune sys-
with induction of parturition with those drugs.
templaysapivotalroleindetachmentofthemem-
Early studies ofcows wihrelainedmembranes
branes(Heuweiser&Grunert1987,Peters&Laven
showedthatchangesinthecompositionofthe'glue
1996a).Neutrophil,macrophage and T lympho-
line'adhesive proteins between the cotyledonary
cyteinvasion of theplacenta occursaroundthetime
and caruncular epithelium （Bjorkman and Sollen
ofdetachment (Gunnink 1984);and there is evi-
1960) are ofimportance in the processof placental
dence that deficiencies in the activities ofeach of
detachment.Proteoglycans are important intercel-
thesecells occurs in cowswith retained membranes
lular adhesion proteins that are present at the feto-
（Kimura etal2002,Miyoshietal2002）.Cows with
maternalinterface:thereisevidencethat the activity
RFM alsoproducereducedquantitiesoftheneutro-
oftheenzymeβ-N-acetyl-glucosaminidase(whichis
phil attractantinterleukin 8（Miyoshi etal2002)
responsibleforthemetabolism ofproteoglycans)is
and other cytokines(Slama etal 1993,Davies et al
reducedin cowswith RFM(Kanloferet al 2000).
2004).Moreover,in cowswith retained membranes,
Changes in synthesis and metabolism of prosta-
the activity ofthe neutrophil anti-endotoxinpro-
glandinsE andFare also associatedwith theprocess
tein, acyloxyacyl hydrolase, is reduced (Dosogne
of delachment. Circulating concentrations of PGFM
et al 1999), making cows at greater risks to the
(13,14-dihydro,15-keto PGFa stable metabolite
effectsof endotoxin from bacteria that proliferate in
ofPGF)arehigherand thoseofPGEMarelower
the uterus.Finally,as leukocytes contribute to the
innormalcows than inthosewithretainedmem-
collagenaseactivityoftheparturientuterusreduced
branes (Wischral etal200lb).Placentomesfrom
leukocyte activity in cows with RFM maybe a con-
cows with retained membranes produce less PGF
tributor to thereductionin collagen proteolysis in
andmorePGE,invitrothandothosefromnormal
these animals.
cows(Gross et al 1987),whilethere is also inter-
Therole of the cells of theimmune systemmay be
conversion ofPGF to PGE in cowswithretained
duein part to theroleof MHIC-I antigens in the pro-
membranes （Kankofer et al 1994).Moreover,PGE
cessofplacental detachment.It hasbeenpostulated
secretion continues after parturition,as theretained
thatmaternalrecognition of fetal MHCantigens
membranesretain a degreeofviabilityforsome days
provides an initialtriggerforplacentalseparation
（Eiler&Fecteau 2007).PGF secretion inplacental
（Daviesetal2004,Eiler&Fecteau2007）,sinceMHC
tissuefromnormal cows isresponsiveto stimula-
classIcompatibilitybetweenacow andherfetus
tionby oxytocin,whereas that from animals with
hasbeen associatedwith anincreased incidence of
RFM is not (Slama et al 1994).Deficiency of PGF
placental retention.Joosten & Hensen (1992) sug-
synthesis is likely tobe the consequience of a lack of
gestedthat this indicates thatalloreactivity 1othe
maternal oestrogen synthesis(Wischral etal2o0ia),
fetalmembranesbyihedamisa significantevent in
resultinginafailureofaccumulationofprostaglan-
the detachment of theplacenta.
din precursors(arachidonicand linoleicacids) in
placentaltissues(Wischraletal2001b).
Incidence andpredisposing factors
Failureofoestrogensynihesisintheplacenta is
associatedwith inadequate placental or fetal anti-
TheresultsofsurveysofincidenceofRFmareshown
oxidantaciivity(Kankofer &Maj 1997,Wischral
in Table 22.7.The overall incidence is =6-8%(except
etal2001b;Guptaetal2005),in terms of peroxide
inanimalswith dystocia,inwhichtheincidence is
420
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
Table22.8Factorswhichpredisposetoretainedfetalmembranes
Abortion,especiallywhere thecause isassociatedwithplacentitis
Abnormal gcstation length;cither prolonged or shortened
Dystociarimaryuterineinertia,deliverybycaesareanectin
Fatty liver,possiblybecauseitpredisposestouterineatony
Deficienciesofselenium/vitaminEor,possibly,vitaminA
Failure of placental maturation
Twinbirthsand inducedcalvingsarecommonlyassociated
withretenticnof fetal membranes,as theplacenta hadnot
completed the maturational changes that arerequired for
normalseparation
Heat stress,whichcanresultinshortenedgestations,canalso
result in increased incidencesofretained fetal membranes
Abnormalitiesofoestrogen:progesteroneratio inlate gestation
Secondary inertiacausedbyhypocalcaemiaisweaklyassociatedwithretentionof thefetalmembranes,whichisprobably
because of the associationof both with dystocia
muchhigher:25-50%).Thelowestincidences are
fetus andmouldssuchasAspergillus orMucor spp.,
fromtheLiK(<4%)andNewZealand(<2%)
or genital infection around the time of parturition
Anything that interferes with the process of matl-
(Roberts1971,1986).Retentionisalsomorelikely
rationoftheplacentomes,orcausesbirthtooccur
tooccurwhenmanycowscalveinthesameaccom
before maturation is complete, results in RFM.
modation in quick succession, leading to a build
Prematurebirthisverycommonlyassociatedwith
up ofmore pathogenic contaminant organisms
retention.Cattle twins are usually slightly prema-
(group C streptococci, E. coli, Stapiylococcus spp
ture;hence,30-50%oftwin birthsarefollowed
Pseudomonas spp. and A.pyogenes) in the environ-
byretention(Morrison&Erb1957,Erbetal1958.
ment.Such outbreaks ofretention have alsobeen
Breden&Odegaard1994).Likewise,whentwinning
associated with meiritis and calf scour(Roberis
isinduced by embryo transfer,an increased inci
1986).Laven & Peters （1996)considered that
denceofretentionoccurs(Andersonetal 1978).ltis
A.pyogenes should only be considered causal of
for thisreasonthatprematureremovalofthecalfby
retention,when there is evidence ofa significant
caesarean section(Boos etal2000)and induction of
degree of placentitis.Where placentitis results in
prematurecalving(Bellows etal 1994,Mansellet al
retention,it is due to inflammatory swelling of
2006)also causeretention.
the caruncle and cotyledon, impaired endome-
Likewise,heat stress can reduce gestation length
trialsecretory activityandimpairedmyometrial
and increase the incidence of retention of theafter-
contractility.
birth in dairy cattle.Thus,Dubois & Williams
Retention also occurs when there is enlarge-
(1980) found that cows that calved during thewarm
ment of the placentomes in the absence of placen-
season in Georgia,USA,where themean daily tem-
litis. Such enlargement may occur in the presence
perature was 26C, had a reduction of 2.82 days in
ofoedema of the chorionic villi,hyperaemia of
gestation length and an incidence of retention of
the placentomes, advanced involution of the pla-
24.05%,comparedwith 12.24%for theremainder
centomes in postmature fetuses and prepartum
of the year.The gestation lengths for retaining cows
necrosisofthevillous tipsofthe fetalplacen-
were, on average,5.25 days shorter than those of
tome（Grunert 1984,Paisley etal 1986,Laven &
non-retainingcows.
Peters 1996).These abnormalities are considered
Grossplacentitis is also associatedwithretention
tomechanicallypreventtheseparationoffetaland
ofthemembranes.Placentitis andretention of the
maternalvilli.
fetal membranes occur incases ofabortion due to
LIterine inertia,particularly where it results in
Brucella abortus,Salmonella Dublin,Campylobacter
inadequate uterine contractionduring theperiod
421
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
ofthird-stagelabour,isvariablyassociated with
concluded thatreproductivedysfunctionmightnot
retention.Early studies (Benesch I930,Jordan
beasimportantaspreviouslythoughtincattlegraz-
1952,Venable & MacDonald 1958)associated
ing pasture moderately deficient in selenium.
impaired uterinecontractility withretention,espe-
Finally,a number of other factors havebeen asso
ciallywhere secondary uterine inertia occurs as a
ciated with reiained membranes.There is some evi-
resultof dystocia.Not all studiesagree with this
denceofahereditarypredisposition1oretention of
view,however（Zerobin&Sporri1972,Martineial
the fetal membranes. Cows of the beef breeds are
1981,Paisleyetal 1986),as,while inertia may be
much lessoftenaffected than thoseofdairybreeds
associatedwith aretardationofdelivery,themem-
andin thelatter theincidence ishigherinAyrshires
braneshaveundergonenormal maturation.Hence,
than in Friesians.Old cowsare more affected than
Grunert(1984)consideredthat fewer than1%of
young ones.Springtime calving exerts a predisposing
casesofretentionwerecausedbyuterineinertia
influence;thismightbeconnectedwithavitaminA
and that,even when inertia had occurred,detach-
deficiency,whichhas beenshown toproducereten-
mentof theplacentawas easily accomplished.On
tionunderexperimental conditions.Exercisemay be
the other hand,dystocia （Eiler & Fecateau 2007)
associated witha reducedincidence of RFM(Lamb et
and fetotomy(Wehrend etal2002)are consis-
al1979,Bendixenetal1987),although thereareals
tenilyassociatedwithretention,towhichinertia is
studies(Bellows et al 1994) that do nol support this
likely tobea significantcontributor.Uterineiner-
concept.Animals thathave previouslyhad RFM are
tia caused by gross overstretching of the myome-
trium(e.g.in animals with hydrallantois)has been
The incidence ofretained membranes is higher in
more definitely associatedwithretention(Arthur&
genetically high-yielding dairy cows and cows on
Bee1996),although the abnormalities ofplacenta
highnutritiveplanes atparturition aremoreprone
and fetus in such animals suggest that other fac-
toretention(whitmoreetal1974),asarecowswith
tors arelikelytobeinvolved.Llterineinertia dueto
disorders ofcarbohydratemetabolism (fatcow syn-
hypocalcaemia hasalsobeen associatedwith reten-
drome, ketosis, displaced abomasum) around the
tion（e.g.Grohn et al 1990,Arthur & Bee 1996,
time ofcalving(Melendezetal2003).
Wilde 2006).However,intervention studies,in
which cows have been given calcium as a prophy-
lactic or treatmentforRFm,have generallynot sup-
Clinical features
portedtheview that hypocalcaemiahasa critical
Systemiceffects
rolein thepathogenesis of the disease(Hernandez
etal 1999,Melendez et al 2003,Gundelach &
The effect of RFM depends largely upon the degree
Hoedemaker 2007).Likewise,Morion（2000)did
ofuterineinfection thattakesplace.Uncomplicated
notassociateclinicalcases ofhypocalcaemia with
casesmaybeoflinlemoreconsequencethanthe
retention ofthe membranes.
inconvenience of foul smelling membranes gel-
There is evidence ofa high incidence ofretained
ting in the way of milking, although morbidity,as
fetal membranes when cowsdiets are deficient in
denoted by some temporary impairment of appe-
selenium（Trinder etal 1973,Julien etal 1976a,b;
tite andreductionofmilkyield,hasbeenestimated
Brzezinska-Slebodzinska 2003)and/or vitamin E
to be 55-65% of cases.In an important early inves-
(Allison&Laven 2000,Mee 2004,Bourneetal
tigation ofthe morbidity of RFM,Palmer （1932)
2007).Correctionof dietarydeficienciesor supple-
observed the pathogenicity of retention in 44 cattle.
mentary feeding of these substances is commonly
During the fortnight after calving, appetite was good
associatedwithareductionoftheincidenceofreten-
in 31.8%, fair in 54.5% and poor in 13.6%;body
tion(Weiss 1994,Wilde2006).Nonetheless,some
weight was unaffected in88.6%.
other studies (e.g. Gwazdauskas et al 1979) found
Mortalityhasbeenestimatedasbetween1-4%of
no reduction in RFM after prepartum supplementa-
cases(Arthur1975,Roberts1986),normallyrelated
tion with selenium.Hence,itis concluded therefore
tothe severity of themetritis that occurs.Cowswith
that selenium deficiency may be a cause ofa high
RFMthat havecalvedspontaneously afteranormal
incidence ofRFM in certain deficient areas,but that
length of gestation generally depart littlefrom nor-
sporadiccases of retention are not associated with
malhealth.On theother hand,when retention fol-
selenium deficiency.Wichtel （1998a,b)similarly
lowsextensive obstetricinterference for dystocia,
422
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
aseveremetritis andtoxaemiacansupervenewithin
intervalanddaysfromcalvingtofirstservice.Various
2-3days that,if untrealed,can be fatal.Whether
studies have confirmed these findings (Bartlett
these casescanbedirectly aitributed totheretention
etal1986,Joostenet al1988,Borsberry&Dobson
is,however,unclear, since similar cases might have
1989a,Esslemont & Peeler 1993,Kossaibati &
been equally illifthe fetalmembranes had been
Esslemont 1997, McDougall & Murray 2000,
removed at the tine of delivery. Clinical signs and
Morton2000b,Xu&Burton2000).Inthesestud
treatmentofmetritis arediscussedonpage410.
ies,RFM typically extended the calving-conception
interval by 25-30 days,reduced conception rates to
first-serviceby 10-15%and increasedthechances
Durationofretention
ofbeingculledforfailure toconceiveby5-18%
Cowsthatfail todeliver themembraneswithin 36
ForBritish dairy herds,the economiccosts ofa case
hours or soarelikelytoretainthem for 7-10 days.
ofRFM have been estimated as 300 (Kossaibati
Myometrialcontractionslargelyceasefrom36hours
&Esslemont1997)to 475（lo0stenetal1988).
after thebirthof thecalf so,if themembranes have
Datafrom thestudiesofMorton(2000b)and Xu&
notbeen expelled by this time,freeing of the fetal
Burton(2000)on theeffectsofRFMon subsequent
villifromthematernalcrypts eventually occursas
fertility are summarized inTable22.9.
a result ofbacterial putrefaction.Thisprocessstarts
within24hoursofbirthbuttakesseveraldaysto
Treatment
complete.Natural sloughing of the matermal carun-
cles alsocontributes to the subsequent dehiscence of
The treatment of animals with RFM has long been
the membranes, such that eventual expulsion of the
acontentious subject.A number ofapproaches
membranes dependsupon uterineinvolution(see
havebeen taken to animals with this condition,
Ch.7).The duration ofretention seemsto depend
including:
on several factors,such as the extent of the areasof
·manualremoval
attachment of thefetalmembranes,therateofuter-
·administration of ecbolic agents
ineinvolution,theamount ofuterine exudate and
the proportion of the afterbirth that had already
·no treatment
passed through the cervix when retention began.
treatment formetritis/endometritisbut nospecific
treatment ofretention itself.
Effectsonfertility
RFMisnot,ofitself,associatedwithimpairedsubse
quentfertility.ThiswasfirstdemonstratedbyPalmer
Table22.9Effectofretainedfetalmembranesonsubsequent
(1932),who compared the fertility of 44cases of
fertility（fromXu&Burton2000.Morton2000b)
RFMwith44cowsintheherd thathadcleansednor-
mally,finding that there was no significant differ-
Retained
Not retained
(%)
(%)
enceinthesubsequentbreedingrecordsof thetwo
groups.A consensus of veterinary opinion has devel-
Xu&Burton2000
oped,which supportsPalmer'sfindings that uncom-
(New Zealand)
plicated retention does not significantly affect the
3-weeksubmissionrate
71
08
fertilityofcowsihatarematedbeyond60days
First-service conception
6E
53
from the last calving.The significance of retention
is, therefore,dependent upon the degree of metritis
rate
that occurs. Sandals et al (1979) clarified this aspect
Morton2000b
(Australia)
oftheconditionbymeansofaretrospective analy-
sis of652parturitionsof293dairycowsinCanada.
3-week submission rate
72
76
Their study revealed that RFM alone did not impair
First-service conception
39
49
subsequentreproductiveperformance.The animals
rate
thatdevelopedthemetritiscomplex,withorwithout
6-week in-calf rate
50
63
RM,iwverianinrasena
Emptyrate
14
9
open'servicesperconception,calving-first-oestrus
423
Part
51
Subfertilityand infertility
Laven(1995) surveyed themethodsused byBritish
attempted,removal should begentle(DeBois 1982,
veterinariansfor treatingcases ofretention,finding
Watson1988);ideallylimitedtothewithdrawalof
thatmanualremovalwasusedinatleastsomecases
themembranesfrom thegenitaltractaftertheyhave
by 92.5% of respondents. Ecbolic agents (oxytocin,
become spontaneously detached from the caruncles
PGF) were sometimes used by 84.2% of respon-
(Roberts 1986).While, in many animals, spontane-
dents,with15.7%usingestradiolto try topotentiate
ous detachmentmayhaveoccurredwithin96hours,
theeffectsofoxytocin.A few gavecalciumboro-
Roberts(1986) considered that it was quite accept-
gluconate.Of thetreatmentsused tocontrol metri-
abletoleavemembranesfor10oreven15daysbefore
tis,67.5%of respondents used pessaries and 17.5%
removal,if this lengthoftime was neededfortheir
intrauterine infusionsofoxytetracycline.Mostveter-
detachment.Even with such minimal intervention,
inariansreservedparenteralantibioticsforanimals
there appears to be no benefit from removal of the
that were systemically ill,but 18% used them in ani-
membranes(Laven &Peters 1996,Kulasekar elal
mals with no illness.The'no treatment'option was
2004, Drillich et al 2006).In his context, farmers
only used routinely by 1.6% of respondents.
should alsobediscouraged from attempting tounder-
takeforcedremovaloffetalmembranes from their
Manualremoval
own cows,since they arevery likelytousetoomuch
force and to attempt removal too soon after calving.
Thetechniques used formanualremovalofRFM
range from externally applied gentle traction
Ecbolicagents
throughtoforcedextractionand separation of
each cotyledon and caruncle.Manualremovalis a
Manyattemptshavebeenmadetoreduce theinci
superficially attractive method,in that it immedi-
dence of RM,or to hasten thereleaseof the mem
atelyremoves he stinking mass ofrotting afterbirth,
branes once retention has occurred,with ecbolic
therebyimprovingmilking hygiene.However,itis
agents such as oxytocin or PGF,Oxytocin treat-
increasinglywidelyrecognizedthatmanualremoval
ment haslittleornobeneficial effect(Miller&Lodge
is detrimental to the cow(Laven 1995).
1984,Stevens&Dinsmore 1997,Laven et al 1998)
Forced extraction, once commonly practised,is
evenwhen theuterus hasbeenpre-sensitizedbythe
now generallyregardedasbeingcontraindicated.
administration of oestrogenic substances (Moller
Forced extractions can result in damage to the
etal1967,Roberts 1986,Arthur&Bee1996).
endometrium(VanderplasscheandBouters,1982),
ProstaglandinFand itsanalogueshavebeenused
andmore distant partsofthe membranes are often
as ecbolic agents and,in the study of Laven(1995),
left behind (Grunert and Grunert,199o).If fetal
their use was more common than that of oxytocin.
cotyledonsremain attachedafter forced traction,
Prostaglandinsmay assistindetachmentof themem
theymaybecomedetachedlaterandwillremain
branesthrough direct actionsupontheplacentomes
within theuterinelumenasforeignbodies(Roberts,
(Grossetal1986)ratherthanjustby anecbolicaction.
1986).Similarly,theprevalenceandseverity ofuter-
There are some reports of beneficial effects ofPGF
ineinfectionareworseaftermanualremovalthan
soon (1-12h)after calving(Herschler & Lawrence
after conservative treatment（Penavin et al 1975,
1984,Studer&Holtan1986,Zaiemetal1994)but
Bolinderetal 1988,Bretzlaff 1988,Laven 1995);
the consensus is increasingly clear that it is of no
a conclusion alsoreachedbyRoberts's(1986)con-
benefit（Hoplins 1983,Bretzlaff 1988,Gross 1988,
sideration ofthecondition.Roberts alsoconcluded
Garcia etal1992,Peters&Laven 1996b;Stevens&
that the presence of pyrexia was an absolute con-
Dinsmore 1997,Drillich et al 2005).
traindicationto the forcedremoval of fetalmem-
branes.Moreover,forced extraction is commonly
associated with impaired subsequent reproduc-
Treatmentformetritislendometritisonly
tive performance (Ben-David 1968,Bolinder et al
Arthur&Bee(1996)recommended that,inview
1988).
of the poor response to manual removal and the
The current recommendations for he manual
dubious effects of ecbolic agents,uncomplicated
removal of fetal membranes,therefore,are that cows
cases of RFM require noimmediate treatment; only
shouldnot be examineduntil96hours after calv-
thosecowswith signs of metritise.g.pyrexia,nap
ing（Laven 1995,Arthur &Bee 1996)and that,if
petence,reduced milkyield)needtobe treated,by
424
Chapter
22
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
parenteral antibiotictherapy.Anumber ofsubse-
Most oftheserepresent theadverse effectsofenvi
quent studies have confirmed that this is an appro-
ronment, management or feeding upon the repro-
priate treatment regimen (Kulasekar el al 2004,
ductive endocrine axis,since congenital causes of
Drillichet al 2005,2006).Theuse ofparenteral
reproductive endocrinedysfunctionarerare.Nearly
antibioticsforthetreatmentofcowswithmetritis
allmanifest themselves as anovulatoryanoestrus:a
is discussed on page 411.
syndrome that,over recent years,has become one
Traditional practice has been that, after forced
ofthe most significant problems oftheinterna
extraction of RFM or after unsuccessful attempts at
tional dairyindustry.For theindividual dairyherd,
extraction,antibiotics were placed into theuterus in
ahighproportion ofanoestrousanimals delays
an attempt to prevent endometritis. Intrauterine anti-
re-conception,resultinginlonger open periods,lon-
biotics reduce odour(Roberts 1986)but they also
ger dryperiods and an increaseintheproportion of
reducetherateofputrefaction ofthemembranes
animals culled for failure to conceive.ltis no less
and the level of intrauterine phagocytosis(Paisley
significant to the beef indusuy, given theindustry's
et al 1986), thereby prolonging retention (Roberts
critical economic dependence upon regular annual
1986).Administration ofintrauterine antibiotics to
calvings.
cowswhiletheyhaveretainedmembranesdoesnot
Causes ofanoestrus include:
reducetieincidenceofendometritis(Bretzlaffetal
pregnancy
1982),while intrauterine administration of tetracy-
ovarian
inactivity, resulting in anovulatory
clines may worsen subsequent reproductive perfor-
anoestrus
mance(Moller etal 1967,Duncansson 1980,Garcia
failure toobserve oestrusor ovulation thatisnot
etal1992,Goshen&Shpigel2006),duetoirritation
andpH damage totheendometritim(Eiler&Fectau
accompanied bysigns of oestrus('silent heat')
2007).Furthermore,some of the antibiotics that
·cystic ovarian disease,which can result in
are present inintrauterinepessaries areinactivated in
anoestrus,or other abnormal patterns ofrepro-
the presence of the debris that is contained within the
ductivebehaviour
uterus (Paisley et al 1986, Laven 1995); a problem
·miscellaneous conditions, such as spontaneous
that is often exacerbated byveterinariansfailing touse
prolongation of the life span of thecorpus luteum;
therecommended dose (Laven 1995).Hence,there
that associatedwithinfectionhasbeendescribed
appears to he lile to recommend the use of intrauter-
above.
ine antibiotics while retained membranes are present.
AllcowsthathadRFMrequireexamination and
Pregnancy
treatment for endometritis before breeding: ide-
allytowardstheendofthevoluntarywaitperiod.
I isremarkablehow often pregnant cows,many in
Diagnosis and treatmentofendometritisis discussed
advanced gestation,are presented for examination
on pages 415-417.
for the cause of anoestrus. Most commonly, this
occurswhen datesofartificialinseminations ornat-
Collagenase
ural-servicematingsarenotrecordedbutacciden-
tal situations,such as thebull thatbreaks through a
Infusion of collagenase solution into the stumps of
fence oranimals hat havenot beencastrated,areby
theumbilicalarteriesoftheretainedmembraneshas
nomeansrare.Hence,wheneveranoestrouscowsare
proved an effectivemeans of treatment on an experi-
mental basis.Although noilicensed foruseincattle,
overlooked, however adamantly the herd manager
collagenase is used siccessfully to treat RFm in the
protests the impossibility of its occurrence.
mare(see Ch.26 and Eiler &Fectau 2007).
Anovulatoryanoestrus
Anoestrus and other functional
causes of infertility
Oestrous cycles, which cease during pregnancy,do
notresume straight away after calving.The high
concentrations ofprogesterone thathaveprevailed
Abnormalities of the reproductive endocrine con-
Lhroughout pregnancy cause negative feedback sup-
trol systems constitutefunctional form of infertility.
pression of the hypothalamo-pituitary axis,with
425
Part
Subfertility andinfertility
theresult thatfollicular activityinthe ovariesof full-
that doesnothaveprominentovarian structures.
termpregnant cows are minimal.Hence,a period
The presence of a large CL is generally associated
of restoration of both gonadotrophin secretion and
with pregnaneyendometritisor pyometra,while
ovarian follicular activity has to occur after calving
thepresence ofcystic ovarian disease isalso char
beforeoestrouscyclescanberesumed,andaperiod
acterizedbyenlargementoftieovary.Oldcowsfre
ofpostpartumanovulatoryanoestrusisanormal
quentlyhaveroughened,irregularovariesbecause
aspect of bovine reproduction (see Ch. 7).
the presence of old corpora albicantia. CLs are dif
However,clinical anoestrus doesnot only occur
ficult topalpate or to visualize by ultrasonography
in the early postovulatory period,while the ovary of
ity.Other cows,which have started to cycle at the
thefreshly ovulatedcowcanbedifficulttodifferen-
normal time afier calving, may relapse back into
tiate from an inactive ovary(although thepresence
anoestrus,often in response to nutritional (includ-
ofuterine toneandvaginalmucusshouldmake
ingmicronutrient)deficiencies.These animals are
the differentiation clear). Mill or blood progester-
associated with significant economic losses,espe-
onecanhelp todetermine whetheractiveluteal
ciallyif theirreturn toanoestrus occurs afterthestart
structures are present,with the development of
of thebreedingperiod,inwhichcasetheir failureo
cowside'ELiSA tests giving the potential for this to
return tooestrusmaywell beregarded asa sign that
be done while the cow is being examined (Casetta
theyhave successfullyconceived.
1991,Keltonetal 1991)
Anoestrus is therefore a problem inasmuchi as it
impinges upon the period when animals need to
Predisposingfactors
bere-bred.when this occurs,it is considered to be
pathological,and thus needs treatment.At the herd
Anovulatory anoestrus is a multifactorialproblem,
level,it is the duration of anoestrus in each indi-
which occurs inresponse to a range ofmanagemen-
vidualcow anditsprevalencewithintheherd thal
talornutritional deficiencies.Majorfactors include:
determinethe significance ofthe'condition'forthe
·Breed:Thetime takenfor re-initiation of oestrous
maintenance of regular calving patterns.
breeds（36-70 days)than in dairy breeds（10-45
Clinical findings
days). Genetic differences are partly responsible
for this difference,as indeed they are for differ-
Theclinicalhistoryisnormallyeitherofanani
ences between dairy breeds,although there are
malthat:(1)hasnot beenseen inoestrussincethe
concurrent effects of nurrition and suckling
time ofcalving,(2)started having oestrous cycles
buthas subsequently ceasedor(3)isfound tohave
Season:Autumn-calving cows have ahigherinci-
relapsed into anoestruis when presenled for preg-
dence of anovulatory anoestrus than do spring-
nancy diagnosis.
calvinganimals[Marion&Gier1968,Oxenreider
On examinationperrectum,theovariesofaffected
&Wagner1971).Whether this isdue10adirecl
cows are small,quiescent,flat and smooth.This is
effectofphotoperiodonthereproductiveendo-
especially so in first-calved heifers. On the other
crine systems(such as occurs in the sheep)or to
hand,some anoestrous cows have relatively large
indirect effects(such as through nutrition)has
follicles (up to a pre-maturation size of 1.5 cm) pres-
been a matter of debate.Climate,in terms of
ent.Depofanoestrus canbeestimated,to some
extremes of temperature,rainfall,etc,is a signifi-
extent,byihesize of the ovariesand thedegree of
cant component of the effects of season
development ofthestructureswithin them(Nation
·Nutrition: Imbalances between the energy require-
etal1998).Thus,cowswithvery small,inactiveova
mentfor lactation and the energy availableinfeed
ries thiat are devoidof any significant structures (i.e.
is probably the main cause of anoestrus.Protein is
no palpable follicles or luteal structures) are consid-
less commonly limiting, unless gross deficiencies
eredtobeinagreaterdepthofanoestrusthanthose
occur.Energy-relatedmetabolicdisorders,such as
with larger ovaries containingpalpablefollicles.
fatcow syndrome,fattyliver andketosis are also
Differentiationmustbemadefrom othercauses
relatedtoanovulatoryanoestrus.Veryhighmet-
of anoestrus and from ovaries that are functioning
abolicworkload,suchas occursinhigh-yielding
normally,butareataphaseoftheoestrouscycle
dairycows,isalso associatedwithanoestrus,even
426
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
when the energy and protein requirements of
Pathogenesis
thecow are fullymet(Mulleretal 19s6,Rind&
Phillips 1998).Traceelement deficiencies(notably
The endocrinemechanisms,which are involved in
magnesium,phosphorus,copper, cobalt and man-
restoration of normal cyclic activity of the repro-
ganese) are commonly associated with anoestrus;
ductive system after calving have been described
sometimes these are causal;others may bereflec-
in Chapter 7. The process is initiated by the hypo-
tive of,oradditivewih,an inadequate supply of
thalamusregaining the ability toproduce GnRH,as
energy (McClure1994)
thenegative feedback effectsof the higli progester
·Stress:Social stressesproduced by group and space
one and oestrogen concentrations in late gestation
management of animals are widely considered to
are withdrawn.There is a rapid increase in follicle-
be a significant contributor to anoestrus(Platen
stimulatinghormone(FSH)concentrationsbetween
etal1995,Albright&Arave1997).Physical stres-
=7and 14 days post-partum,resultingin the emer
sors such as transport (Nanda&Dobson 1990),
genceofthefirstfollicularwave.Whetherthefirst
dominant follicle ovulates depends on the growth
temperature and handling（Thun etal1996)have
also been implicated as limiting factors to repro-
and development of the follicle and the ability of
the pituitary to sustain both an adequate luteiniz-
duction in cattle,as havethestresses of pain and
intercurrent disease
ing hormone (LH) pulse frequency for pre-ovulatory
growth and an LH surge to cause ovulation(Roche
·Lameness predisposes cows to anoestrus,because
2006).Thepostpartumelevation ofFSH secretion
ofits effectsupon nutrition andvia the stresspro-
islargely independent of nutritional factors,so
duced by chronicor unrelieved pain.Lame cows
the extent towhich follicular growth is adequate is
havelongerintervals from calvingtofirst service
largelydeterminedbythesystemicconcentrations
and from calving toconception,and havelower
ofthemetabolichormones,insulin and insulin-like
conceptionrates(Lucey etal1986),lower submis-
growth factor (IGF)-1(Butler &Smith 1989,Lucy
sionratesandlowerfinalpregnancyrates(Morton
2001).Hence,situations in which lowICF-I concen-
2000). Lame cows usually have subnormal feed
trations are present (underfeeding.Holstein genet-
intakes,sooften loseweightrapidly.Flence,where
ics) impedefollicular growth andreduce the chances
lameness occurs during early lactation, affected
ofovulationofthedominantfollicle(Roche2006).
cows are in negative energy balance for a long
RestorationofpulsaileLH secretion andtheLH
period of time. It is likely that there are also cor-
ticosteroid-mediated effects on thereproductive
surgemechanismtakesratherlongerthanthatofFSH.
In the early postpartum period the anterior pituitary
endocrine axis (Ley et al 1994).
isvirtuallyrefractory lostimulationwith GnRH,wit
progressiveincreasesinresponsiveness takingplace
Incidence
overtheperiodbetween=14and28days after calv-
ing (Lamming et al 1979). However, negative energy
True anoestrus is most frequently diagnosed in
balancereducesLHpulsatility（Beam&Butler 1999
high-yielding dairy cows, first-calf heifers,which
Butler 2000), through effects of central hypoglycae-
are still growing, and beef suckler cows. Observed
mia (McClure1994,Funston etal 1995),excesscon-
incidencesofanovulatoryanoestrus aredependent
centrationsofproducts oftissuelipidmobilization
upon thepresenceorabsenceofthefactors that
(Zaaijer&Noordhuizen2001),lowcirculatinginsu-
predispose to the development of the condition.
lin concentrations(McClure 1994)and,possibly,
Thus, a generalized figure for incidence is of lim-
activation ofendogenous opioid antigonadotrophic
itedvalue,sinceitdepends entirely upon both the
mechanisms(Dyer 1985).If thepulse frequencyis
type ofcattle and the management system.Even
adequate,the increasein oestradiol concentrations
within a single system,incidences of anoestrus
necessarytoinducepositivefeedbackand ovulation
varyfrom region toregion,season toseasonand,
will occur. If not,the dominant follicle will undergo
especially,fromyear toyear.Interactionsbetween
atresiaand anewfollicular wavewill be initiated.
nuirient availability,climatic conditions and the
Hence, the interval between calving and the resump-
establishmentof lactationareresponsibleforenor-
tion ofnormalpulsatileLH secretion isakeydeter-
mous fluctuations in theincidence and depth of
minant to regaining the ability to ovulate (Lamiming
anoestrus.
etal19sl)andtheresumptionofoestrouscycles
427
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
In beefcowssuckling contributestotheduration
short-term,affected animals can be treated with
ofanoestrusinbeef cows.The probable explanation
for this is in terms of negative effects of the prolac-
the reproductive endocrine system.Even though
tin that is released in response to sucking（Karg&
suchhormonal treatmentsaretoagreaterorlesser
Schams 1974) upon the GnRH-LH axis.For exam-
extent successful,they can rarely berelied upon to
ple,Radfordetal(1978)demonstrated that theLH
resolvea situationofanovulatory anoestrusfully
release inresponsetooestradiolstimulation at40
(especially at theherd level) unless attention is also
days postpartum was less in suclkled than in non-
paid to alleviating thepredisposingfactors
suckled cows.Likewise,Peters &Lamming(1990)
showed that dopamine (syn. prolactin-inhibiting
Eliminationofpredisposingfactors
hormone) antagonists stimulate,and agonists
inhibit,LH secretion inbeefcows.In sheep,thesit
The most common causes of anovulatory anoestrus
uation isclearer,with autocoid-like actionsofpro-
thatcanbemanagedata farm level arethoserelat-
lactinwithin thepituitarybeinga critical moderator
ing to nutrition and stress.Where micronutrient
ofboth lactational and seasonal anoestrus（Brooks
deficiencies exist in the absence of significantunder-
etal1999),perhapsinconjunctionwith dopamine
feeding,correction of thedeficiency can producea
(Gregoryetal2004)
relatively rapid response.More commonly,effects
Stress contributes to the development of anovu-
oftraceelement deficiency arecompoundedwith
latory anoestrus primarily through its effects upon
gonadotrophin secretion. The effects of stress are
theprimary cause ofanoestrus,itisunlikelythat a
initiallymediatedprimarilythroughcorticosteroid-
rapidresponsewill be achievedbysuddenlyincreas-
mediated pathways（Smith&Dobson 2002)，act-
ing energy intake(Rhodes et al 2o0o).Stimulation
ing through typeIlglucocorticoidreceptors(Breen
ofovarianactivityusuallyrequires3-4weeksof
et al 2004).Not all the effects of stress are corticos-
improvedfeedingbeforearesponseoccurs.Where
teroid-mediated,however,sincethe impairment of
poorresponses areobtained,it isnormally possible
reproductive function that is induced by stress per-
to identify a time when feeding was suboptimal.
sists after adaption and reduction ofcorticoster-
Hence,improvement of overall energy levels in
oidconcentrations towardsrestingvalues(Smith&
the diet usually has to be part of a long-term strat-
Dobson 2002).Corticosteroid-mediated pathways
egy for the farm.Management of the dry period has
inhibitLH pulsefrequencyvia a reductionin GnRH
tobeimproved,so that cows calveintheoptimum
pulsatility(Smithetal2003)andareduction inthe
condition score.Management of thetransition cow
responseofthepituitarytoGnRH(Breenetal2005).
hastobeimproved,sothat shedoesnotsufferfrom
Consequently,thereis impaired preovulatory fol-
licular growth and cestradiol synthesis and a delay
orblock in thedevelopment of the LH surge(Smith
feeding has to be improved,ensuring that supplies
&Dobson 2002, Breen et al 2005）.There are also
andrequirementsareascloselymatchedaspossible,
anumber of corticosteroid-independentmecha-
that feedingregimens areused that will ensure max-
nisms that inhibit LH pulsatility (Debus et al 2002),
includingopioids,corticotrophin-releasinghormone
animals have equal (or,in the case of first-calvers,
(Smith etal 2003),endotoxin-mediated （Debus
preferential)accesstofood.Mostoftheseprinciples
etal2002)andothermechanismsthatpotentiatethe
apply equally to dairy andbeefcows,although the
negative effects of hypoglycaemia upon the central
opportunitiesformodifyingfeedmanagementprac-
neuroendocrine axis.
ticesof dairy cows are usually muchgreater thanfor
beef suckler cows. In beef suckler cows, temporary
weaning and restricted suclling together with the
Treatment
use of progestogens (see below) during the time of
Inthelong term,ahighincidence ofanovulatory
calfremoval haveresulted inreducing the time to
anoestrusin a herd isbest managed by identifica-
the first ovulation post-partum.
tion and correction of thepredisposing factors.For
Alleviation ofother predisposing factors,such as
example, feeding could be improved,micronutri-
stress, can be difficult.Avoiding mixing groups of
ent deficiencies corrected,stress reduced.In the
cowsatcritical timesseemsobvious,yetmanagement
428
Chapter
22
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
of“high'- and low'-yielding groups of cows can
and to remove,so that concentrations decline
make this difficult to achievein practice.Provision
abruptly on withdrawal.At the time ofwriting
ofadequatefeedingspaceismoreeasilyachievable
there are anumber ofsuch devices on the mar-
but reducing group sizes tu nuinbers wlere cows
ket, including de CIDR (controlled intenal drug
can establishnormalsocialhierarchiescanbevirtu-
release),the PRID （progesterone releasing intra
ally impossible.The effects of climatic stress can be
vaginal device)andtheCueMate.Earimplants,like-
reducedbytheprovisionofshadetocowsthatare
wise,arerelatively easytoinsert and,on removal,
heat-stressed.Provisionofshelter to cows thathave
alsoproduce therequiredabruptdecrease incon-
to stand around incold,draughty collectingyards can
centrations.Neither the oral nor injected routes
alsoberemarkably effective.Theincidence of lame-
are practical.
ness can be almost entirely attributed to manage-
In practice,however,rogesterone aloneisnotpar-
ment practices so anoestrus dueto this cause should
ticularly effectivein treatinganovulatory anoestrus,
be regarded as being due to poor management rather
as it failstomeet all the aforementioned criteria
than an inherent pathological problem.
Hence, most progesterone-based therapies have
incorporatedother hormones,
Hormonaltreatment
TheworkofHansel andco-workers(Hansel1981)
showedthat good responses to progesterone treat-
Manydifferenthormonaltreatmentshavebeengiven
mentcanbeachievedwith quiteshortperiods of
to anoestrous cattle in attempts to cause a resump-
administration.Hence,they used a progesterone
tionofcyclicactivity.Themainregimens that have
insert for 7 days,combinedwith PGFtowards the
been developed are based either on progestogens,
time of progesterone removal (in case animals had
relyingontheso-called‘pituitaryrebound’effeclto
activeluteal tissue),and found both good oestrous
restart the cycle,orupon drugs that either cause the
responses in anoestrous animals andgood concep-
releaseofgonadotrophinsorhavedirectgonadouro-
tionratesin cowsthat were in oestrus.
phicactionsthemselves.Theprinciplesthatunderpin
Estradiol has been incorporated into many treat-
successful treatments for anoestrus (McDougall &
ment regimens for treating anoestrous cows. It can
Rhodes2007)are to:
begiven atthe time ofprogesterone withdrawal,
ensure thatcowsare cyclingatthe end of thevol-
as ameans ofaugmenting thebehavioural signs of
untarywaitperiods or at thestart ofthebreed-
oestrus and of helping to ensure that oestrogen con-
ing season, to maximize the chance of a timely
conception
In the most recent variation on this basic protocol,
controlovarian follicle wave development,to
estradiol hasbeengiven au thetime ofplacingthe
ensurethattheovulatoryfollicleismaturebutnot
progesteroneinsertinorder torestart thefollicular
atretic
wave.In this way,thecriterion ofhaving a mature,
non-atretic follicle present at the time of progester-
control thetimingofovulation toallow theuseof
one withdrawalis likely tobe met.In such regimens,
fixedtimeAIortomaximizetheopportunitiesfor
estradiol is given as an ester:typically benzoate or
effectivedetectionofoestrus
cypionate.Most cows subsequentlyexhibitoestrus,
·ensure that the induced corpus luteum is fune-
either asaresult of stimulation of an ovulatory folli-
tionallynormal,in terms ofthe duration of its
cle oras aresult of the behavioural effects of the pro-
persistence and the magnitude of its progesterone
gesterone followed by oestrogen. It is possible for as
secretion.
many as90%of cows that displayoestrous behaviour
Progesterone-based. The use of progesterone to
tohave ovulatoryfollicles,but theproportioncanbe
treat anovulatory anoesirus isbased on theprin-
much lowerincowsthiataretoorecentlycalvedor
ciple that administered progesterone mimics the
have apoorbody condition score.Conception rates
lutealphase ofthenatural oestrouscycles andthat,
arebetween45%and55%ofcowsthathaveovula-
when theprogesteroneis removed,the events of
toryfollicles,s0a maximumof35-45%ofcowswill
thenormal follicularphasewill bestimulated.For
typicallyconceive toa singletreatment.
suchprotocolstobeeffective,rapidand easywith-
Gonadotrophin-based. The use of drugs such as
drawaloftheprogesteroneisessential.Intravaginal
GnRH,human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
progesterone-releasinginsertsareeasy toadminister
andequine chorionicgonadotrophin（eCG)
429
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
by themselves to treat anoestrus has notbeen
Low doses (400-750Iu) ofeCGat the time of
particularly successful. Although eCG is a potent
removal of a progesterone insert have been used
stimulator ofovarian activity,the doses that are
successfullyasa means ofsynchronizingoestrus
effective in stimulating oestrous cycles in anoe-
and treating anovulatory anoestrus,especially in
strouscattle(3000-4500Iu)areaslikely tocause
beef cattleMulvehill&Sreenan 1977,Macmillan&
superovulation as toinitiatenormal ovarianactivity.
Pickering 19s8).However,eCGmust be used with
Hence,ifused in thetreatmentof anoestrus,eCGis
caution in dairy cows,as,even at low doses,there
usuallyusedincombinationwith otherdrugs such
isadegreeofriskofmildsuperovulationandtwin
as progesterone.
Singledosesof GnRHI (Bulman&Lamming1978)
or estradiol at the time of progesterone insert place-
oritsanalogue,buserelin,havebeenusedwithlim
ment wouldproduce a sufficient degree of control of
ited success to treat anoestrusin dairy cows.If used
thefollicular wave to obviatethis risk（Fig.22.22).
by alone,GnRH is only effective in theshort term
Results of this study indicated that results in cycling
there is a follicle of sufficient maturity to be forced
cows were comparable lo those achieved using
toovulateorluteinizein situ bythe induced LH
more traditionalprogesterone+estradiolbenzoate
surge.Hence,itisnotparticularlyeffectivefor cows
regimens,
in deepanoestrus.Nonetheless,evenf ineffectivein
Alternatively,the response to GPG programmes
the short term,theremaybea long-termstimulation
can be augmented by incorporating progesterone
of follicular growthvia enhancedFSH secretion.
into theregimen（Fig.22.23).Anumber of studies
In current practice, the main use of GnRH is in
combination with prostaglandin Fin so-called
GnRHor
PGF2u+
GnRH or Al(fixed time or
'GPG' regimens. GPG programmes are based on
buserelin
eCG(400IU) buserelin lo observed heat)
theinjection ofGnRH tocauseluteinization ofa
follicle,followed=7 days laterby PGFto cause
012345678910
luteolysis,then 2 days later with a further GnRH
Day
P4insert
treatment,tocause ovulation of a newfollicle.In
A
cycling cows, GPG regimens are effective means
of synchronizing oestrus,with acceptable concep-
tionrates(Leanet al2003)at theinducedoestrus
ODB
ODB(1mg)+Al(fiedlime or
(whether using fixed time Al or insemination to
(2mg)
eCG(400IU)
observed oestrus)
In the contextofusing GPGto treat anoestrus,
012345578910
most evidence suggests that cows that are cycling
B
Day
P4insert
respond much better to the regimen than those
thaf are anoesirous (e.g. Maiero et al 2006, Bo
Fig.22.22Synchronization of oestrus/treatment of anoestrus
with(A)progesterone,GnRH andeCG and (B)progesterone
etal2007a).In anoestrouscows treatedwith GPG,
estradiol and eCG.ODB,estradiol benzoate.(Adapted from
ovulationratestothefirst GnRH treatmentarelow
Bo et al2007b.)
and variable,of the order of 40-60%(Stevenson
elal1996,1999).Also,even though~50%ofcows
haveactivelutealstructuresaftercompletionofthe
GnRHor
PGF
GnRH or buserelin to
programme(McDougall et al 2001),a significant
buseralin
non-observed cows:
proportion of these animals have short-lived luteal
Alimmedately or wihin24h
struclures(Gumenetal2003).
Combination programmes. Two problems therefore
01234567891011
exist with current programmes: the banning of estra-
Day
P4insert
diol in the Eu for use in food-producing animals
Inseminateto
and therelativeineffectivenessofGPGprogrammes
observed heats
foranimals in anovulatory anoestrus.In seeking
alternatives to the use of oestrogens, most recent
Fig.22.23Modified GPGregime,plus anintravaginal
workhasfocusedonthe combinations of drugsthat
progesterone insert for treating anovulatory anoestrusindairy
cows orheifers.(Adapted from MicDougall&Rhodes2007.)
canbeusedwithprogesteroneinserts.
430
Chapter
22
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
have shown thatinsertion ofanintravaginalpro-
Re-synchronization. Cows that fail to conceive after
gesterone device at the timeof thefirst GnRH injec-
treatmentfor anovulatory anoestrus willeither
tion improves pregnancy rates (Martinez el al 2002,
return tooestrus in 21daysor willrelapse into
Kawateetal2004,Melendezetal2006,Stevenson
anoestrus.Thelatter cows arefrequently assumed
etal2006,Walshet al2007).Otherstudieshave
tobepregnant.Thesecows,together with cowsthat
indicatedthat thereisnobenefit to theco-admin-
spontaneously relapse into anoestrus,sometimes
istration of progesterone with a GPG regime if cows
called ‘phantom cows’（Cavaleri et al 2000a,b),
are cycling(Rivera et al 2005), but there is a con-
present considerable problens for herd managers,
siderably improvedresponsein cows thatare anoe-
as they either fail to conceive or have a very long
strous (Cavestany et al 2003,Murugavel et al 2003,
open period.
El-Zarkouny etal 2004).In the studyof El-Zarkouny
Managementofsuchanimalsisaimedatpreventing
et al (2004),in which GPGor GPG+ progesterone
their relapse into anoestrus from going undetected.
were given to cycling and non-cycling cows,the
A further placement of intravaginal progesterone
magnitude of the difference between the responses
releasinginserts(eithernew orused onesthat have
was determined by the proportion of anoestrous
been cleaned anddisinfected)after breeding will
cows that had been present in the treatment groups.
allowpositiveidentificationofcows thathavefailed
Itappears that coadministration of progesterone in
l0conceive.Resynchronization regimensadvocate
GPG regimens prevents premature luteolysis afterthe
placementof insertsat 12-14 days(Cavaleri etal
administrationofPCF(Ill-Hwaetal2003,Sakase
2000a;Chebel etal 2006)or 16 days(McDougall&
etal2007)andmakescowsmorelikelytoovulate
Rhodes2007)post mating,for=6 days.Placement
andhave normalluteal function after treatment
oftheinsertdoesnotimpairihe activityof the CL,
(Melendezet al2006).Theeffectsofpre-treatment
so has no adverse effect on pregnancy in those cows
with progesterone have also been studied (Chebel
that haveconceived,butforcows thathavefailedto
etal2006,Bicalhoetal2007)butno clearbene-
conceive, it ensures that they display oestrus when
fit for such regimes in the treatmeni of anovulatory
the insert is removed. Consequently. the proportion
anoestrushaveyetbeen demonstrated
ofcowsthatfail toconceiveorconceivelatein the
Treating anoestrus with GPG + intravaginal pro-
mating period should be reduced.In practice,the
gesterone is a more expensive option than the
resulis(in terms of finalpregnancy rate and reduc-
traditional estradiol+ intravaginal progesterone regi-
tion of days open)achievedbyre-synchrony meth-
mens.Some studies have dropped the second GnRH
odsareless spectacular than would bepredicted
treatment,which would have the effect of reducing
(Cavalerietal200ob),yetitremainsaoption thatis
cost.Murugaveletal(2003)foundnobenefitofthe
ofvalue in some circumstances（Fig.22.24).
second GnRH,whileAlnimer &Lubbadeh（2003)
found higher pregnancy rates in animals that had
Failuretoobserveoestrus
had a second GnRH treatmentthan in those that
had not.However,both of these irials were rela-
TheuseofAlasthemainmethodofbreedingdairy
tively small-scale, so larger studies are probably
needed tofullyelucidatethesituation.McDougall&
oestrus detection fallsupon the staffwho manage
Rhodes (2007) determined that, for dairy herds in
NewZealand,there is a positive cost-benefit of dif-
Al(fixed
Inseminale
ferentiatingbetweenicowsin anovulatoryanoestrus
timeor
toobservyed
(no corpus luteum) from CL-positive cows, so that
observed)
the former can be treated with a GPG+ progesterone
本
regime,while alternative treatmentscanbeusedfor
012
1213141561718192021222324
Day
P4inserd
thelatter.
Many studieshaveshown that theresponses to
Fig.22.24Basicresynchronizationprogrammetoprevent the
any of the foregoingregimens are better in animals
undetectedrelapseinto anoestrusof cowsthathavepreviously
that are well fed rather thian poorly fed. Most evi-
beentreatedforanovulatory anoestrus.Pregnantcows
denceshows thattheresponseisbetterinanimals
areunaffectedbytheprogesteroneinsert,whileoestrusis
whose planeofnutritionapproaches equilibrium
inducedinnon-pregnantcowsor cows that didnotresume
oestrouscyclesin response to theinitial treatment
rather thanbeingin energy deficit.
431
Part
51
Subfertility andinfertility
the herd.Oestrus detection is therefore a critical
Oestrogen concentrations(Lymio etal 2000,Lopez
aspect of dairy herdmanagement for,while good
et al 2004). Inyother words, high-yielding cows
Destrus detection does not necessarily guarantee
have lower oestrogen concentration and areduced
good reproductive performance,poor oestrus detec-
intensity of oestrous behaviour.The extentto
tionmakespoorperformancehard to avoid.Inherds
which lower oestrogen concenurations are due to
thatareusuallynaturallymated,theimportance of
insulin-and ICF-I-mediated deficiencies offol-
oestrus detectionis less critical,largelybeingcon-
licular growth （Butler & Smith 1989,Lucy 2001)
finedtoensuringthatadequatenon-return rates
or to the increased metabolism and clearance
occur after service.
thatoccurs in cows with a high metabolicload
Cows display oestrous behaviour in the absence of
(Sangsritavong et al 2002) is yet to be established.
a bull by mounting and standing to be mounted by
There may alsobe changes in the central nervous
other sexually active cows(see Ch.1).Ulntil recently,
systemthatareunrelatedtoalteredsteroidprofiles
theconsensusviewhasbeenthatmostnormalcows
(Mayne2007).
exhibit oestrousbehaviour at the appropriate stage
ofthecycle[Morrowetal1966,Kingetal1976)and
Oestrusdetection
that,provided appropriateobservationswereunder-
taken (Williamson et al 1972),0estrus detection
Theinportance ofensuringthatoestrus detection
rates in excess of 90% should be achievable. More
is undertaken eficiently has greatly increased: tim-
recently, there has been evidence for a decline in
ing andduration of observationshaveto bemaxi-
the intensity of oestrous behaviour in high-yielding
mized and optimized, there has to be a reappraisal
dairy cows,with a general decline in the number
of thesigns that areinterpreted asbeingindicative
ofmounts,the duration ofeach mountand the
ofoestrousbehaviour（Hleresetal 2000,Kerbrat&
length of time over which mounts occur(compare
Disenhaus 2004) and,increasingly,there is a need
Esslemont&Bryant 1976withvanEerdenburg et al
fortechnologicalaids toimprove theefficiency
2002).The assumption that 100% of cows in phys-
of oestrus detection. lt is also important to recog-
iologicaloestruswill show the classicbehavioural
nize that, as difficulties in detecting oestrus have
signsofstandingtobemounted duringoestrusthere-
increased,the use ofwhole-herd synchrony tech-
foreno longer appears tobe true for high-yielding
niques,which bypass the need for human detection
dairy cattle.Inthe studyofKerbrat &Disenhaus
ofoestrus,has increased.
(2004）,in which continuous video monitoring of
Whetherornotthebehaviouralsignsofoestrus
cowswascomparedwithmilkprogesteroneprofiles
are observed depends upon many factors(Table
（asanindicator orphysiologicaloestrus),only8/15
22.10) and,notwithstanding the changes in the
cows stood tobemounted.Otherreceni studies have
expression of oestrus that appear tobe occurring in
confirmed thatthereductioninintensity and dura-
high-yielding cows,there is much that can be done
tionofoestrousbehaviour hasresultedinlowdetec-
at a management level to optimize its detection.
tion rates using standard observational techniques.
Van Vliet&vanEerdenburg(1996)only observed
Herdsize andcalvingpattern
standing oestrus in 37% of cows,while Dransfield
etal（1998)recorded that24% ofcows had an
In orderforeffective display ofoestrus,theremust
becows that are prepared to mount,as well as cows
duration,comparedwith only 8%with an oestrus
that arepreparedto bemounted.Cowsthatmount
ofhigh intensityand long duration.
are generally those that are coming into, or going
The reduced intensity of oestrous behaviour
outof,oestrus and these,togetherwiththecows that
is explained inpart withreference to preovula-
arein oestrus,associate togetherinasexually active
tory oestrogen concentration.While Glencross
group'(SAG).Cows thatare in dioestrus or are anoe
etal（i9sl)considered thatintensityofoestrous
strousarenotgenerallypresentintheSAG
behaviour was unrelated to oestrogen concentra-
Itisclear that thedurationandintensityofoestrus
tions,morerecent studies(Lopezetal2004)have
increase as the number ofanimals in the SAG
found thatpreovulatory oestrogen concentrations
increases（Hurniketal 1975,Esslemontetal 1980,
are lower in high- than low-yielding cows, and
Kilgour &Dalton 1984), making oestrus detection
thattheintensityofbehaviourisrelatedtothose
easier ina larger group.Systems that have strongly
432
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
Table 22.10 Factors associated with efficiency of oestrus
Wood 1976). Negative effects of increasing herd size
detection
are that the herd managerhas to look after more
cows, so cows tend to lose their individual identity
Time allowed for oestrus detection
How much?
fied nor so closely observed (Waiblinger & Menke
How often?
1999). Likewise, there is evidence for impaired dis
play of oestrus in herds that are too large, or have
When, in relation to the activity patterns of the cows?
groups that change too frequently, fora stable social
Human social factors
hierarchyto developbetween individual cows.
What other activities are happening on the farm at the same
time?
Time and place of observation
What other pressures exist for the herdsman's time?
Is the detector able to recognize the signs of oestrus?
There aretimes and situations when cows exhibit few
Is the detector interested in detection of oestrus or is it 'just
Or no signs of oestrous behaviour, and others when
another job'?
the display of oestrus is more likely to occur. Cows
Calving pattern
are unlikely to display oesirous behaviour while
How many cows?
being held in collecting yards (Esslernont & Bryant
1976), during milking (Williamson et al 1972,
How many cows in the sexually active group?
Pennington et al 1986), while feeding (Pennington
For howmuch of theyear does oesirus cetection have to be
et al 1985, 1986) and while moving along races 0r
undertaken?
lracks.Crowded collectionareas and confined spaces
Housing
may not permit the ready grouping of sexually active
Are cows housed or at pasture?
individuals. Conversely, cows are more likely to dis-
Is thereroom for cows tc display cestrous behaviour?
play oestrus in cubicle yards, in feeding or loafing
Can cows that are not in cestrus avcid being ridden?
areas(Esslemoni & Bryant 1976) or while at pasture
(Williamson et al 1972).
Identification and records
Several studieshave reported that thefloor surface
Can cows beidentified accurately?
is ofimpertanceinthe display ofoestrous behav-
When should individuals be observed for returns to oestrus
iour. Concrete surfaces are more slippery than dirt
after artificial insemination?
surfaces and hence less conducive either to mount
Aids
ing or to being mounted (Britl ei al 1986, Vailes &
Tail paint.heat-mount detectors, clectronic aids, etc.?
Britt 1990),while individuals ihat have previously
slipped on concrete may be unwilling to attempt to
Relative reliance placed on aids and primary observation?
mount in the furure (Albright 1994). Pennington
et al (1985) also noted that themajority of mount
seasonal calving and mating patterns generally have
ings took place in conditions that had the best foot-
much larger SAGs than year-round-calving herds,
ing and were less crowded (Albright & Arave 1997).
and consequently better oestrus detection. In year-
Paddocks that aredry underfoot are anideal place to
round-calving herds only =2% of the cows calve
observe oestrus.
within any given week. ln consequence, there will
The relatively short duration of oestrus is one of
be times when thie sexually active‘group’consists
the main reasons that observation has to be under-
of a single cow, making oestrus detection very dif-
taken both regularly and frequently. Although early
ficult indeed (vanVliet&van Eerdenburg 1996,van
Eerdenburg et al 2002, Kerbrat & Disenhaus 2004).
hours (Tanabe&Almquist 1960), most studies have
Herd size affects the detection of oestrus in two
found ittolast no more than 15 hours (Albrigh&
main ways. Firstly, as herd size [and concentra-
Arave 1997).Esslemont(1974) found that, although
tion of calving pattern) increases, the size of SAGs
the mean duration of oestrus is 15 hours, 20%
increases, making oestrus detection easier. On the
ofcows are in oesirus for less than 6 hours.More
other hand,there is a reduction in the accuracy
recently, Kerbrat & Disenhaus (2004) also showed a
and efficiency ofoestrus detection associated with
mean duration of 14 hours,with a similar range to
increased herd size (Fallon 1962, Esslemont 1974,
that reported by Esslemont.
433
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Ithas long been considered that cows aremore
seen showing behavioural signs,and for their accu-
likelytodisplay oestrousbehaviour duringthenight
rateidentificatiqn
than during the day.Curiously,whenvideoor radio-
telemeiryhavebeen uised to determinepalterns of
Environmentalfactors
mounting,this nocturnal pattern has not been evi-
dent（Amyot&Hurnik1987,Nebel etal 2000).
Patterns of oestrous behaviour vary with tempera-
Indeed,Aibright&Arave1997)concluded that the
ture,with thefrequency ofmounts and thereper-
resultsofstudiesofthetimingofoestrousbehaviour
toireofactivities differingbetweenhot,moderate
wereinconsistentwithsimplediurnalpatterns,and
and coldconditions （Pennington etal 19s5).In
probably should be explained in terms of the peri
cold conditions, mounting behaviour was much
odsof timeforwhichcowswereleftundisturbedby
lessbetween18.00 and06.00than atothertimes
other farm activities.Thus,it may be that thepreva-
ofday,whereas in hot conditions itwasleast dur-
lenceofoestrousbehaviour thatoccursinhoused
ing the hottest part of the day.Pennington et al
cows duringthenightmay simplybe an indication
(1985)alsonotedthat theduration ofoestrus was
of thietimewhenthereisleastother activityonthe
reducedto8-10hoursunder extremeclimaticcon
farm(see alsoWilliamsonet al 1972,Hurniket al
ditions.Certainly,where autumn calvingandwin-
1975,Esslemont&Bryant1976)
ter matingis practised(asin theUK),a shortening
Esslemont(1973)examined theeffectoftheuse
oftheduration ofoestrus andareduction in the
ofa rigidregimen,nvolving threeorfour periodsof
intensity of oestrous behaviour are widely recog-
observation for 15 or 30 minutes,upon oestrus
nized as problems of mating management of such
detection efficiency.With three 15-minute periods
herds.
ofobservation（8.00,14.00 and21.00)a detection
rate of G9.6%was achieved. Increasing the dura-
Humanfactors
tionto30minutesimprovedtherateto81.2%,
whilefour30-minuteperiodsofobservation(S.00
Despite the importance ofgood oestrus detection
14.00,21.00and 24.00) produced the best result of
to the economic performance of the dairy herd,
84.1%.The absolute times ofobservation arenot
itis often regarded as a'chore'thathas tobefit-
criticaland canbevaried to suitthetimetableof
tedbetween themany othertasksthathavetobe
the farm.Van Vliet &van Eerdenburg(1996) sug-
done.Therefore perhapsit is not surprising that
gested that,ifoestrus isobserved when cows areina
inmany situations oestrus detectionefficiency
is poor.On the other hand,where oestruis detec
and when they are undisturbed (ie. after comple-
tion isregarded asapriority task and is under
tion of milking and feeding undisturbed),ata time
takenbyhighly motivated farm staff underideal
whendioestrouscows arerestingandcudding,two
conditionsforobservation,oestrus detectionrates
observations of 30minutes per day would result ina
can be remarkably high.An important prerequi-
detectionefficiencyof74%and anaccuracyof100%
sitefor effectiveoestrus detectionisthereforethe
(vanVliet&vanEerdenburg1996).
provision of enough time to do the job properly
(O'Connor2007)
Identification
With the general decline in numbers of staff
working on dairy farms and the difficulties in get-
Itmust bepossibletoreadily identify the individ-
ting junior staff that have any experience of working
ual from any position, so that the herdsman can
with livestock,there is often a dearth ofperson-
thenrecord the animalnumber immediately and
nel who arecapableofaccurateoestrus detection.
permanently. Good freeze branding on the rumps,
O'Connor (2007) emphasized the importance of
together with numbered collars or large ear tags,
making sure that oneperson is assignedresponsibil-
shouldpreferablybeusedforidentification.Evenin
ity for oestrus detection and ensuring that theper-
small herds,whosestockmen think that theyknow
son is adequately trained to do so.Theimportance
the cows as individuals,many mistakes are made
ofhaving staffwho are trainedto identify oestrus
through misidentification or misrecording.
correctly was shownby Esslemont(1974),who
When observation ismade of housed cows,provi-
found that therewas asignificantlyhigheroestrus
sionofadequatelightingisrequiredforcowstobe
detectionrate by trainedcompared to untrained
434
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
staff. Whiere there is a defined breeding season, it is
Aids to the detection of oestrus
possible to use early (preseason) heats as a means
There are several methods available that can be used
ofretraining staff in the skills of oestrus detec-
to improve the cestrus detection rate. Traditionally.
tion.Many such herds record premating heats,not
these have been regarded as ‘aids',inasmuch as
only to identify anoestrous cowsbut also to allow
they have been adjuncts to human observation of
prediction of the time when the first heat can be
expected during the mating period. Recent changes
oestrous behaviour.With the difficultiespresented
by reduced intensity of oestrus display and the
in the intensity ofbehiavioural oestrus implies that
declining pool of labour with livestock skills, recent
personnel need to be able to recognize a range of
research has concentrated on attempting to fully
relatively subtlebeliaviours as wellasthe classic
sign of standing to be mounted (Heres et al 2000,
automate detection aids,with the intention of obvi-
atingthe need for human detection.
Lyimo et al 2000,Kerbrat&Disenhaus2004).
The length of ihe breeding season affects the abil-
Detection of mounting
ity of herd managers to detect oestrus. Where there
is a short breeding season, detection rates can reach
Detection of mounting can be achieved by mark-
90% or more, because of a combination of a con-
ing the tail head with paini so that when the cow is
centration of staff effort on detection of oestrus and
mounted the marking is disturbed, or by placing a
large SAGs. In year-round calving herds, the disper-
pressure-sensitive device on the tail head to record
salofeffortand the small SAGs mean that oestrus
the act ofmounting
detection rates arerarely better than 6o%;inmany
Tail painting. The technique of tail painting was
cases thiey are less than this.
developed inNewZealand (Macmillan& Curnow
1977) to improve oestrus detection rates. A brittle,
'Silent'ovulations
high-gloss enamelpaint isplaced as a thick layer in
the midline over the sacrum and base of tail (Fig.
Most cows do not display oestrus at the time of
22.25), preferably applied using a brush against
their first postpartum ovulation,because of a lack
the line of the hair to ensure good adhesion before
of progesterone priming (King et al 1976). For the
smoothing in the direction of the hiairline. There
reasons discussed above,it is increasingly com-
should be regular inspection of the paint so that
mon for cows to have low intensity of oestrous
repainting can be done if necessary. When a cow is
behaviour,overa short period oftime,which may
mounted by other cows, the paint is abraded and
notinclude standing to be mounted.Hence,these
relmoved: Submission rates of over 90% and preg-
nancy rates of up lo 60% can be obtained follow-
lation, even though at least some behavioural
ing Al after ohservation of ihe condition of the
signs associated with oestrus will generally have
tail-paint.Some inaccuracies (positive or negative)
beeni displayed.
ofdetectionoccurwhenbetween25% and75% of
Other causes of inadequate display of oestrous
paint remains (Kerr & McCaughey 1984), although
behaviour include heat stress (Gwazdauskas et al
these can beminimized by concurrent direct obser-
1983). Cows sufTering froin ergotism (fescue toxic-
vation for behavioural signs of oestrus.At the tine of
ity') may become suboestrous, while a number of
writing, the use of tail-paint is almost ubiquitous in
nutritional deficiencies, including β-carotene,phos-
Australia and NewZealand.Tail paint has been used
phorus, copper and cobalt, are also said to cause
in the UK,but has proved tobe oflittle overall bene
suboestrus.
fit to oestrus detection rates. This may be because of
lHowever, the most common cause of'silent ovu-
the small SAGs that occur in non-seasonal herds
lationsis a failure of oestrus detection. Hence, once
Heat-mount detectors.A'heat mount' delector such
convinced that cows are not suffering from anovu-
as the KaMaR or Beacon can beused.These consist
latory anoestrus and that there are no pathological
of a sof, translucent plastic dome attached to a rect-
causes of suboestrus,herds with a high incicence
angle ofcanvas in which there isplaced asoft plastic
of'silent ovulations' generally benefit from either
vial ofred dye that isfixedwithadhesivejustcranial
a thorough review of oestrus detection procedures
to the base of the tail (Fig. 22.26). When a cow is
or the use of detection aids such as are described
mounted and the vial is subjected to sufficient pres-
below.
sure, i.e. at standing oestrus, it is compressed, the dye
435
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
Fig.22.25Tail paint applied asanaid tooestrus detection(A)after application to a groupof cows over thecaudal sacral and
taillhead areasand(B)after having beenrubbed offby mounting during oestrus.(Courtesy of I.Malmo.)
Fig.22.26KaMarheat mount detector attached to the sacrum ofa cow(A)before activation and(B)after activation.
escapes and the domebecomes red.Falsepositives
material covered by a low-sheen black acrylic paint.
can occur,when the detectoris activatedbyacow
Thestripis applied tothe sacrum andwhenthecow
rubbingtheundersideofarailorincrowdedcollect-
ismounted the black covering is rubbed off.The
ing yards when a cow that is not in oestrus cannot
reflective strip can then beobserved via an over-
escape the attentions of mounting cows.Detectors
head camera. First-service pregnancy rate was =70%
can alsobecomedetachedwhenplacedonwetcoats
incowsinwhichthedelectionstripwasused,ver-
orwhen thewintercoat isbeing shed.Despite these
sus =40% in cows in which oestrus detection was by
caveais,however,heat mount detectors are widely
observation plus the use of tail paint.
used,withfirst-serviceconceptionratesofmorethan
Morerecently,radio-telemetric
heat-mount
G0%havingbeenreported(Phatak&Touchberry
detectors have become available (e.g.HeatWatch,
1988).There is some evidence to suggest that heat
ShowHeat).In this system, an electronic pressure-
mountdetectorshavebenefitsovertailpaintwhen
sensingsystemislinkedvia aradio-telemetriclink
theintensity ofoestrousbehaviour is low(i.e.as tail
toacomputer data analysissystem,which sorts the
paintrelies on multiplemountings forits removal).
information by cow and generates activity lists (e.g.
Alawneh et al (2006) reported the use of a novel
oestrus, possible oestrus, etc.)(Nebel el al 1995,
oestrus detection-strip thatconsists ofareflective
Walker et al 1995,Dransfield etal 1998).Oestrus
436
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
detectionratesofmorethan9o%,with accuracies of
Conductivityofvaginalfluids
=95% have been recorded using this system (Albright
&Arave1997,Cavalerieial2000a):a figure thatis as
At oestrus,the resistance ofvaginal mucus falls,in
association with therisein oestrogen concentrations.
goodastliebestthatcanbeachievedbybehavioural
Various attempts have been made to use this as a
observations,and isvery much better than national
means of predictingoestrus,although withgenerally
averagesforoestrusdetection.Timingofinsemination
disappoiniing results （Foote et al 1979,Cavestany &
mayneedtobealteredaftertheuseofheat-mount
Foot 1985).The variability in themeasurements may
detectors (i.e.compared to timing after direct obser-
vation). Dransfield et al (1998) suggested an optimal
well berelated tothefact that thetip of theprobe
interval of 4-12hours after the first mounting epi-
with its associated electrode isnot in contact with
vaginalmucus.Kitwoodetal（1993)reporled that
sode,with a significant diminutionofpregnancyrate
the position of the probe within the vagina affects
after16hours.
Furtherwork hasbeen undertaken to develop pres-
impedance readings.When regular examination of
cows can bebacked up with a computer-based data-
suresensors and/ortransmittersthatareimplanted
rather than being affixed to the animal's skin
logging and analysis system,results are better than
(McConaha et al 1994),although no such systems
when‘one-off measurements are made,since,while
most cows exhibit decreases in resistance at oestrus.
arepresently availablecommercially.
most individuals differ in their baseline resistance
during dioestrus.Hence, the measurement ofrela
Activity monitors
tive changes inresistance may be more useful than
During oestrus, the cow shows greater movement
measuirement of absolute values.Nevertheless,Rezac
and locomotor activity,which can be used as a
etal (i991)found thatlowest impedance values
could occur on day-1,0,or+1relative to the day
basis for oestrus detection(Kiddy1977,Schofield
of oestrus (day O).Themain practical limitation to
1990).Pedometer devices typicallycontain a mer
the use of vaginal probesis that itis labour-intensive,
curyswitch that is activatedby themovement of
the cow. They are attached either to one hind leg
requiring daily probing of each cow and cleaning and
disinfection between cows.Experimental implanta-
or,less commonly, to the neck.The accuracy of
tion ofsensorsbeneath thevulvalmucosa hasbeen
pedometers isgreatestwhen activity data isinter-
pretedin relation to thebaclgroundlevel of
attemptedtocircumventtieseproblems(Lewisetal
1989)but,whileresults appearpromisingnofurther
activityoftheindividual animal(Eradus&Braake
developmentofthistechniquehasbeenreported.
1993).However,thielocomotor activity of indi-
vidual cows depends not only upon the stage of
the cycle but also upon the sizeof the SAG(Varner
Other methods
etal 1994),with the result that pedometer sys-
The mechanical nose'.Development of gas-sensing
tems aremore accurate atdetecting oestrus in
systems andwork on theidentificationof pheromone-
groups of animals than in individuals (Roelofs
secreting cells in the perineum of oestrous cows (e.g.
et al 2o05).The accuracy is also affected by the
Blazquezet al 1994) make it possible that direct elec-
interface between the pedoineter and the data
tronicsensingof theodours ofoestrouspheromones,
analysissystem;infrequent extraction ofdata from
perhaps as cows pass a detector during milkingmay
the pedometer (e.g. twice a day at milking time)
be feasible within theforeseeablefuture.
is less effective than real-time acquisition ofdata
Inline progesterone measurement.Delwiche et al
(Lyimo et al 2000,Nebelet al2000).The over-
(2001) reported successful use of an inline biosen-
allaccuracyofoestrus detection achievedwith
sor to measure milk progesterone concentrations
pedomeiers has been increasing overrecent years,
as an indicator of oestrus. Preliminary results sug-
sothat,whileless accuratethancontinuousobser
gest greaterefficiency and accuracy than either direct
vation（Pennington et al1986),it is sufficiently
observation or activity monitors.
accurate to be commercially viable.Firk etal
(2002) have suggested that, if combined with in-
Indirectdetection
linemonitoring ofmilkyield,milk flowrate and
electrical conductivity,theaccuracy ofpedometers
Use of teaser bulls,androgenized steers or cows.
couldbeenhanced.
Vasectomizedorothersterileentiresorandrogenized
437
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
steerscanbeused,eitherequippedwithsomeform
basedonsequentialadministrationsofprostaglan
ofmarking device or in association with ‘heat-
chrony-synchrony-resynchronyregimens,allaim to
larintheUklargelybecauseteaserbullswithgood
replaceinseminationtodetectedoestruswithfixed-
libido present a major safety hazard when allowed
time insemination,whileresynchrony programmes
to run loose with the herd.Furthermore,where
alsoaim toensurethatcowsthathavenotconceived
venereal diseases are present they represent a major
are re-inseminated in a timely manner.
health hazard because of their ability to transmit
Useofbulls:'throwinginthe towel'?Aresponseof farm-
such diseases.Inothercountries,penile deviationis
ers toall theforegoingdifficulties,whichisincreasingly
used as a means ofpreparing sterile bulls.For this,
evident in the lay orfarming-press, is to retreat from the
thepreputial orificeisfreed fromitsnormalattach-
useofAl backtowardstheuseofbulls.Advocatesof this
ments and is relocated some distance from the
idea arguethatitisbettertohaveacowthat ispregnant
midline. Although this procedure is not permitted
toamediocrebuill than tohave a cowthat failstocon-
intheUK,itis considered tobe aneffective aid to
ceive to a high-breeding-value bull.Likewise,they argue
the detection ofoestrus inmany othercountries.Its
thatitisbettertobreedcowsbynaturalservice than
disadvantages include those common to the use of
torequireexpensivepharmacologicalregimenswhose
gonad-intact bulls.Moreover some bulls learn how
outcomesin termsofper-serviceconceptionrates and
toservedespitethepeniledeviation,whileothers
ofnumbersofcowsinvoluntarilyculledforfailureto
desist frommounting at all.These,anda numberf
conceive,givesnobetterresults thannatural service.
other surgical proceduresfor creating marker bulls,
Themaincounterargument to this approachis,of
are described byWolfe(1986).
course,thecessationofgeneticadvancement oreven
Androgenizedcows can alsobeeffective‘teasers
the loss of geneticmerit for key productivity traits.
Itis also important toensure that bulls arehealthy
onateinoilbyintramuscular injectioneveryweek
(in terms ofvenereal disease,bovineviral diarrhoea,
for3weeks,a suitable teaseris prepared，which
etc.),fertileand managed safely.
can be used about 2weeks after thelast injection.
Maintenanceofsexualactivityrequiresrepeattreat-
menit at intervalsbut theseandrogenized cows have
Timing ofinsemination
distinct advantages since they are safer and do not
Faultsof detection
transmit venereal disease
Closed-circuit television.Continuous video recording
A number ofobservers (Hoffmann etal 1974,
canbemadeofthe‘loafing'areasoftheyardwhere
Appleyard&Cook1976),have used milk progester-
cows arehoused,which,solongasthereisadequate
oneconcentrationstoshowthatbetween1o%and
lighting and good animal identification,can beused
15%,orperhaps even22%,ofcows are inseminated
toidentifycowsthatareinoestrus.Whiletheresulis
during the lutealphase oftheoestrouscycle.lt is
of continuous video monitoring can be very good
not surprising that these animals fail to conceive.
indeed,a means of automating the recognition of
However,thesefigures do notinclude those animals
oestrous cowsneeds tobedeveloped(Roelofset al
thatare inseminated during thefollicularphaseof
2005)beforethepotentialof thesystemcanbefully
thecycleat timesthatarenot optimumforgood
realized.
conceptionrates.Bulman&Lamming（1978)found
Use of milk progesterone assays.The return to
that15%ofcowswereinseminatedduringtheluteal
oestrus in non-pregnant cows can be anticipated by
phase but a further 15% were inseminated during
themeasurement ofprogesterone concentrations in
inappropriate stagesof the follicular phiase.
sequential milk samples.Protocols for such mea-
The main reasons for these errors are incorrect
surement regimensare given in Chapter 24.
identification of animals that are in oestrus and
Use of oestrus synchronization and induction
failure to appreciate the true signs of oestrus.
programmes.Because of the difficulties ofmaintain-
Frequently,where large numbers of cows are
ing effective levels of oestrus detection,whole-herd
inseminated at the incorrect time,the oestrus
oestrus synchronizationprogrammes have been
detectionrateis poor, thus generally reflectinga
developed as ameans of circumventing the need for
poor standard of herd management.In such cir-
human observation. These programmes,whether
cumstances,someofthemethodsdescribedabove
438
Chapter
221
Infertilityandsubfertilityin thecow
shouldbeusedtoimprovetheoestrus detection
Oestrus
Ovulation
rate in the herd.In seasonally calving herds, the
100
emphasis that is placed upon attaining high sub-
mission rates during the first few weeks of the mat-
ing period is such that many cows are presented
forinsemination that arenotinoestrus.However,
2
most of these cows are correctly identified a few
days later, so the effect upon pregnancy rates is far
less significant (see Ch.24).
Optimaltimingofartificialinsemination
Oestrusisshort inthecow,with ovulationoccur-
ring 10-12 hours after the end of oestrus. During
thenext 6hourstheoocytetravels aboutathirdof
theway down theuterinetube,duringwhich time
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
fertilization occurs,about 30 hours after the onset
Hours from first sign of oestrus
of oestrus (Robinson 1979, Roelofs et al 2005).
This figure has remained remarkably constant in
Fig.22.27 Conception ratesin the cow:the effect of the time
viewof thechanges in oestrousbehaviour that have
of inseminaticn in relaton to oestrus andovulation.(After
Trimberger 1948.)
occurredoverthepast30years,althoughsomecows
do exhibit significant prolongations of theinterval
between theonsetofoestrus andovulation(Bloch
etal2006)
1977b),but,when multiple cysts are present, they
Thebest conception rates occur if insemination
canbesmaller（>17mm diameter)(Garverick2007).
is carried out in the middle to the end of standing
The definition normally excludes the presence ofa
oestrus,i.e.13-18 hours before ovulation (Nebel
functional CL (Youngquist 1986).
etal 1994,Maatje etal 1997,Nebeletal2000).
In the normal postpartum cow, follicular waves
Traditionally,therecommendationforthetiming of
start soon after calving,with ovulation of the domi-
insemination has followed thea.m.-p.m.guideline
nantfollicleofoneoftheearlywaves.Cysticovarian
（Trimberger 1948:Fig.22.27).which is that cows
disease[COD)is the clinical manifestation of dys
observed in oestrus in the morning should be sub-
function ofthisprocess,arisingasaresult ofanovu
mittedforAIin theafternoonandcowsobservedin
lation ofa dominant follicle.Sakaguchi et al (2006)
oestrus during the afternoon should be submitted
suggested that the development of cyst is synptom-
for Al the following morning. Cows may conceive
atic of a more generalized disturbance of ovarian
if they are inseminated at the beginning of oestrus
function,whichrangesfrom aseriesofanovulatory
oreven36hours aftertheendofoestrusbutcon-
folliclewavesofnormalduration,through tempo
ceptionrates arereduced and,iflateinsemination
rary appearance of anovulatory cystic structures that
undertaken,thereis anincreased riskofembryonic
develop andregress ina cyclical manner,to anovula-
death.Nebel etal (2000) suggested that,if the time
tory cysts that persist inthe ovary for extended peri
ofonset ofoestrus isnot preciselyknown,insemi-
Ods of time (Fig.22.28). Hence, many cows develop
nation should takeplacewithin6hours ofitsinitial
large, fluid-filled structures in the ovaries during
observation.
the immediate postpartum period.These normally
regress spontaneously but present as a clinical
problem when they cause aberrant behaviour or
Cysticovariandisease
alterationsofthe oestrouscycle.
Ovarian cysts are follicular structuresthat fail to
ovulate andpersistwithin theovaryforlonger than
Aetiologyandpathogenesis
normal follicles, resulting in aberrant reproduc-
tive function.A cyst is defined as being more than
It isgenerally accepted that thecause of follicular cysts
25mm in diameter if single(Al-Dahash & David
isa dysfunction of thereproductive neuroendocrine
439
Part
51
Subfertility andinfertility
ManystudiesofcowswithCODhaveshown that
the preovulatory,LHl surgeis absentor attenuated
(Cook etal 10,Hamilton et al 1995), as a result
ofpartialor completefailure ofoestradiol to elicit
a normalpositivefeedbacksecretionofLH(Zaied
etal 1981,Refsal et al 1987,Nanda et al 1991).This
appearstobedue tofailureor lackof sensitivity of the
A0
10
20
30
40
50
hypothalamic surge-generating centre to oestradiol
Hepeated,non-ovular folicuarwaves
(Garverick2007)andafailureofGnRlreleaserather
thanto eithera lackofhypothalamic GnRl contents,
a lackofpituitaryLHcontentsoralackofpituitary
responsiveness to LH (Vanholderet al 2005).
Afler calving, there is a progressive restoration of
the ability of the hypothalamus to generate an LH
surge in response to oestradiol(Kesler&Garverick
B0
10
20
30
10
1982),which is part of the normal process of
Temporary follicularcysts
resuming oestrous cycles. One of the reasons for
the failure of the surge mechanism in cows with
cysts is therefore that there is still a temporal limi-
tation totheeffectivenessofthe surgemechanism
(Peter 2004).As recently reviewed by Vanholder
et al (2005),additional factors appeartobe involved
in the development of the disease process.Firstly,if
10
20
50
60
70
a GnRH/LH surge occurs at a time when no folli-
Anovulatorycyst:regrassionfollowedbynewovulation
cle capable ofovulationis present,thehypothala-
mus becomes unresponsive to the positive feedback
effectsofoestradiol（Gimenetal2002,Ciimen&
Wiltbank2002),asit doesifthere isnoriseinpro-
gesterone after an ovulation.Responsiveness of
the hypothalamus can be resiored by progesterone
(Gumen &Wiltbank 2005）.Secondly,theLH surge
D0
30
40
50
F0
0
mechanism can be attenuated by stress.Inhibition
Persistence ofanovulatorycystaffernew ovulalion
ofovulationandcystformation(Liptrap&McNally
1976) and an impairment of the LHI surge mecha-
nism similar tothiatincowswith COD(Phogatetal
folli
1999,Dobsonetal 2000)has been produced experi-
Max
mentallyby exogenous adrenocorticotrophichor-
mone(ACTH) or hydrocortisone.These changescan
10
20
30
40
文
60
70
also beinduced by stresses that activate thehypo-
E
Days alter calvin
thalamo-pituitary-adrenal corticoid axis (Stoebel &
Moberg1982,Nanda&Dobson1990).
Fig.22.28 Sequencesofpostpartumfellcle growth ina cow
Cowswith COD alsohaveahigher frequency
that(A)isnormal.(B)hasrepeated non-ovulatory follicles,
and amplitude of LH secretion during cyst growth
(C)has short-term follicular cysts,(D)has cystic ovarian
disease and(E)haspersistentovarian cyst after new ovulation.
than do normalcows（Brown etal 1986,Cook
(Adaptec fromSakaguchietal 2006.)
et al 1991). It hasbeen suggested that these abnor-
malpatterns are causalofCOD(Farin&Estill 1993)
system,resultinginaberrantpatternsofLHsecretion
but current opinion is that,while such patterns of
during the development of a dominant follicle and
LH secretion are effective at maintaining a cyst once
a failure of the LH surge mechanism (Peter 2004).
it has developed(Hampton et al 2003), they arenot
required for the formation of cysts. It has been sug-
involved inthedisorder(Hamiltonet al 1995)
gested that the abnormalities of tonicLHl secretion
440
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertilityin thecow
areareflectionof thepresenceofprogesteronecon-
for the aetiology of COD based on thatproposed by
centrations that aremarginally abovebaselineval-
Vanholderetal(2005)is showninFigure22.29.
ues(Vanholderetal 2005).
The second major factor in the development of
Predisposingfactors
COD is alterationsinthebiochemicalactivityof
thefollicle.Thereis someevidence(Kawateet al
Cystic ovarian disease arises as an interaction
2004)of a reduced population of LH receptors in
between a hereditary predisposition,stress,milk
the granulosa of cysts compared to normal follicles,
yield, age and plane of nutrition.
althoughearlierstudies(Odoreetal1999,Calderet
·Hereditary predisposition:Therearedifferencesin
al 2001) found the opposite.There is also evidence
incidenceofCODbetweenbreeds(Emmanuelson&
forreduced oestrogenreceptorsin thegranulosa of
Bendixen 199l)and between families(Casida &
cysts(Salvetti 2007).Whether these contributeto
Chapman 1951) and sires (Kirk et al 1982) within
the development ofcystsremains opentoquestion.
abreed,whichindicatethelikelihoodofaninher-
High-yielding dairy cowshave,as a result ofgenetic
itedbasis.Estimates of heritability are variable,
selectionandmetabolicload,lowconcentrationsof
but generally low (Youngquist 1986, Day 1991,
insulin and IGF-l,and thereis circumstantial evi
Zwald 2004a,b).Even so,the urait is amenable
dence thatthesemay contributetothedevelopment
to selection(Zwald 2004a,b)and theincidence
of COD through an impairment of follicularcell
ofthe condition hasbeen dramaticallyreduced
proliferation and steroidogenesis (Vanholder et al
withinabreedbyavoidingtheuseofcowsthat
2005).Negative energy balance is associated,at an
havehadcysticovarian disease as bullmothers
epidemiological level,with COD,and there may be
andby avoidingtheuseofbulls thathavebred
directnegativeeffectsofelevatednon-esterified fatty
daughters that have the disease asbull sires(Bane
acids (NEFAs)upon follicular finction.A scheme
1964).
Failureof
LHsurge
mechanism
Normal
Pulsalile
LH
oestradiol
peak
Inadequate
LHsurge
[Normal
development]
Cyst
Subnormal
oestradiol
peak
Selection
Abnormal
develd
NEFA
nsulin
B-OHB
IGF-1
Fig.22.29Schematicrepresentationof thepathogenesisofovarian cysts.(Redrawn fromVanholderet al2005.)
441
Part
51
Subfertilityand infertility
·Breed:COD is more common in Holstein-
on the effects of the cysts upon reproductive function
Friesians than in other dairy breeds.It is rare in
isusually absentfromabattoir surveyswhileinhrd
beefbreeds.
studies, cysts should only be regarded as pathologi-
Age:The incidence of COD is greatest in animals
cal if they persist into the breeding period.Incidences
between 4and 6years of age(Roberts 1986).It
found in abattoir surveys range from 0.5%(Australia:
has traditionallybeenregarded asbeinguncom-
Summers 1974)to 18.5%(Japan:Fujimoto 1956).
mon in animals in their first lactation,although
Al-Dahash&David(1977a)foundanincidenceof
Watson(i998)showedthattheincidenceinfirst
3.8% in a British abattoir survey.Day (1991) quoted
fourNorthAmericanreferencesgivingfiguresranging
lactation animals was similar to that in second
and third laciations.
from 6% to 19% per lactation. ln a study of 34 dairy
herdsin Ontario,therewas alactational incidenceof
·Yield andnutrition:Many studies havelinked
5%, with a median time tofirst diagnosis postpartum
COD to milk yield (e.g.Marion & Gier 1968,
of90.5 days.Watson(1996),in a study of3000 cows
Ashmawy et al 1992).However,therelationship
in24herdsintheUk,foundthiat cysticovarian dis-
with yield is complex,as it involves the extent
easecaused clinical signs in7-8%of cows.Zwald et al
ofnegativeenergybalance,thegeneticpotential
(2004a) similarly estimated that COD occurs in 8%
ofthe cow(see above)and the metabolic load
oflactations.Youngquist (1986)estimated tie inci-
oflactation.Thus,milkyieldper semay not be
dence atbetween10% and20%,butconsideredthat
assignificant a cause ofcysticovarian disease as
if the cysts that occurbefore the start of the breeding
is the genetic potential for high yield (Zulu&
season arealso taken into account, the incidence is
Penny 1998,Hooijer et al (2001).Condition at
about 30%.Anecdotal evidencehas frequently sug-
drying off has also been associated with the dis-
gested that cystic ovarian disease is increasing in inci-
ease(Gearhart et al 1990),presumably through
dence:a20-year retrospective study of a single dairy
effects onpostcalving fatmobilization.Excessive
herdinvolving923cowsand2246calvings showeda
dietaryproteinmayalsohaveadirecteffecton
steadyincreasefrom1963.ln1966only10%ofcows
the incidence of COD (Ashmawy et al 1992).
wereaffected,whereasin1983thecomparablefigure
β-carotene:It has been suggested that B-carotene
was57%.
may reduce the incidence of COD (Lotthanmer
1979).However this has not been supported by
the work ofothers（Folman etal1979,Marcek
Distribution
et al 1985),who found no benefit from such sup-
Cysts may be present in one or both ovaries (Table
plementation ofcows'diets.
22.11). More cysts are identified in theright ovary
·Season:COD ismorecommon inwinter than at
than intheleft,reflecting the relative activity of the
other times of theyear(Bierschwal 1966,Roine
iwoovaries.Garm(1949)foundthat multiplecysts
1973);this may reflect thefact that the majority
weremorefrequent than singlecystsbutElmore
of cows are calving in the autumn and thus will
etal(1975) found that 75%were solitary cysts.
havereachedpeakyield at this time.Itmayreflecl
Al-Dahash &David (1977b) found,in a survey of
a lackof exercise,excess dietary protein and/orthe
over8000genitaltracts,that53.5%ofthe307tracts
effects of photoperiod(Peter2004).
that had cystic ovaries had a single cyst and 46.2%
·Intercurrent disease: Ketosis,dystocia,stress,
hadmultiple cysts.The majorily of cysts found in
twin births,RFM,millfeverand postpartum uter-
thisstudywerebeiween2.5and3.0cm indiameler,
ineinfectionshavealsobeenconsideredriskfac-
withveryfewlarger than5or6cim.
torsfor thecondition(Morrowet al 19661969,
Hardie &Ax 198l,Roberts 1986,Bosu &Peter
Diagnosis
1987,Laporte etal1994).
Ovariancysts are traditionally classifiedas eitherfol-
Clinical presentation
licularorluteal cysts.Thisisauseful classificationin
Incidence
as much as it summarizes findings at a point in time;
however,cysts aredynamicrather thanstaticstruc
Surveys ofthe incidence of cystic ovarian disease need
tures,regressing spontaneously and being replaced
tobeinterpretedwithsomecaution,sinceinformation
by others（Kesler&Garverick1982,Cooketal1990)
442
Chapter
22
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
Table2z.11Distributionofovariani cystsand their associationwithcorpora lutea(fromAl-Dahash&David 1977b)
Typeof cyst
No.present
Percentage of cysts
No corpus luteum
Corpus luteum
present
present
Thin-walled
Single
16.93
18.85
80.19
Multiple
40.26
4.15
Single
10.22
7.67
Thick-walled
19.81
Multiple
1.92
0
Total
69.33
30.67
andchangingintheextentoftheirluteinization.
luteinized,cysts（Fig.22.31)are thick-walled and are
Follicularcystsarethin-walled,fluctuating structures
usuallysingle.Identification and differentiation by
that can be singleor multiple (Fig.22.30).Follicular
ultrasonography（Fig.22.32) is generally more accu
cysts maybesingleor,commonly,multiple.Luteal,or
rate than by manual palpation (Jeffcoate & Ayliffe
1995,Douthwaite&Dobson2000).Thereareanum
berofotherfluid-filledstructures thatmaybepresent
on the ovary and need to be differentiated from cysts
(Table 22.12).The corpus haemorrhagicum, adjacent
luteal and follicular structures,non-ovarian cysts (e.g.
parovarian cysts), abscesses and tumours can also be
confusedwith cysts(Farin&Estill 1993)
The type of cyst thatis present can be confirmed
by measuring peripheral progesterone concentra-
tions(Douthwaite&Dobson2000):bloodormilk
progesterone concentrations(>2ng/ml in milkor
876543210123456789
>1.0ng/mlinplasma/serum:Booth1988,Carroll et
al1990,Farinetal1992)areconsideredtobeindica-
tiveof a luteal cyst.Progesterone determinations have
Fig.22.30 Ovaries of a cow with two thin-walled cysts
confirmed abattoirdata that follicularcysts are twoor
(4-5cm in diameter)in the right (r)ovary and a single
threetimesmorecommonthanlutealcysts(Kesler&
thin-walled cyst (5cm in diameter) in the left()ovary.
Garverick1982,Leslie&Bosu1983,Bo0th1988)
B
4
32101
Fig.22.31Ovarian cysts.(A)Cross-sectionof anovary ofa cowshowing a typical single,thick-walled,luteal cyst.Note that thewall
comprisesatleast3mm of lutealtissue.(B)Cross-sectionofanovaryofacowshowing three cystswithsomedegreeofluteinization.
443
Part
|51
Subfertilityandinfertility
L00.7CM
Fig.22.32 Ultrasound image of the ovary of (a)a cow with a thin-walled cyst and (b)a luteal cyst;note thick wallof luteal
tissue,which is >3mm in thickness.(Ccurtesy of W.R.Ward.)
Table22.12Fluid-containingstructuresinbovine ovaries
Normal structures
Abnormal structures
Follicles
Vacuolated
Luteinized follicles
Follicular cysts
Luteinized
corpora lutea
cysts
Transient,dynamic,ft
Same size as
2.5cm diameter.No
Soft, thin-walled,
Thick-walled,
fluctuant structures,
non-vacuolated CL but
evidence of cvulation
fluid-filled structure
fluid-filled structure
which reach1.5-2.0cm
mayfeelslightlysofter
point.Larger cavity
≥2.5cm diameter
≥2.5cm diameter
in diameterjustbefore,
on palpation.Evidence
thanvacuolatedcorpus
that persists.
that persists.Thick-
during and for 12 hours
of ovulation point.
luteum
Thickness of cyst
ness of cyst wall
after oestrus
Central vacuole disap-
wall<3mm
pears during pregnancy
Follicles≤1.5cm diam-
Usually single
Usually single
May be single:
Usually single
eterare normally
frequently multiple,
present at allstages
in oneor both
of oestrous cycle
ovaries
Occurs after=25%of
Follow anovulation of
Follow anovulation
Follow ancvulation
normal ovulations
mature follicle
of mature follicle
ofmature follicle
Associatedwithnormal
Associatedwith
More likely tc occur in
Associatedwith
Associatedwith
oestrouscycle
normal oestrouscycle
immediatepost-partum
low peripheral
high perpheral
period.Associated
progesterone
progesterone
withnormalorshorter
concentrations.
concentrations.
lengthof oestrous cycle
Affected cows are
Affected cows are
either anoestrous or
anoestrous
nymphomaniacal
444
Chapter
22
Infertilityand subfertilityinthecow
Cysts can be present concurrently with a CL
playing excessive,prolonged signs of oestrus,with
(Al-Dahash&David 1977b,Royetal 1985,Carroll
oedematous swelling of the vulva, frequent and
et al 1990),so the absence of a CLneeds tobe con-
copious discharge ofclearmucus and a shortened
firmed （Fig.22.33).However,in cows that also
interval between successiveheats.Inneglected cases,
have a CL,any cysts that arepresent are lilely tobe
thereisnervousbehaviour,depressedmilkyield,loss
hormonally inactive（Al-Dahash &David 1977c),
ofbodilycondition(even emaciation),sinking of
because of loss of the granulosa cells, so are con-
the sacrosciatic ligaments andupward displacement
sideredas anatomicalremnantsratherthan active
ofthe coccyx(Fig.22.34).Affectedcows attenpt to
structures.
ride other cows and will stand to be mounted by
othercows.Because oftheir excessive sexual activity
Clinical signs
they have a generally disruptive effect upon therest
of the herd,making accurate oestrus detection dif
The main clinical signs of COD in cattle
are
ficult.Occasionally, cows with long-standing COD
nymphomania,anoestrus ormasculinization.
willbecomevirilized（Arthur1959:Fig.22.35)
CODwasfirst discovered as aresult of investiga
tionsofnymphomaniacbehaviourincows.Roberts
(1955) described nymphomaniacal cows as dis-
Fig.22.34Cow with thetypical nymphomanicconformation.
Fig.22.33Genital tract with large 10cm thin-walled cyst in
Fig.22.35 Cow with masculine appearance and behaviour
rightovary and leftcvarywithcorpusluteum incised.
(virilism)associatedwithlong-standingcysticovariandisease.
445
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
Most cows with COD are,however,anoestrous.
hypothalamus to oestradiol (de Silva and Reeves
1988).
COD were presented for irregular heats or serves,
compared with 74% that were presented as being
Hormona/programmes
anoestrous.A further 12%werefound during rou-
tine pre-breeding examinations and 12% were
Most cysts are treated using reproductive hor-
mones.The choice of hormonal treatment regimen
nancy diagnosis. Likewise, anoestrus was the pre-
depends largely upon the type of cyst that is pres-
dominant behaviour of cows with COD in the
ent; follicular cysts are usually treated with either
studiesofBierschwal (1966):60%,Anttila&Roine
gonadotrophic hormones (i.e. hCG or GnRH)
(1972): 57% and Dobs0n etal (1977):73%,while,
or progesterone, whereas luteinized cysts can be
in the series ofcases reviewed by Roberts (1986),
treatedwithluteolyticsubstances.
62.5-85%ofanimals were anoestrous.
Gonadotrophin. Follicular cysts can be treated with
The behaviour of cows with cysts is largely unre-
hCG or GnRH. Counter-intuitively, these hormones
lated to peripheral steroid concentrations Roberts
donotcause ovulation of thecyst:rather thiey cause
(1986). Cows with follicular cysts have blood uestro-
luteinization of the cysts of ovulation of new folli-
gen (Kitiock et al 1973, Dobson et al 1977) and
cles （Ribadu et al 1994, Jeffcoate & Ayliffe 1995)
testosterone (Eyestone & Ax 1984) concentrations
which develop into Cls.Lower doses of GnRH
that are not greatly dissimilar from those of normal
(100-250μg)probably cause luteinization of the
cOws.
cyst (Kesler et al 1981); higher doses (e.g. 0.5-1.0mg
GnRH or 10pig buserelin) probably cause ovulation
ofnew follicles and formation ofa CL(Bertchitold
Treatmentandsequelae
etal1980).Whicheveroccurs,the resultis an increase
Spontaneous recovery from cystic ovarian disease
in progesterone concentration, which causes nega-
occurs frequently in the early postcalving period,
tive feedback on LH secretion and resets the sensitiv-
although it is difficult to estimate this figure accu-
ity of the pituitary to oestradiol (Guimen &Wiltbank
ratelyinthelightofthe data,whichshow thatcysts
2002). There is also a decline in follicular steroid
can be short- or long-term structures (e.g. Sakaguchi
synthesis,leading to lowered oestradiol-17β con-
etal 2006).Reported self-curerates varyfrom 15-30%
centrations, which is also needed to resiore norinal
ofcases（Garverick 1997,Peter2004)within 45days
cyclical activity(Kesler& Garverick 1982).
of calving. If divided into cysts that arise from the
After treatment, there is a resumption of nor-
first dominant follicle versus those that arise from
maloestrous cycles in 65-90% of cows treated
subsequent waves, the self-cure rates are 5o% and
with GnRH (Dobson et al 1977,Kesler et al 1978,
20%respectively(Kesler&Garverick1982).
Whitmore et al 1979,ljazet al 1987)and 75%
treated with hCG (Dobson et al 1977) within 3
weeks.The interval to oestrus has been reported as
Physicalmethods
3-15 days (Nanda etal 1988) and 18-23 days (ljaz
The treatment of cystic ovarian diseasein cattle has
et al 1987). Conception rates to the next oestrus
been reviewed in detail by Nanda et al (1989).It
range from 37-55% (ljaz et al 1987), with up to
is generally advocated that cysts should not be
80% ofcows eventually coiceiving(Whitmore
manually ruptured per rectum, as this can cause
et al 1979).Cysts recur in 8% (Nanda et al 1988) to
trauma, haemorrhage and/or ovariobursal adhe-
16%(Watson 1998)of cows.Jou et al (1999) and
sions.Despite the known risks and limited efficacy
Peters(20o5)were more cautious about the effec-
ofmanual rupture.Watson(1998) reported from a
tiveness of GnRH,however,noting that,whileitis
surveyoffieldpracticethatnearly35%ofcystswere
effective in treating cysts, fertility after treatment is
'treated'by manual rupture(although halfof these
poor.
also had hormone treatment).
Onceluteinization has occurred,theinterval to
Surgical removalofonechronically affectedovary
the next oestrus can be shortened by giving PGF
might be worth considering in a limited number of
(Garverick 2007).In an atlempt to reduce the
cases where other treatments have failed,as ova-
interval between treatment and first service, the
riectomy restores the normal responsiveness of the
suggestion has been made that routine treatment
446
Chapter
22
Infertility and subfertility in thecow
of cysts could be managed by giving GnRH when
carefuldifferentiationofthe typeofcystbeforeini-
thecystisfirstdiagnosed,followed byPGF9days
tiationof treatment,orincorporationofaluteolytic
later(Kesleretal1978,Garverick1997).However,
agent into the programme.
ina study in which comparisons ofsubsequent
ProstaglandinF.Themost logical way to treata
fertilityweremadewith GnRH therapy alone,the
luteal cystistheuse of PGFApredictableresponse
results were worse;in addition,such a treatment
wasobtained byDobs0n et al(1977):26of27cows
regimen is more expensive(Archibald etal 1991).
showed regression of the cyst,the majority came
Similar disappointing results were reported by
intooestrus in3-5days and56%ofthecowscon-
Nanda etal (1988).Full GPGregimes have been
ceived,at a mean treatment-to-conception interval
used totreat COD(Ambroseetal2004,Garverick
of27 days.Jackson (1981),in a survey involving sev-
2007), but it is not yet clear if there are benefits
eral countries,reported over80%responsewith dis-
from using the more expensive programme.
appearance of the cyst and oestrus within 3-5 days,
Progesterone.Alternatively, follicular cysts can be
withatleast60%and in mostcasesover90%of
treated with intravaginal progesterone-releasing
thesecowsconceiving.Many similarreports existin
inserts (van Giessen 1991, Calder et al 1999).
the literature（see ljaz et al 1987）.Indeed,failure of
Increased peripheral progesterone concentrations
cowswithsupposed luteal cyststorespond toPGF
result in aloweringpulsatileLH secretion andares-
therapy is almost invariably due to misdiagnosis.
torationofthe abilityofthehypothalamo-pituitary
In the studyofWatson(1998),10%ofcowswith
axis to generate an LH surge in response to oestradiol
COD were treated with of PGF27%with proges-
(Todoroli &Kaneko2006）.Ina studyin which
teroneand23%with GnRH.Responsestotreatment,
PRIDswere usedin25cows(18of which hadbeen
andacomparisonwithnotreatment,areshown in
treated unsuccessfully with other hormones), 68%
Table22.13.
recovered within 13-18 days after the insertion of
Non treatment.Watson&Cliff (1996)found that,of
thePRIDand88%oftheseconceivedwithinthree
thosecows withcysticovariesthatwereuntreated,
inseminations (Nanda et al 1988). Signs ofnym-
54%eventually conceived,compared with 79-87%
phomania abate within 24 hours of PRID insertion,
ofthose thatwere treated.Surprisingly,however,here
the cysts gradually regress and, following removal
wasno difference between treatmenisinthe overall
after10-12 days,thereisoestrus withovulation and
successrate,althoughfewercowsneededre-treatment
corpus luteum formation.Progesterone by itself is
after aninitial progesterone treatment than with other
relatively ineffective in treating luteinized cysts,
therapies.Watson(1998)recorded that16%ofcows
however（Todoroki etal 2o01),sothere needstobe
with CODwerenot treatedafter diagnosis.
Table22.13Response to treatment forcysticovarian disease(derived from Watson1998)
Treatment
Interval
Conception
Calving-
Overall
Services
Interval
Success
from
to firstAl(%)
conception
pregnancy
per con-
from startof
(treated
calving to
interval(d)
rate(%)
ception
treatment
cowsthat
first AI(d)
(u)
to concep-
conceived)
tion(d)
(%)
Cows with cystic ovarian disease
PGF
82
46
126
85
2.4
50
89
GnRH
88
41
151
79
3.6
55
81
Progesterone
78
32
131
78
3.5
59
85
Notreatment
76
35
124
77
3.5
50
78
Normal cowsfrom the same herds
(No treatment)
76
45
101
NO
2.2
NQ:not quoted
447
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Sequelae. Cystic ovarian disease results in an
extension of the calving interval,with consequent
decreases in lifetime milkyields and increases in
the involuntary culling rate. They are also more
likely tobecomerepeatbreeders(Moss et al 2002).
Nonetheless,in both thefield study ofWatson &
Cliff(1996)and thecomputermodellingofScholl
etal （1990),it was found that,while COD has a
major effect uponreproductive outcomes ofindivid
ual animals, the condiion was not of major signifi-
canceindeterminingthereproductiveperformance
at theherdlevel.Forexample,Watson (1998) calcu-
120
latedthattheneteffectofCODwithinaherdwasto
increasethemeancalvingtoconception interval by
=2 days and the number of serves per conception by
0.1-0.2serves.For the individual animal,treatment
iseconomically worthwhile:deVriesetal（2006)
calculatedanetbenefitof=LS$80of treaumentwith
aprogesteroneinsertcomparedtonotreatment.
Mucometra,in which there is distension ofthe
uerus with mucoid fluid and thinning of the uter-
ine wall (Fig. 22.36), is associated with neglected
cases of COD (Al-Dahash & David 1977a).
Prevention
By careful genetic selection,improvements have
been made by eliminating bulls that have sired
Fig.22.36Cowwith cysticovarian disease and consequent
daughters thathave subsequently suffered from
mucometra.Note the thin-walled distensionof the uterus,
which is almost symmetrical between the twouterine horns:
COD.Ideally,cows should not be treated for cys-
O= ovaries.
ticovariesand certainlytheirprogeny shouldnot
be used for breeding.nfortunately,this places the
herdmanagerandtheveterinarianinadilemma
previously described,in the presence of uterine
since,frequently,those cows that are affected are
infection and inflammation of the tissues,there is
the best producers.
interferencewith theproduction or thereleaseof
ProphylacticuseofGnRH（eg.100-200μg of
PGF(Seguin et al 1974）.This condition can be
GnRH12-14dayspostpartum;Kesler&Garverick
self-perpetuating, since progesterone domination of
1982) has shown some successinreducingtheprev-
theuterusreduces itsresistancetoinfection andpre-
alenceofcysts inherds(Zaiedetal1980).Whether
ventsrecurrent periods of oestrus whentheuterus is
it is cost-effective hasnotbeen calculated.
moreresistant(Rowson etal1953).
There is,however,evidence that persistence of the
corpus luteum can occur in the absence of uterine
Miscellaneous conditions
lesions.Lamming&Bulman（1976)identified 2%
of the cows with elevated mill progesterone levels
Persistentcorpusluteum
formore than30 days.Othershave associated luteal
Themechanismsinvolvedinthecontrolofthelife
persistencewithfailure ofovulationor follicular
span of the corpus luteum are described in Chapter1.
development.
Anythingthatinterferes with theproductionor
Ifit is considered that apersistent CLispresent,
release of prostaglandin F will result in a persis-
itcanbereadilytreatedwithPGForasynthetic
tentCL.Pregnancy istheconditionthatmostfre-
analogue,provided,of course,that theclinician is
quently results inpersistence of the CL.However,as
confident thatthecowisnotpregnant.
448
Chapter
221
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
Ovulatorydefects
USA andUK havefound thatbeef-breed heifers
thatfirstcalveat2yearsofagearemoreprofitable
Ovulationinthecownormallyoccurs25-35hoursafter
than those calving at3years(Pinney etal 1962,
the onset of behavioural oestrus and18-26 hours after
Nuncz-Dominguez el al 1991, and see Spitzer
theovulatory L-I peak(see Ch.1).Extended intervals
1986).In the study of Pinney et al(1962),2-year
between the onset of oestrus and ovulation(delayed
old calvers produced 0.8 more calves per cow at
ovulation’)ofupto48hourshavebeenreported in
10%lesscostover theirentireproductionlifethan
dairy cows: typical incidences range from 2-15% (Erb
3-year-old calvers.Similarly,fordairy cows,theideal
et al 1976, Roelofs et al 2005). Concentrations of
age for first calving is =24 months, as first lactation
oestradiol and LH in thepre-ovulatoryperiod ofsuch
yield decreases rather than increasing if the time of
cows may belower than in the normal follicular phase
first calving is delayed (Spain et al 2007).For sea-
(Bloch et al2006).Conception rates ofcows with
sonally calving dairycows,both the age of first caly
delayedovulation aregenerally low.
ing and the date of first calving are critical. Animals
Some studies have associated delayed ovulation
must alverightathestartof theseasonwhichmay
with subnormal progesterone concentrations in the
meanthatsomecalve at23oreven22monthsof
followingluteal phase（Blochet al 2006).On the
age. Attaining maximal growth rates during the rear-
otherhand, some cows apparentlyhave a prolonged
ing period is critical to achieve this (MacDiarmid
follicularphaseoftheoestrouscycle,asdetermined
1999),both in terms of achievingadequatebody
by the presence of low progesterone concentra-
size and ensuring that the youngest heifers have
lions inbloodandmilk(Erbetal 1976,Bulman&
attained puberty at the start of the breeding season.
Lamming 1978,Jackson et al1979, that isnot due
Age at puberty is therefore highly dependent
lo delayed ovulation but to delayed onset of pro-
upon growth rate during therearing period,which
gesterone secrelion by the CL assuming normal
requires that aninals be maintained on ahigh plane
steroidogenesis.
of nutrition.Gerloff &Morrow[1986) showed that
the age at puberty of Friesian heifers decreases by
0.77daysforeachadditional 0.45kgbodyweight
Nutrition
al 6 months, and by 0.36 days for each additional
0.45kg body weight between 6 and 12 months
Puberty and the rearing period
of age. On the other hand,excessive growth rales
of dairy heifers before puberty is associated with
Puberty, as determined by the appearance of the
impaired development of the mammary epithe-
first oestrus,occursbetween5and 20 months of
lium and reduced first-lactation milkyields.Thus,
age.It is considered that body size (rather than
Foldager & Sejrsen （1982) suggested an optimal
age)condition score and plane ofnutrition are
growth rate for Holstein heifers of=600-700g/day
themainfactors thataffectthe ageofpuberty
over the range150-300 kg live weight.After puberty,
（Ducker et al1985,Spitzer 1986).In ordert0
theeffeciofgrowthrateonmammarydevelopment
attain puberty,beef heifers should have reached
ismarkedlylessened(Drew2004).
50%anddairyheifers 35-45%oftheirmature
These results demonstrate the importance of ade-
weight.Thus, typical weights at puberty are 240-
quatefeeding during calfhood to ensure the early
260kgforFriesians,270-300kgforHerefords and
onset ofpuberty.The aim should be to have calves
230-250kg forAngus.Within a group ofcattle,
that are healthy,with regularly monitored growth
however,puberty occurs at different body weights:
performance(lable22.14)(McNeil 2003,Schouten
for example,50% of Hereford heifers exhibit
2003),with plannedgrowth ratesto meet thetargel
oestrusat272kgbodyweight,whereas Charolais
liveweightsat different stagesofgrowth(Drew2004).
havetoreach3oskgfortliesameproportion of
Generally,animalsshould havereached=65%of their
animals tobepubertal.For90%ofanimals tobe
adultbodyweighi atthestart of thematingseason
pubertal, the weights are 318kg and 352kg body-
in order tobe pubertal and having regular oestrous
weight,respectively(Spitzer1986).
cycles. Continued planned growth is then required
ln most farming systems,it is preferable for heif
toensurethatheifershaveattainedadequatebody
erstocalvefor thefirsttime atclose to2years of
weight by the time of their first calving (Fig. 22.37)
age.For beef heifers,many studies from both the
Heifersthat havereachedthesetargetsshouldbeable
449
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
to reach their genetic potential for milk production in
Table 22.14 Managirg heifer calves
their first lactatio, provided, of couse, that their sub-
Pre-weaning
sequent metabofic needs throughout pregnancy are
not neglected.Live weight at calving has a significant
Meticulous management of cclostrum intake
effect upon subsequent reproductive performance:
Ensure good preweaning growth lhrougih well managed milk.
feeding
heifers tlhat are underweight at their first calving have
much lower conception rates and are morelikely to
Promote early development of the rumen by maximizing early
be culled for infertility than those that are wellgrown
intake of concentrate feecs,provision of high-qual tyrough-
(Table 22.15).
Effecivepreventinfdiarhoea,respratorydiseaseand
ravel-il
Nutrition and the lactating cow
Post-weaning
Recent years have seen a dramatic decrease in the
Weigh regularly to monitor growth rates; adjustfeeding as
fertility of dairy cows.Many surveyshave shown
appropriate
an inverse relationship （Fig.22.38;Mann 2004)
Maintain high intakes of hignly digestible forages
between fertility and yield (e.g. Nebel & McGilliard
Avoid ‘nutrient gaps'e.g.in dry summers or wet winters
1993,Washburn elal 2002,Royal & Flint 2004,
Butler 2005),which is generally considered to
Monitor regularly for trace elenent status
have resulted from (1) selection for cows with the
Effective parasite cntrol
genetic potential for very high yields and (2) the
Effective vaccination orogramme (e.g. leptospirosis, bovine
metabolic demands of lactation.As a result,thiere
viral diarrhoea, infecticus bovine rhinotracheitis)
has been an upsurge of interest in the relation-
Pre-mating
Ensure adequate live weight at the time of maring (E5% of
regard to the marked changes that have occurred in
mature body weight)
themetabolic endocrine system ofdairycows as a
Maintain a high plane of nutrition around mating: vital that
result of genetic selection for partition of nutrients
weight is gained rather than lost
towards lactation and away from growth and tissue
deposition.
Mating to calving
Of course,nutrition has always been recognized
Ensure adecuate growth rates to achieve at least 85% af
a key determinant of reproductive performance, not
mature body weight at first calving (Fig. 22.37)
only in dairy cattle but also in beef animals. The
Reduce growthrate in the last Zmonths to reduce thersk of
increase in energy demands thiat is associated with
dystocia
the onset of lactation is not immediately matched
by an increase in feed intake,and there is a lag of
今
intake;hence early lactation is usually characterized
700-
by a period of negative energy balance when tis-
600-
0.8
sueismobilizedto meet the demandsfor lactation
0.7
500
that are not being supplied tlhrough feed. Negative
05
400
energy balance is atits maximum 1-2weeksafter
calving but it can persist well into lactation(Dillon
-0.4
et al 2003), beyond the period of maximum yield
0.3
200-
（Hattan et al 2001).In high-yielding cows, even
when using energy-dense diets, appetite may not be
000
-0.1
able to satisfy energy requirements until yields have
started to decline(Beever et al 2001),well into the
12
16
20
24
period when it would be appropriate to start serv-
Age (months)
ing cows. For high-yielding cows that have a stan-
Fig.22.37 Growth rates and daily live weight gain of heifers
dard 305-day lactation, precalving body condition
from birth to the time of first calving. (Adaptedl from Drew
may not havebeenreached by the time of drying off
2004.)
(Beever et al 2004)
450
Chapter
221
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
Table22.15Effect of liveweightofHolstein heifersatfirstcalving on subsequent in-calf rates(at6and21weeks）and
conceptionratesduring theirfirst lactation(fromMorton2ooob,withpermission)
Pre-calving live
6-weel in-calf
21-week in-calf
n
Proportion(%) conceiving between 7
weight(kg)
rate (%)
rate(%)
and 21 weeks after the start of mating
Up to400
319
49
79
30
401-440
388
60
87
27
441-470
369
68
89
21
471-510
450
68
87
19
226
75
88
511-540
13
541andabove
231
77
87
10
negative energy balance (Gossen et al 2006, Grimard
etal2006,Roche etal2007)
60
Maintaining body condition score(BCS)in cows
thathavebeen genetically selectedforhighyieldis
particularly challenging, especially in systems that
are forage- or pasture-based. Roche et al (2006)
found that NorthAmerican Holsteincowsfedpas-
40
tureplusconcentrateslost=65kgliveweight(com-
paredto=35kginNewZealandFriesiancattle)over
the first 2 months of lactation.Holsteins receiving
6kg of concentrates per day did not achieve precalv-
20-
ingbodyweightuntilmorethan200daysintolacta-
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
lion,whilethoseonlowerlevelsofconcentrateshad
Year
notreturnedtoprecalvingbodyweightsby300days
intolactation.Itis interesting tonote that,where
Fig.22.38 Changes in conceptionrates forcattle in the
literature.(Adap:ed from Mann 2004.)
BCS rather than live weight is assessed,Holsteins
require an evenlongerperiodoftime toreturn to
precalving values (Roche et al 2006),probably
because changes in gut fill with advancing lactation
Animals have a clear prioritization for energy
contribute substanrially to changes in live weight
when innegative energy balance, such ihat main-
(Beever et al 2004). The net result of these changes
tenance and lactation tale precedence over growth
in live weight and BCS is that significantly more
and reproduction: i.e.where negative energy bal-
Holstein than Friesian cows(30%vs 3%;Kolver et
ance exists there is a consequential impairment of
al 2006) failed to conceiveby the end of the mating
reproductiveperformance(Bauman&Currie19s0).
period.Fahey et al (2005) also found that Holstein
Cows that are in negative energy balance during
cows fed pasture plus limited concentrate supple-
early lactation are at greater risk of becoming anoe-
mentation had a longer anoestrous period than ade-
strous than those that are in energy equilibrium
quatelyfed animals.
Thus,both excessive BCS loss (Chapa el al
tive energy balance aremore likely toremain anoe-
2001,Gossen elal 2006) and the depthof the
strousuntilequilibrium isrestored（Butler&Smith
BCSnadir(Buckleyet al2003,Rocheetal2007)
1989), which is probably the reason that the persis-
appear to be the main determinants of the degree
tence of lactation in Holstein cows is negatively asso-
to which reproductive performance (e.g. the dura-
ciatedwithreproductiveperformance(Buckleyetal
tion of anoestrus, first-service conception rate,
2003).Conceptionratesandembryonicmortality
calving-conception interval)is impaired.Similar
rates are also adversely affectedin animals that arein
relationshipsbetweenBSCloss and fertility occur
451
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
in beef cows. For example, Warnick et al (1967)
(βOHB),decreases in glucose and increases in
found thatbeefcows were infertilewhen losing
indicators of hgpatic dysfunction due to lipid
weight,while a 2%increase in liveweight in the
infiltration ofihe liver（Zulu etal 2002a).There
3weeksbeforeserviceimproved conception rates
are strongly negative relationships between ele-
(Moller&Shannon1972).Ifweightlossbetween
vated blood NEFA/βOHB concentrations and
calving and 60 dayspostpartum ismorethan10%,
reproductiveoutcomes,particularlyinrelation to
there is likely tobe poor fertility,while any loss of
ovarian folliculardevelopment(Marretal2002)
morethan5%islikelytobeacauseforconcern
and oocytecompetence(McEvoy etal1997).As
(Morris 1976).
a result,conception rates and pregnancy rates are
There is,however,a complex relationship
likely to be significanily depressed:Samarutel et
between the effects of BCS at calving and energy
al(2006),forexample,found thatno cows with
balance during the post-calving period,Reasonable
a BSCofmore than3.75（1-5scale)conceived
body stores of fat at the time of calving can pro-
to their first insemination. On the other hand,
videastoreofenergy thatcanmitigatetheeffects
significant loss of liveweight over the dry period
ofundernutrition.Thus,while BCS loss in the
isalso associatedwithmetabolicdisorders and
postcalving period is negatively associated with
impaired reproductive performance in the post-
the duration of anoestrus and conception rates
calving period (1ll-Hwa& Gook-Hlyun 2003)
(Roche et al 2007), optimal BCS at calving is asso-
Thus reasonable body stores of fatat the time
ciated with better reproductive performance than
of calving can provide a store of energy that can
low BCS (Patton et al 2007). The ‘InCalf survey
mitigate the effects ofundernutrition,whereas
ofAustraliandairycattle(Morton200ob),clearly
excessivemobilizationoffatfromoverweightani-
illustrales this pattern (Table 22.16).Conversely,
mals is undesirable, especially if there is a signifi-
calving in toohigh a condition score also adversely
cant degree of underfeeding post-calving. However,
affectsreproductive performance.Cows that are
if it is possible that energy demands of the freshly
fatatcalving（Ohgietal2005,Gossen etal2006)
calved cow can be substantially met, calving
orhavebeenfed excessivelyduringtheprecalving
withonlyamoderateconditionscorecanbepref
period (McNamara elal2003)havehigherlive
erabletocalvingwith excessivestoresoffat.Hence
weightlossduetolowerpost-calvingfeed intake
within each farming system, practices are empiri-
(Butler 2005）.Consequentially,such animals
cally developed that best approximate the type
have increases in NEFAs and β-hydroxybutyrate
andamountof feed thatisavailablewithnutrient
requirements for lactation in order to minimize
the duration/incidence ofanoestrus.In traditional
British dairying systems, the preferred option has-
been tocalvein a moderatelyfatcondition,since
Table 22.16 Body condition score at calving,post-calving
the grass silages and cereals available to British
condition scorelossand pregnancy rates(from Morton
dairy farners were of inadequate quality to fully
2000b)
feed freshly calved cows.More recent British prac-
ticehasfollowed that of North America,in which
Criterion
Pregnant within6weeks
the dairy cows hold very small reserves of body fat
of the start of mating (%)
but whose appetite is capacious and,when given
Body condition score at calving (1-8)
high quality forages and energy-dense cereals,can
58
approximately match output by intake. Pastoral
<4.5
dairying cannot fully feed cows in the early post-
4.5-5.4
69
calving period, so tries to find an equilibrium point
>5.4
65
ofcalving condition scorethat allows enough fat
Body condition change during early lactation
reserves to meet the energy deficit while not being
(1-8scale)
sofat that appetiteislimited.Farm advisors,nutri-
Lost ≥0.67units
58
tionists andveterinarianswhooperatewithin these
Lost 0.33-0.67units
59
systemsbecomeadeptatoptimallybalancingthese
factors in order to both maximize lactationyields
Lost<0.33units
61
and minimize post-calving anoestrus.
452
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
of preventing a further decline in fertility or even of
Energy metabolism and reproduction
reversing the trend.Most studies of therelationship
Thelastfewyearshaveseen therecognitionthatthe
betweenfertilityandyieldhaverecordedacohortof
fertility of dairy cowshasbeen declining(McGowan
cows that havebothhighyield andacceptablefer-
et al 1996, O'Farrell et al 1997,Dillon &Buckley
tility;identification and selection of such individu-
1998).Thisdeclinewasinitially atuributedtothe
alsisadvocatedasameansofimprovingfertility
many changes in the husbandry and manageinent
withoutcompromisingyield（e.g.Kadarmideen&
ofdairycows thathave occurredoverthepastcouple
Wegmann2003).Whetherthisprocesscanbefacili-
of decadesbut morerecently it has been recognized
latedthoughcurrentresearchintoquantitativetrait
thattheintensiveselectionfor highmilkyield that
loci(QTLs) that are associatedwithfertilityremains
has taken place (particularlyin the Holstein-Friesian
tobe seen.
breed)hasbeen associated witha parallel,uninten-
Cows thathavebeengeneticallyselectedforhigh
tional, selection for worsening ferility.The tradi
yield have anumberofdifferences in the activity
tionalviewhasbeenthattheheritabilityoffertility
oftheirmetabolicendocrine system from cows
traits is very low and the magnitude of any genetic
with a lower genetic potential,which appear to be
correlationsbetweenproduction andfertilitytraits
ofimportanceinthemechanism oftheir subfertil-
so marginal that any genetic effect of selection for
ity.Growthhormone(GH)is thechiefhormone
highyielduponfertility traitswouldbenegligible
responsible for nutrient partition in dairy cows:
（Rahejaetal1989,Weller 1989,Mantysaari&van
cowsthataregeneticallyselectedforhighyieldhave
Vleck1989,Arendonket al1989).
higherblood GH concentrations than lower-yield-
More recently this opinion has changed.Many
ing and beef cattle,whileadministration of bST(i.e.
studies (e.g.Boichard &Manfredi 1994,Hoekstra
GH) is apharmacological stimulus togreater lacta-
etal1994,Dematawewa&Berger 1998)recorded
tionalyield
geneticrelationshipsbetweenfertilityandproduc-
Growth hormone acts through receptors in liver
tion traits in US Holsteins that were high and nega-
andadiposetisstietoregulatethesupplyofglucose
tive. Even in the Swiss Simmental, often regarded as
and fatty acids to the mammary gland (Lucy 2006).
a dual purposerather than a dairy breed,anegative
The liver also produces IGF-I in response to GH,
genetic association was foundbetween yield and fer-
with a negativefeedback loopbetween hepaticIGF-I
tility(Hodel et al 1995).Asa result,ithas become
and hypothalamic GH releasinghormone(GHRH)
widely accepted that there is an inverse genetic rela-
（and,hence,pituitary GH)secretion.LiverGHrece
tionshipbetweenyield andfertilitythatismanifest
tors (GHR) decrease abruptly just prior to calving.
moststronglyintheNorthAmericanHolstein and
resulting inreduced IGF-I secretion[Lucy etal 2001,
animals derived from it.Flint(2006)even refers to
Zulu et al 2002b).Loss of the negative feedback reg-
infertilityasaninheriteddiseaseofcattle.Heritability
ulation of GH by ICF-I means that its concenta-
ofbinary traits such as conception to first service
tions rise (Fig.22.39),resulting in gluconeogenesis
remains relatively low but,by linking yield to fer-
in the liver and lipolysis in adipose tissue.Hence,
tility throughcontinuousvariablessuchasinterval
there is a net decrease inIGF-I concentrations and a
tofirst luteal activity（Royal et al 2002),embryonic
net rise in concentrations of NEFA and other prod-
mortality（Grimardetal200G),dairyconformation
ucts oflipolysis in thepostpartumperiod.Insulin
(Royal et al 2002,Berry etal2004,Dechow el al
appears to be a key mediator in this process (Fig
2004)and proportion of Holstein genetics (Wall et
22.40).High-yielding cowshavelower insulin con-
al 2005), more useful heritabilities have been identi-
centrations and amuch greater degree ofperipheral
fied Indices based on BCS have also been explored:
insulin resistance than lower-yielding cows (Wathes
some studieshavenotconsideredthemvaluable
etal2007),whilethemassive drain onbloodglu-
(e.g.Banos et al 2004)while others have come to
coseinto themammaryglandmeansthatinsulin
the opposite conclusion (e.g.Berry et al 2003,Royal
concentrations are maintainedatlowvalues.Low
etal2002).
insulinconcentrationsn turn,continueosuppres
In consequence, there has been a progressive
hepatic GHR expression,resulting in a maintenance
trendto incorporatefertility and longevity traits
ofthe catabolicstate.
intoselectionindices(Mantysaari&vanVleck1989,
Once glucose supply stars to exceed demand,the
O'Farrell 1998,Burton&Harris1999),as a means
situation becomes reversed.Strategies to increase
453
Part
5
Subfertilityand infertility
concentrations,leading to sustained GH secretions
and the consequent stimulation of lipolysis. The
effects of impaired or altered energy nutrition upon
Prepartum
AEO
Postpartum
reproductionarethereforelargelytheresultofthe
interactionoflowconcentrationsofIGF-1(Fig.22.41),
insulin andglucoseand highconcentrationsofNEFA
and βOHB with the reproductive endocrine axis.
LowbloodglucoseandelevatedβOHBandNEFA
concentrations result in impaired GnRH and/or
LH secretion（Butler&Smith 1989,Beam&Butler
1999) with consequent effects upon follicle growth
andovulation.Thisisparticularlynoticeableincows
GH
IGF·
with fatty liver,in which basal,pulsatile and pre-
GH-R
-Feedintake
ovulatoryLH areabnormal(Reid 1984).Secondly,
Insulin
Milkyield
both ICF-I and insulin are important growth fac-
tors for the growth and development of follicles
Fig.22.39 Sequence of changes in concentrations of key
(Simpson el al 1994, Armstrong et al 2002,Zulu
metabolic hormonesandmetabolitesduring the peri-calving
etal 2002a).TheactionsofIGF-1are primarily medi-
period and the onset of lactation.(Adapted from Lucy et a
2001.)
ated throughgranulosa cell proliferation(Wathes
et al 2003) and enhanced responsiveness to gonad-
otrophins（Zulu etal2002a),whileinsulin primar-
Priorto calving
ily affects oestrogen production(Wathes et al 2003).
Decreasedliver GHR
Thereis alsosomestimulationofaromataseactiv-
itybyIGF-I.LowIGF-I concentrationsaretherefore
Y
Decreased blood|IGF-|
associated withunderdevelopmentoffolliclesin
underfedcows(Webbet al1997),while cowswith
Increasedolocd[GH]
short postpartum anoestrous intervals(Thatcher
etal1996)and normalovarian function（Zulu
Increased liver
Increasedadipose
etal2002b)havehigherIGF-Iconcentrationsthan
ogenesis
lipolysis
do thosewith delayed or abnormal ovarian activ-
Suppresses liver
Onset of lactation:
Stimulates adipose
ity.Thirdly,there is evidence that negative energy
GHRexpression
Use of glucose for
GHRexpression
laclose synthesis
balance has deleterious effecis upon the oocyte
Raised blood
Lowblood
[NEFA]~
[esoon5]
A
Peripheral insulin
Hypcthalamus]
GnRH secretion
Lowblood
↓+ve feedback to OE
[insulin]
resistance
Fig.22.40Interrelationships between GH,IGF-I,insulin and
negative energybalance in thepostpartum high-yielding dairy
LHand FSH secretion
Piluitary
Response lo GnRH
cow.(Basedon data inLucy2006.)
Low IGF-1
Y
glucose supply include modifying rumen fermenta-
Cvary
↓Gianulosa prolifleration and diferentiation
↓LHFSH supporled steroidogenesis
tiontoincreasethesupplyofpropionateortodirecily
JAromatase aclivity
supplygluconeogenicsubstrates(Patton et al2004).
Lutealactivity and sleroidogenesis
Thus,feeding monensin (Hixon et al 1982),mono-
JEmbryogrowth
propylene glycol(Tunon et al 2006) or increasing the
Embryo
JIFN-Tproduction
starch coinponent of thediethas all been associated
with improved reproductive outcomes.
Fig.22.41 Effectsof lowcirculating IGF-lconcentrations on
In theunderfedcow(Lucy et al2001,Wang et al
the reproductive system.(Adapted from Zulu et al 2002a,b
and Butler 2005.)
2003)there is alsoadeclinein liver GH-IRand IGF-I
454
Chapter
221
Infertility andsubfertilityin the cow
(Kruipetal1998,Butler2005）,primarilydue1othe
releasein response to exogenous GH (McGuire el
effecis ofraised NEFA concentrations(Kruip et al
al 1992,Lucy et al2001).
2001).Theseeffectsarenotlimitedtotheduration
The effectof high levelsof proteinin the diet upon
ofelevatedNEFAconcentrations,however,andmay
concepiion ratehas been the subject of long-stand
persistwellintolactation(Snijders et al2000).Even
ingcontroversy:manystudies show an adverseeffect
when insulin concentrations areelevated through
of high protein levelsuponfertility,whilemanyoth
concentrate feeding,residual adverse effects upon
ers show no efect (Lean et al 1998).
theoocytepersist(Garnsworthy2006)
The potential for high levelsof protein to affect
Steroidogenesis in the CL is impaired in the
fertility has tobe considered in terms of the overall
absence of adequate concentrations of insulin or
metaboliceffects of excess protein.These effects are
IGF-1(Liebermann et al 1996).Conversely,luteal
wellrecognized:
cells have receptors for CH(Wathes et al 2003), so
Where energy supply is limitingand therate of
therelationshipsbetweenhighyield,negativeenrgy
ammonia production from dietary CP exceeds
balance and progesterone synthesis are relatively
the ability ofthe ruimenmicrobes to convert it
complex. On the other hand, progesterone con-
into microbial protein,excess nitrogen will be
centrationsinhigh-yielding cows arereduced by its
absorbedas ammonia(Wathes et al2003).This is
increasedmetabolismin theliver(Lucy&Crooker
particularlyafeatureofdiets that aredeficient in
2001, Sangsritavong et al 2002).Thus, regardless
readily fermentable carbohydrates and have a sig-
ofwhether the cause isimpairedlutealsynthesis
nificant excess of degradable protein (e.g. spring
orenhanced metabolism,high-yielding cows and
pasture)
animalsinnegative energy balance generallyhave
lower circulating progesterone concentrations dur-
·Excess ammonia has tobe converted to urea by
the liver.This has rwo consequences:first, there
ingthelutealphaseorearlypregnancythanother
is an energy cost associated with the synthe-
animals.Lowprogesteroneconcentrations are asso-
sis of urea,which can be an additional drain on
ciated with a reduced probability of pregnancy, at
least partly due to retarded embryo developiment
the energy resources of an underfed cow (Roche
2006). Second, blood urea concentrations rise,
and a consequentinadequateproductionof IFN-t to
prevent luteolysis (Mann et al 2006).
with potential consequences on a number of
aspects of reproductive activity.
Protein
The energy cost of metabolizing the ammonia that is
liberated from excess protein is generally accepted to
High-yieldingdairy cowsrequire around18-19%
besuchthat excess degradableproteinmay exacer-
crude protein（CP)to sustain lactation(Kung&
batenegative energy balance during early lactation,
Huber 1983). Degradable protein and non-pro-
and thereby reduce fertility(Butler1998).
tein nitrogen sources that are incorporated into
There are a number ofpossible routes by which
microbialproteinareabletomaintainmoderate
urea might affect reproduction:
yield but,in order to meet the nutrient demands
for high yields,sources of undegradable protein
Abnormallyhighconcentrations of urea and
are also needed.In terms of maintaining normal
ammonia may bepresent in the uterus(Jordan
reproductive function,however,high protein lev-
(Jordan&Swanson1979,Hossain 1993),00cytes
els are not needed,with a number of studies sug-
gesting that =16% is adequate for the maintenance
orembryos(Ferguson1990,Elrod&Butler1993,
Robinson & McEvoy 1996),or adversely affect
ofreproductiveactivity(Jordan&Swanson 1979
uterinefunction(Elrod1992,Butler1998,Rhoads
Ferguson&Chalupa1989).Undernutritioninpro-
lein(<16%CP)has,however,been associated with
etal2004)
impaired reproductive function in some (Jordan
High circulating concentrations of urea may also
&Swanson 1979,Fekete etal 1996) butnot all
have an effect upon the hypothalamic-pituitary
(Edwards etal1980).Onemechanism by which
axis, particularly LH (Jordan & Swanson 1979,
Blauwiekeletal1986)
isvia a decrease in GH receptor expression in the
Theremaybean impairmentoflutealproges-
liver(Breieret al 1999)andareduction inIGF-I
terone synthesis,resulting in reduced circulating
455
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
concentrations [Garverick etal 1972,Larson et
Mineralsandmicronutrients
al1997),although others(Ferguson& Chalupa
Effectsupon-feitility
1989)havefoundnoeffectofhighCPinclusions
onprogesteroneconcentrations
While it is generally agreed that micronutrients can
There may be adverse effects of urea upon hepatic
affectfertilityofcalehereareconflictingopinions
clearancerates ofreproductive steroids(Lean et al
aboutthesignificanceofapparent deficiencies.This
1998)
is because of the inherent difficulties of accurately
High dietary CP may be associated with an
determiningnutrientrequirements,because of lack
increased incidence ofretained fetalmembranes,
ofknowledge of the interaction of micronutrientsin
dystocia and postpartum metritis(Anderson &
thealimentarytract and because manyofthestudies
Barton 1987).
that determined nutrientrequirementswere done
40 or more years ago when yields weremuch lower.
Gerloff&Morrow(1986)andLeanetal(1998)con-
McClure （1994)also points out thatmany older
cluded fromvariousmeta-analyses of field trials that
studies attributed effects of micronutrients upon fer-
amarginal depression of conception rate occurs at
tility to studies inwhichreproductive performance
CPlevelsof16-18% and that thereduction is sig-
wascompared before and after supplementations,a
nificantatmore than 19%CP.Lavenet al(2007),on
technique that isnowconsideredtobeinvalid.
the other hand,came to the conclusion that catile
McClure (1994) suggests that most micronutri-
can tolerate high nitrogen intakes without their fer-
ent deficiencies exert their effects upon reproduc-
tilitybeing adversely affected,probably because of
tion through (1) depressionof the activity of rumen
theirabilitytoadapt tohighbloodureaconcentra-
microflora,(2)reduction in enzyme activity affect-
tions(Dawudaetal2002).Theyconcluded that the
ing energy and protein metabolism and the synthe-
effect ofexcess dietary nitrogen uponreproduction
sis of hormones and(3) integrity of rapidly dividing
is primarily afunction of the interval between the
cells within the reproductive system. To this list,
timing of theincrease innitrogen intakerelative to
Lean et al (1998) add theroleofmicronutrients as
fertilization or ovulation(i.e.with a shorterinterval
antioxidants,which are responsible for protecting
increasing the likelihood of an effect),than to CP
cellsfrom the effectsoffreeradicals.
or rumen degradable protein (RDP) contents per se.
Hence,he effects ofexcess nitrogen are more lilely
toberelated toacuteincreasesinbloodammonia
Cobalt
(and hence follicle,oocyte and intrauterine ammo-
nia) in thepre-adaptation period than to those of
Cobalt deficiency occurs in pastures of Australia,
urea(which represent apost-adaptation situation).
NewZealand,Florida,Kenya andScotland(McClure
However, where excess nitrogen causes a signifi-
1994).Deficiency occurs when diets contain less
cant drain on the energy resources of cows that are
than 0.07mg/lg dry matter(DM)cobalt and is due
alreadyin negative energy balance,this is likely to
to failure ofvitamin, synthesis,which is an sen
impairreproduction via energy-mediated pathways.
tial cofactorforcarbohydratemetabolism.Deficiency
Interestingly,anumberofstudieshaveshown that
usually causes anaemia,inappetence,poor bodily
small improvementsintheLIDPcontentofthediet
condition,ill thrift and loss ofcondition.Poorfer-
improvesfertiliryor,at least,mitigatestheeffectsof
tility(non-display of oestrus,irregularinteroestrous
high levels of RDP (Armstrong et al 1990, Staples
intervals and poor pregnancy rates) may be present
at the same time as these obvious signs of deficiency.
(1994) and Webb et al (1997) improve the avail-
Sometimes poor fertility in apparently normal cows
ability of gluconeogenic substrates.However,the
can be corrected by cobalt supplementation.
mostcommon sourceofhigh-gradeundegraded
Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring liver
protein for such trials is fish meal,a feedstuff that
cobalt or vitamin B,concentrations.The concen
alsocontainsuniquefattyacidsthatcanaffectnot
tration ofcobalt intheliversofcaitleis sufficiently
onlycarbohydratemetabolismbut alsoprostaglan-
responsivetochangesincobalt intaketomakeila
din and steroid metabolism(Staples1998b;Meier
useful aid in the diagnosis ofcobalt deficiency in
2000,Verkerk 2000), so the effects are not necessar-
the field.Similarly, the responsiveness ofvitamin B
ilya direct effect ofUDP.
concentrations to suboptimalcobalt intakesmakes
456
Chapter
221
Infertility and suibfertilityin thecow
ita useful diagnosticaid.Blood concentrations of
gested thaufertility isnot relatedto blood copper
cobalt or vitamin B,can also be used, although
concentrations（e.g.Larson etal 1980),nor does
thereissomedoubtconcerningthevalue ofthelat-
coppersupplementationhaveapositiveeffecton
termeasurement in caitle(Parkinson etal 2008)
ferility (whiutaker 1980).Moreover,in a number
of studies where copper deficiency has clearly been
documented,there oftenisnoimpact onfertilityor
Copper andmolybdenum
reproductiveperformance(Corah 1996).
Hypocuprosis can be either direct or indirect.
Oneof the problemswith determiningwhether
Direct copper deficiency, due to an absolute defi-
copperdeficiencyisaffectingfertilityisfindingan
ciency of copper in the diet, is exceedingly uncom-
accuratemeasureofcopper status(Laven&Livsey
mon(Suttle2002).Most casesofcopper deficiency
2005), since neither blood nor liver copper concen-
are indirect,asaresult of excessive levelsofmolyb
trations,nor blood ceruloplasmin concentrations,
denum,iron or sulphur (and,possibly,calcium
provide a full representation of animals' copper sta-
orzinc) in the diet,which result in the conver-
tus.Suttle(2002) suggested the use ofmultiplecrite-
sion of copper into an insoluble, indigestible
ria and,if there are a number of thesethatarebelow
form within therumen (Phillippo 1983,McClure
thelowerlimit of the‘marginal'band,a diagnosis of
1994,Underwood&Suitle1999).Hypocuprosisis
hypocuprosis islikely(Table22.17).Valuesabove
mostlikelywhen thereis highsoilmolybdenum,
thecutoffindicatethatthereislittlelikelihoodof
high soil pH (e.g.after liming:Phillippo 1983),
coppersupplementationbeingbeneficial
immature plants, excess rainfall/irrigation and/or
contamination of forage with soil (Suttle 2004)
lodineandgoitrogens
Decreased useofsulphur-containingfertilizers and
avoidanceofexcesslevelsofiron inclusion inmin
Simple iodine deficiency occurs when intakes are
eral feed supplements appearstobe associatedwith
below 0.8mg/kgDM (Alderman1970) to2.0mg/lg
a decrease in the prevalenceofindirect copper defi-
DM(McClure 1994).Lean et al(1998)consid-
ered thatpercutaneous absorption ofiodine-based
It has been suggested that excess dietary molybde-
teatdipsis adequate toprevent deficiencyinmilk-
num may have direct effects that mimic many of
ing cows.lodine deficiency is largely manifested
the features of hypocuprosis(Phillippo et al 1982),
through the effects of a lack of thyroxine. As thy-
although Suttle （2002) discounts this possibil-
roxine isa generalmetabolicregulator(McDonald
ity.Themain consequence ofcopper deficiencyis
&Pineda 1989),its deficiency is associated with
upon the efficiency of food utilization,because of
non-specific signs ofill thrift and poorgrowth.The
effectsupon theintegrityofthesinall intestine and
main effects ofiodine deficiency upon reproduc-
of loss of activity of energy-metabolism (McClure
tionarealsorelated to impairedthyroid function
1994). Copper also has a role as an antioxidant,
in the dam, embryo or fetus.The most common
which maybe of importance toreproductive per-
abnormalities associated with iodine deficiency are
formance(Leanet al 1998).
embryonic death,abortion and stillborn or weak,
Copper deficiency has longbeen associated with
goitrous calves.Loss of libido and inhibition of
impaired fertility.This has been manifested as a
oestrous behaviour （although not necessarily of
reductioninfirst-serviceconceptionrates,mpaired
ovarian cycles)have also been reported(Spielman
embryonic survival,a reduction in overall preg-
etal1945,Williams&Stott1966,McDonald1980).
nancy rates and poor display of oestrus. Impaired
However, the results of iodine supplementation
LHsecretionhasbeenimplicated as themain means
trials (e.g. with injection of iodized oil;Logan
bywhichtheseeffectsmaybemediated(Phillippo
etal1991,Mee1991)uponfertilitytraitsotherthan
et al 1982,1987).Effects can range fromnegligible
stillbirths isequivocal (Anderson et al 2007).
to pronounced (Corah 1996).All of the effects of
Disturbance ofthyroid function can alsobe due
to goitrogenic substance present in kale, lentils,
current excess ofdietary molybdenum(Phillippo
soya bean,linseed and certain strains ofwhite clo-
et al 1982,1987).Some studies have suggested that
ver（Boyd&Reid 1961,Tassell 1967).High levelsof
they may be responsive to copper supplementation
such goitrogenic substances canproduce anoestrus
(eg.Pickering 1975),but other studies have sug-
in heifers（David 1965)
457
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Table 22.17Diagnosis of copper deficiency:lower limits of'marginal'bands'(fromSuttle2002)
Criterion
Diet
Lowerlimitof
Interpretivelimits
marginal band
Diet Cu:Mo
Fresh herbage
1.0-3.0
DietaryS>2g/kgDM,
Forage-based
0.5-2.0
Mo<15mg/kgDM
Diet Fe:Cu
50-100
Diet Cu
Fresh herbage
6-8mg/kgDM
Diet Mo<1.5mg/kgDM
Forage-based
4-6mg/kgDM
Liver Cu
100-300μmol/kgDM
Serum Cu
3-8umol1
DietMo<15mg/kgDM
No acute phaseresponse
Age>3days
Blood Cu
6-10μmoll
Manganese
suboestrus,irregular cycles and low conception
rates （Hignel & Hignett 1951,Morrow 1969,
Manganese isa cofactor ina number of enzymes that
Morris 1976),in the absence ofother clinical
areresponsibleforgluconeogenesis(McClure1994)
signs of phosphorus deficiency.Others (Littlejohn
and has a significantrole asan antioxidant(Lean
&Lewis 1960,Cohen 1975,Carstairs et al 1980)
et al 1998).Manganese is also involved in choles-
foundnoevidenceofreducedfertilityassociated
terol synthesis and hence steroidogenesis.Both the
with phosphiorus.
pituitarygland andovaries arerelativelyrich in this
Daily phosphorus intakes should be about 13g/
trace element.A variety of reproductive disorders
day for maintenance with abou 7g extra for each
that depress ferility in cowshavebeen blamedon
4.5 litres of milk (Deas et al 1979). Most forage
manganese deficiency,including delayed puberty,
contain adequatelevelstomeetthesedemandsbut
anoestrus,poor follicular development,delayed
deficiencies may occur on phosphate-deficient soils
ovulation,silent oestrus and reduced conception
(McClure 1975).Morris (1976) suggested that defi-
rates(Lean1987,Hurley&Doane1989,Kendall
ciencycanoccurwhenthephosphoruscontentof
&Bone 2006). It also causes joint and limb defor-
the feed is less than =0.25%.High-yielding cows
mities in calves.Uinder normal circumstances it is
need phosphorus in excess of that available in pas-
lilkely thatnormalpasture will provide the necessary
turebut,sincecerealgrains containlargeamounts,
requirement of 80mg/kg DM(Alderinan&Stranks
deficiencies are unlikely to occur.Bloodphospho-
1967),although some foods (e.g.maize silage) are
rusconcentrationsoflessthan4mg/dlinanimals
low in manganese.In addition,hereis an intrac
at peak production are indicative of deficiency.If
tionwiththecalcium:phosphorusratioin thediet,
hypophosphataemia is suspected,arapidresponse
withsomeevidencethathighlimingofpasturecan
can follow the feeding of dicalcium phosphate
cause manganese deficiency.
(150-200g/day) or bone meal.
Phosphorus
SeleniumandvitaminE
The evidence for theimportance of hypophospha-
The primary role for which selenium is recog-
taemia as a cause of infertility is conflicting.The
nized clinically is as a component of the cytosolic
provisionofsupplementaryphosphorushasbeen
enzyme glutathione peroxidase(GPx).Cytosolic
shown to improve the breeding performance of
GPXactsin concert with other antioxidants topre-
grazingcattle（Sheehy1946,Hart&Mitchell 1965,
vent damage to cellular membranes induced by
Tassell1967).Anumberofauthorshavedescribed
free radicalsthatarisefrom cellularmetabolism
infertility that was characterized by anoestrus,
ofoxygen(Wichtel 1998a).However,many other
458
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
selenium-containing enzymes exist,including
Selenium deficiency can occur when soilsconitain
iodothyronine deiodases andother glutathione
lessthan0.5mg/kgorthedietcontainsless than
peroxidases,some ofwhich have functions that are
0.05mg/kgselenium.VitaminE deficiency occurs
quite distinct from the antioxidantroleof cytoso-
when aninals graze postmature pasture, receive
licGPX.Theroles ofselenium are thereforewide-
other dietcomponents that contain less than 0.7mg/
spreadthroughout thebody:
kgofthevitamin orarefed dietsthat arehigh in
Lipid peroxidation:Selenium,inconcer with the
polyunsaturated or rancid fats (McClure 1994).
activederivative ofvitaminE,α-tocopherol,pre-
Diagnosis ofseleniumdeficiency can bemadeby
vents lipid peroxidation of membranes, particu-
measuring circulating concentrations ofselenium
larly oftheskeleraland cardiacmuscles
or,better,by measuring selenium stores in the liver
(Table22.18;Wichtel et al 1998b).Measurement of
·Arachidonic acid metabolism: Glutathione per-
levelsinfeed,pastureorsoil is alsooftenindicated.
oxidases areinvolvedinthemetabolismofarachi-
Supplementation is widely practised,especially in
donicacid into theintermediateprostaglandins
areaswhere soils areknown tobe marginal or defi-
PGGand PGH(Hongetal 1989)
cient.However,it should beremembered that exces-
Phagocyte activity:Selenium deficiency,mediated
sive selenium is toxic,especially whereithas been
through glutathione peroxidases, is associated
given by injection.
withreducedbacteriocidalactivity of neutro-
Studies involving selenium-deficient Friesian-
phils,reduced proliferation of lymphocytes and
Holstein heifers have shown improved pregnancy
increased release ofperoxides and macrophages
rates after treatmeni(MacPhersonetal1987).Taylor
(Wichteletal1998a)
etal(1979)found a lower abortionrate aftersele-
·Iodothyronine 5-deiodinase:The enzyme,which
nium supplementation,whileMcClureet al(1986)
convertsthyroxineintotheactivethyroidhor-
reportedahigherfirst-serviceconceptionrateafler
mone, triodothyronine, is selenium-containing
selenium supplementation.Vitamin E deficiency
(Berry et al 1991). Hence, the growth retardation
is directly associated with embryonic loss in cows
that is associated with selenium deficiency appears
and, through its role in the immune system, may
tobe dueat least inpari,to impairedthyroid
also affect the rate of uterine involution after calving
function.
(Lean etal 1998).
A wide range ofeffecis of selenium deficiency on
reproductive performance have been reported,
VitaminA and β-carotene
including retained fetal membranes, poor uterine
involution,metritis,cystic ovaries and impaired
Diets thatare deficient in β-carotenecan result in
fertilization (Trinder et al 1973,Harrison et al
impairmentthrough direct effecis ofβ-carotene
1986a,b).Wichtel(199Sa)noted that the effects of
and throughvitaminA deficiency.McClure(1994)
seleniumdeficiency onuterineinvolutionandpost-
suggested that deficiency only occurs when ani-
partumovarianactivitycouldbemediated through
mals have been on diets that containless than
itseffectsonimmunefunction,uterinecontractility.
45mg/kgB-caroteneforaconsiderableperiodof
thyroid hormone activity or prostaglandin synthe-
time.
sis(Segersonetal1980,Hongetal 1989,Spallholz
Early studies(Kuhlman&Gallup 1942,Madsen&
etal1990,Wichtelelal1996).
Davis1949,Byersetal1956)showedthatvitaminA
Wholeblood Se
Serum Se
Glutathione
Liver Se
(nmol/l)
(nmol/l)
peroxidase (kU/l)
(nmol/kg)
Responsive
<130
<52
<0.5
<380
Marginal
130-250
52-100
0.5-2.0
380-650
Adequate
>250
>100
>2.0
>650
459
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
deficiency is associated with delayed puberty,
Antioxidant function
low pregnancy rates and poor conception rates.
A number of mcronutrients are believed o act upon
Subsequenily, the work of Lotthammer (1979)
identified a direct effect of β-carotene though stud-
reproductive perforimance primarily through their
role as antioxidants. Many metabolic actions produce
ies on feeds thiat contained adequate levels ofvita-
superoxides, which, through the Fenton reaction,
min A but were deficient in β-carotene.Diets that
are deficient in β-carotene but are adequate in vita-
produice highly destructive free radicals (Fettman
1991).Normally, the tissue-damaging effects of these
min A have been reported to result in extended fol-
free radicals are prevented by the presence of anti
licular phases,delayed ovulation,silent oestrus,
follicular cysts (Lothammer et al 1978), low
oxidants.Many of these are essential micronutrients,
conception rates, low pregnancy rates (Cooke
so,when thesemicronutrientsbecome deficient,free
radical rissue damage occurs (lean et al 1998). Frec
1978) and impaired luteal progesterone synthesis
radical damage includes the creation of toxic lipids.
(Jackson 1981).
reactive proteins, free radical cascades and nucleic
However,not all studies have agreedwith these
acid damage. Transition metals, by virtue of their abil.
resulis.Bindas et al (1983), Ducker et al (1984)
ity to change oxidation states, are the key component
Marcek et al (1985) and Gossen & Hoedemaker
(2005) all found that reproductive performance was
of many antioxidant systems.
unresponsive to β-carotene. The reasons for the dif-
McClure (1994) lists selenium,-tocopherol,
β-carotene and copper as the key antioxidanis. To
ferent responses are difficult to explain,The current
this list, Lean etal (199s) add manganese, zinc,iro1,
view ofβ-carotene is that, if it has a role in repro-
cobalt and vitamin A. Glucose, sulphur-containing
duction,it is probably related to its activity as an
amino acids and various proteins probably also
antioxidant, perhaps protecting the maturation of
exert some antioxidant role.Dieiary sources,active
the 0ocyte(lkedaet al2005) or development ofthe
forms, sites of action and mechanism of action of
early embryo.
the major antioxidants are listed in Table 22.19.
Zinc
Phyto-oestrogens
Zincis actively involved in a range of enzyme func-
When cows ingest large quantities of these sub-
tions. The significance of zinc appears to be greater
stances they become anoestrous, with large ovarian
in males (Hurley &Doane 1989) than in females
(Pitts et al 1966). Zine deficiency in the bull may
cysts,vulval andcervical enlargement and poor con-
ceplion rates (Morris 1976). Such substances are
cause impaired fertility associated wiih an altera-
tion in the latter stages of spermatogenesis (Corah
found in subterranean clover,certain strains of red
1996). This impairment of male infertility appears
and white clover and lucerne.
tobe associated with the role ofzinc as an activa-
tor of enzymes involved in testosterone synthesis.
Investigation of nutritional factors
Zinc deficiency in ihe female may cause a decrease
as a cause of infertility
infertility and abnormal oestrousbehaviour (Corah
&Ives 1991].
It is frequently impossible to accurately determine
The uptake of zinc is impaired by copper,cal-
a specific nutrifional cause of infertility, because the
cium,iron,molybdenum and cadmium.However,
clinical signs appear some time after the deficiency
Suttle(1994) suggested that the presenceofzincin
has occurred. Methods such as the use of cumula
soil and in galvanized pipe ware means that defi-
tive frequency graphs (Cu-Sums) of conception rate
 or monitoring daily bull milk protein concentrations
benefit from chelated zinc supplements is there-
can help to pinpoint the times at which management
fore open to question (Ulnderwood & Suttle 1999).
changes took place that have adversely affected nutri-
Zinc toxicity is rare, but excessive zinc supplemen-
lion (see Ch. 24).Effects of improving nutrition are
tationmayleadtoperturbationofessential fatty
more difficult to determine, since changes in the sea-
acid metabolism and hence affect prostaglandin
son of the year and management can also have an
synthesis.
effect that can obfuscate the effects of changes in diet.
460
Chapter
22
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
Table 22.19 Dietary sources, active forms, sites of action and mechanism cf action of themajor antioxidants (with permission
from Lean et al 1998)
Dietary input
Biologically active
Site of action
Mechanism of action
antioxidant
Selenium
 Glutathione percxidase
IC, membrane
Reduces peroxides
Copper
Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
IC
Scavenges O
Ceruloplasmin
Binds Cu,oxidizesFe
Superoxide dismutase
EC
Scavenges O
Zinc
Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
IC
Scavenges O
Superoxide dismutase
EC
Scavenges O,
Metallothicnein
EC
Binds metal ions
Manganese
Mn superoxide dismutase
IC
Scavenges O
Iron
Catalase
IC
Reduces percxides
Transferrin
EC
Binds iron
Cobalt
Vitamin B2
Vitamin E
c-tocophero.
Membrane
elocks peroxidation
VitaminA
Re.inol
EC
Maintains cellintegrity
β-carotene
B-carotene
Membrane
Singlet oxygen
Retinol
EC
Maintains cell intecrity
Glucose
Ascorbate
EC
Radical scavenger
Sulphur-containing
Glutathione
IC
Replenishes glutathione
arnino acius
peroxidase
Protein
Various
EC
Bincs metal ions,
 Scavenges OH
IC= intracallular;EC= extracellular
In most cases, the most important factor respon-
a significant disadvantage,in terms of feed intale
sible for poor fertility is underfeeding.This is most
than their herd-mates
commonly diie to:
·failure to appreciate the reduction of forage intalke
●overestimation of the feeding value of forages.
caused byhigh concentrate intake (Alderman 1970)
For conserved forage, it is important to obtain
·underfeedingofconcentrates due toautomatic
accurate analysis of themajor food components
dispensers giving short measure.Parker & Blowey
from truly representative samples. For pasture,
(1976) found errors greater than 50% in some
it is important to accurately estimate both the
cases. Manual dispensers in the milking shed are
amount and the digestibility of the material that
morecommonly inaccurate lian accurate.
is present
It is necessary to calculate the requirenents of the
·overestimation of feed intaketinder self-feedcon-
cows for maintenance and production and then
ditions. Self-fed silage is especially susceptible to
obtain accurate information about the precise quan-
overestimation. However, it should be noted that,
tities fed. Contributions from mineral licks and
in most situations where self-feeding is practised,
other free access sources are difficult to quantify.
especially where there is inadequate feeding space
Weighing, the use of a girth band measure or condi-
for all cows to feed simultaneously, vulnerable
tion scoring of a representative nuimber of animals
cows (i.e.first calvers,smaller cows,etc.) will be at
are also useful.
461
Part
[51
Subfertility andinfertility
Bile acids:Although included as ameans of
Metabolicprofiles
assessinglipidinfiltration oftheliver,thisisnot
Since theintroduction ofmetabolicprofilelists in
reliable: liverbiopsy is preferable
1970(Payneelal1970)theyhavefrequentlybeen
·Calcium:As homoeostatic control is strong,cal-
usedtohelpintheevaluationofthenutritional status
cium measurements are of little value except in
ofaherdparticularlyinrelationtofertility.Metabolic
clinical cases
profilesarebestused in conjunctionwithotherdirect
Magnesium:
:Values below the normal range
assessments ofnutrient quality (such as ME,digest-
(0.8-1.3 mmol/1) maybeindicative ofincipient grass
ibility,RDP and UDPestimates of forages) and sup-
staggers if very low,orofimpairment of production
plyas'a way ofaslingthecows that they thinkof the
due to subclinical hypomagnesaemia if marginal
monly collected for interpretation of energy status
·Inorganic phosphate:Phosphorus
deficiency
is not common,so phosphate status should be
areglucose,NEFA and βOHIB;forprotein,samples
include urea, albumin and globulin (Table 22.20).
checked before adding supplementary phosphate
Other samples that are sometimes incorporated
tothediel
intometabolic profiles include(Whittaker 1997,
·Copper:Bloodcopper concentrationsarenota
2004):
reliable indicator ofcopper status (require liver
Table22.20Normalrangesandinterpretationof samplescollectedformetabolicprofiles(derivedfromWhittaker1997,2004)
Sample
Optimal range
Interpretation
Advantages
Disadvantages
(lactating cows)
Energy
β-hydroxybutyrate
<1.0mmol/l
0.6-1.0mmol/l:
Stablein transit
Butyratemay be
acceptable level of fat
absorbed frombutyric
mobilization
silage
>2.0mmol/l:ketosis
Non-esterified fatty
<0.7mmol/l
>1.5mmoll:ketosis
More direct measure
Less stable in samples
spise
of fatmobilization
thanβOHB
thanβOHB
May be raised in stressed
animals
Glucose
>3.0mmol/
Variationwithin opti-
Sensitive to short-term
Close homoeostatic
(plasma)
mumrangeaccording
changes in
regulation
toweight change
fermentable ME
Must use oxalate-fluoride
Very high va ues in
anticoagulant
stressed animals
Measureinplasmarather
than serum or whole
Protein
Urea
UreaN:>1.7mmol1
Low:inadequate
Urea:>3.6mmol/l
RDP:FMEratio
High:excess RDP:FME
>3.3mmol//urea N:
inadequateFME in diet
Albumin
>30g/
Low:poor liver health
Serum samples have
orlong-term
lower valuesthanplasma
underfeeding of
protein
Globulin
<50g/
High:indicates
Not re ated tohow
presence of infection
acuteorsevereadisease
processis
462
Chapter
221
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
samples),although concentrations decline when
to the oocyte,impaired protein synthesis during
livercopper stores are deplete
he morula and blastocyst periods and, possibly,
Glutathione peroxidase:Since GPX concentra-
through impaired endometrial activity.
tions are a long-rather than short-term measure
Effecis of heal stress are also seen in later gestation.
Placenta weight and calf birth weight are reduced in
ofselenium statuscare is needed in interpreting
cows that calved in hot months versus those calving
results.
in coolermonths,orversus cows providedwith cool
Detailsofthetests and theirevaluationareavailable
elsewhere (Whittaker 2004).In general terms,meta-
ingduringthehotmonths（Thatcher&Collier1986,
Wolfenson et al1988).Thusheat stress maynot only
bolic profiles attempt to assess the energy balance
affect pregnancyrates ifit occurs at thetime of fertiliza
of lactating cows by estimating blood metabolite
tion but also impair pregnancy throughout is course.
concentrations.
Forexample,theeffectsofheatstresscanbeovercome
by coolingcowswith shade(Vermeulen1988),water
sprays (Omar et al 1996) or sprays used in combina-
Other factors affecting
tionwith forcedventilation(Flamenbaum etal 1988,
reproductive performance
Lu et al 1992).Theeffecisofimpairedoestrus display
canbeovercomebyusingoestrussynchronizationpro-
Heat stress
grammes,with timedAl(Arechiga et al 1998).
Hence, while heat stress causes a significant
Heat stress affects two main aspects of reproduction
impairmentofmanyparameters ofreproductive
in female cattle: the expression of oestrus and the
performance (anoestrus, lowered conception rates,
establishment ofpregnancy.
reduced calf birth weight and, possibly,impaired
Oestrus expression is reduced in heat-stressed
post-partum uterine involution), simple manage
cows.Both the duration ofoestrus and the abil-
ment procedures aregenerally sufficienttomitigate
ityofherdmanagerstodetectoestrusarereduced
or alleviatetheproblem.Simplyprovidingshade
in the hotseason of subtropical/Mediterranean
and adequate access to water helps considerably.
climates (Hansen 2007).This is probably due to
whilecoolingwithwater and/or forcedventilation
decreased locomotor activity and a reduction in
is highly effective.
oestradiolsecretionfromthepre-ovulatoryfollicles
ofheatstressed cows(Thatcher&Collier1986,Lu
The'repeatbreeder'syndrome
impaired LH secretion(Madan Johnson 1973,Lee
1993).However,GnRH may also be affected,since
the addition of GnRH to oestrus synchronization
The term‘repeat breeder'was coined to describe
protocolsimprovesconceptionratesin heat-stressed
cows thatfailedtoconceive afteranumberofser-
cows (Ullah et al 1996, Marai et al 1998).
vices.By mathematical chance, if cows have a 60%
Many studieshave shown thatconceptionrates
conceptionrate,about 6.4%of theanimalsina herd
are reduced when ambient temperatures are high
will not have conceived after the third mating.It was
(e.g.Dunlap&Vincent 1971,Barker etal1994）.The
originally considered that chance was the only fac
effects of heat stress are primarily upon early ges-
tor in determiningwhether these animals failed
tation.Most studies have shown that fertilization
to conceive. However, when the cows that repeat-
rates are normal(Thatcher &Collier 1986,Wise
edly fail to conceive have been examined in more
etal 1988),but death occurs between fertilization
detail, it has been clear that they are not the ran-
and maternal recognition of pregnancy.Most deaths
dom group of animals that mathematical probabil-
occur during the early cleavage divisions (Roman-
ity would suggestbutcontain a subsetofcattle that
are actually subfertile.Moreover,Barrett etal(2004)
although alower rateofdeathsalsooccursbetween
showed that, rather than =6% of animals being non-
days 8and 16(Biggers et al 1986).These effects are
pregnant after the third service, the figure is closer
probablymediatedthroughanincreaseincorebody
lo12%,thedifferencebetweenthetheoretical and
temperature. Hansen (2007) suggested that the
actual figures also being composed of a group of
effects of heat stress are mediated through damage
subfertile animals.
463
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Earlyworkonrepeatbreederswasresponsiblefor
Table22.21Embryonic death in normal andrepeat-breeder
the identification and subsequentelimination of
cows (compiled from:$reenan&Diskin1986(normal cows)
someofthemajorvenerealpathogensofcattle;yet
and Ayalon 1978（repeatbreeders))
even when this had been achieved,there remained
Day
Percentage of animals with
anirreducibleproportionofcows thatexperienced
embryos
repeated pregnancy failure. Some repeat breeders
aresimplycowsthathave grosspathologyofthe
Normal
Repeat breeder
reproductivesystem,havesomefunctionalform of
2-3
85
71
infertilityorexperiencesomemanagementalpre
11-13
74
50
disposition to infertility. A number of reviews have
14-16
73
50
enumerated the causesofreproduciivefailurein
such animals(Roberts 1986,Lafi&Kaneene1988,
17-19
60
43
Eddy 1994,Levine1999).Manyof thesecauses have
35-42
67
35
beenconsideredpreviouslyandcanbediagnosed by
careful clinical examination andhistory-taking.The
repeat breeder cow that presents the greatest clinical
Thus,provided one has excluded obvious patho
and managemental challenge,however,is the ani-
logical lesions,mismanagement of mating and
mal thatcontinuallyreturmstoserviceintheabsence
infectious diseases that impair reproductive perfor-
ofanyobviouspathologicaldisease
mance,threemain causes ofrepeat breedingremain
as causesofanimpaireduterineenvironment:
abnormalities of the periovulatory period,chronic
Impaired embryonic development
endometrial damage and luteal deficiency.
Ayalon andco-workers(1968,Ayalon1972)under-
toolanumberofpivotal studies oftherepeat
Periovulatoryabnormalities
breeder cow.They found a slightly reduced fertiliza
tionrateinrepeatbreeders comparedwithnormal
A number of studies ofrepeatbreeder cowshave
cowsbutafterfertilizationthetwogroupsofcows
shown endocrine abnormalities of the periovulatory
exhibited very different patterns of embryonic sur-
period.Repeat breeders are likely to have delayed
vival.Repeatbreeders suffered a significant level of
ovulation and an extended follicular phase (Bage
embryonicdeath (Ayalonetal 1968,Ayalon 1972,
etal 2002a,Bhupenderetal2005).This appears tobe
1978,Maurer&Echternkamp 1985)ataround the
associated with thepresence of suprabasal progester-
sixth dayof pregnancy,with furtherlosses at around
one concentrations during the follicular phase (Bage
days17-19(Table 22.21).These timings are associ-
2003,Bhupender et al 2005),which Vos(1999) sug-
ated,first,withhatching from thezona pellucida
gested allowsfollicledevelopment but postpones the
and,second,with failure ofthe maternalrecogni-
LH surge.Hence,thereisa longer interval between
tion of pregnancy on day 16. Moreover, embryos
luteolysis and ovulation and a delayed LH surge,
derivedfromnormal cowsfailedto surviveinthe
resulting in follicles and oocytes that are relatively
uteri of repeat breeders, while embryos derived
aged by the time of ovulation.Repeat breeder cows
fromrepeatbreedershadnormalsurvivalratesin
arealsomorelikelytohavetwo-thanthree-wave
normalcows（Almediaetal 1984,Ayalon 1984)
Cycles(Perez et al2003),furtherincreasing theprob
Furthermore, the fertilization and cleavage rates of
ability of the presence of aged follicles.
oocytescollectedbyovumpick-upandfertilizedin
Possiblyasaresult of theimpairmentofthe events
vitroaresimilarinrepeaibreederandnormalcows
aroundovulation,repeatbreeders are alsomore
(Bage et al 2003).Hence,theproblem of therepeat
lilkely to have a delayed postovulatory risein proges-
breeder isprimarilyin theuterine environment
terone concentrations(Bage et al 2002b).
ratherthanrepresentinga deficiencyoftheembryo
itselfalthough,by the seventh dayof gestation
Damage to the endometrium
invitrodevelopmentalcapacityofembryosderived
from repeat breeders is compromised (Tanabe
Althoughchronicmetritishasbeenassociatedwith
et al1985), as is their morphological development
therepeatbreedingsyndrome at anepidemiological
(Gustafsson 1985).
level(e.g.Mosset al2002),some doubthasbeencast
464
Chapter
1221
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
on theimportanceofuterineinfection.Forexample,
treatment ofrepeatbreeders is frequentlybased on
Levine(1999) did not place great importance upon
this assumption.
chronicuterineinfection asacauseofrepeatbreed
Therelationshipbetweenprogesteroneconcentra-
ing, citing studies by Hartigan et al(1972）,DeKruif
tions and pregnancyrate has been investigated on
(1976),Hartigan(1978)and Roberis (1986)as evi-
many occasions. Most of these studies agree ihat
denceofagenerallylowinfectionrateandmoderate
blood or milk progesterone concentrations in preg-
bacterialrecovery rates.Interestingly,recent studies
nantanimalsdivergefromthose thatfail to conceive
from the Indian subcontinent do not support this
atsomepointberweendays6and14post insemi-
view,since,forexample,Ramakrishna(1996)found
nation（Erbetal 1976,Bulman&Lamming1978.
4Gout of60repeatbreedercows tohavesignificant
Lukaszewska&Hansel1980,Bloomfieldetal 1986,
bacterial isolates from cervical discharges; Malik
Lammingetal1989,Parkinson&Lamming1990)
etal(1987) found370out of396mucus samples
andthatthisdivergenceislilkelytobeofimportance
from infertilecows tobeinfected.Moreover,infec-
for the successofembryodevelopment.Moreover,
tion does not have tobe active atthetime ofsam-
Starbuck et al (1999) suggested that milk pro-
plingforinfection-relateduterinedamagetohave
gesterone concentrations of less than 3ng/ml on
occurred.The effectsofinfection upon endometrial
day5post-inseminationareunlikelyoresult in
scarring in the mare are well known (see Ch. 26) but
pregnancies
eveninthecowthereisincreasinglyclearevidence
However,attempts at diagnosing lutealinade
that chronicuterine damage results from infec-
quacybytakingasinglesampleofmilkorbloodfor
tion. Gonzalez (1984) associated infertility with progesterone analysis are also of little value (Barrett
the degree of endometrial damage that was pres-
etal 2004).Hence,given that the relationship
entinuterinebiopsies,whileDeBois&Manspeaker
between lowprogesterone andpregnancy failure is
(1986),in theirreview ofendometrial biopsiesin
oneofprobabilitiesrather thanofabsolutevalues,
cattle,noted that mild chronic endometritis is one
attemptshavebeenmadelofindcost-effectiveways
of the most common causes of repeat breeding.
to augment circulating progesterone concentrations
Henceitwas theiropinion that endometrialbiopsy
in the hope of improving the pregnancyrate in an
is an essential part of the examination of the valu-
entireherd,especially among therepeat breeders.
ablecowwithunexplainedinfertility.
Uterine secretions ofrepeat breeder cows have
Treatment
been characterized as differingfrom those of normal
cows(Zavy &Giesert 1994).Almedia el al (1984)
Themain luteotrophichormone of thecow is LH
showed qualitative and quantitative differences in
“Thus, if LH activity is enhanced (e.g. by injection
theionic composition ofuterine flushings of normal
ofhCGor GnRH)after ovulation,a stimulation of
and repeat breeder cows.No clear-cut associations
thedevelopmentandfunctionofthecorpusluteum
betweenbiopsylesions anduterine secretion char-
may result.Despite the long-standing use of hCG as
acteristicsareevident in theliterature anditmight
a‘holdinginjection'in infertilecows,thereisno sta
be argued that differences in uterine secretory pro-
tistically significanteffect in improvingpregnancy
files are as likely toreflect differences in luteal activ-
ratesin either normal cows(Greve &Lehn-lensen
ity(or,at leastprogesterone status)as the degreeof
1982,Sreenan&Diskin 1983)orrepeatbreeders
histologicalchangetoendometrialstructure.
（Hanseletal1976,Leidletal1979)
Resultsfor theuse of GnRHat the timeofinsem-
Luteal deficiency
ination have generally been positive (Schels and
Mostafawi 1978,Lee etal 1981,Naka0 et al 1983,
Progesterone is necessary for themaintenance of
Morgan&Lean 1993),especially by improving preg-
pregnancy.Until 150-200 days of pregnancy the
nancyratesforservices other than thefirst(Maurice
main source ofthehormone isthecorpusluteum;
etal 1982,Stevensonetal 1984).Hlence,theuse of
so thatifthis isnot completelyformedor it isnot
GnRHin thiswayisquitecommon(Malmo&Beggs
functioning adequately then insufficient proges-
2000).Lean etal(2003)undertoola meta-analysis
teroneisproducedand thepregnancy fails.Luteal
of40trialsonthe administrationofGnRHatinsem-
deficiency has been suspected of causing inferil-
ination,with the result that he overallrisk of preg-
ityformanyyearsand,althoughproofisdifficult,
nancy wasincreased by 12.5%in allcows,butwas
465
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
increasedby22.5%whenused inrepeatbreeders.
Alnimer M,LubbadehW2003Asian-Aust]AnimSci16:
Resultswerebetteratinseminations subsequent to
1268
AmbroseDJ,SciEJPLopesFLetal 2004CanVe45:
thefirst compared to thoseobtained following the
use of GnRH or analogue at first.
931
Amyot E,1urnik IF 1987 CanAnim Sci 67:605
An alternative approach hasbeen to give hCG or
Anderson GW,BartonB1987NewEnglandFeedDealers
GnRH 11-13 days after breeding.The rationale for
Conference,cited by Ferguson&Chalupa1989
this approach,is toinduce accessoryClsorluteinid
Anderson WA.Davis CL 1958 In:Gassner FX (ed)
follicles,or to augmentthe progesterone secretion
Reproductionandinfertility,3rdSymposium.Pergamon
from existing structures. Macmillan et al (1986) and
Press,New York
Anderson GB, Cupps PI, Drosi M et al 1978 J Anim Sci 46:
Sheldon&Dobson(1993)recordedbenefits from
449
such a regimen,but not all studies have agreed with
Anderson PD,Dalir-Naghadeh B,ParkinsonT|2007 Proc NZ
this (e.g. Jubb etal 1990). Meta-analysis of the effects
SocAnimProd 67:248
of 8-10μg buserelin or 250μg GnRH on days 11-14
Andriamanga SSteffan 1Thibier M 1984AnnRechVet 15:
after insemination(Lean et al 2003) found that the
503
risk of pregnancy to first service was increased by
Anttila),RoineK1972 SuomElainlaakarilehti 78:562
7-10% atfirst servicebutnot atsubsequentservices.
AppleyardWT,CookB1976VetRec99:253
Archibald LF Norman SN.Tran C,Lyle S.Thomas PGA 1991
From this,they concluded that treatmentwith GnRH
Vet Med US86:1037
is likely tobe cost-effective.
Arechiga CF Staples CR,McDowell LR,Hansen P 1998
Progesteroneimplantshavebeenusedtotryto aug
JDairy Sci 81:390
mentprogesteroneconcentrationsduringtheperiod
Arendonk JAM,van Hovenir R,deBoer W1989Livestock
when luteolysis is expected.However,Diskin
1&
Prod Sci21:1
Sreenan (1986)concluded from meta-analysis of
Armstrong ID,Goodall EA,Gordon Fetal 199oAnim Prod
many early trials of the effectsof progesterone admin-
50:1
Armstrong DG,Gong IG,GardnerOet al 2002
istration upon pregnancy rate that it was ineffectual.
Reproduction 123:371
However,recently,interest in progesterone admin-
Arthur GH 1959VetRec71:598
istration as a means of augmenting pregriancy rate
Arthur GH 1975Veterinaryreproductionand obstetrics,
has been rekindled,and a method thiat is increas-
4th edn.BailliereTindall, London
ingly widely practised is the reinsertion of previously
Arthur GH,Abdel-Rahim AT 1984In:Proceedings of the
used progesterone-releasing intravaginal devices (i.e.
13thWorld CongresonDiseasesof Catle,Dubanouth
PRIDs or CIDRs).This practice may increase preg-
Africa2:809
Arthur GH,BeeD 1996In:Arthur GHl,Noakes DE,Pearson
nancy rates(Macmillan et al 1986)by augmenting
H, ParkinsonTI (eds)Veterinary reproduction and obstet-
circulatingprogesteroneconcentrationshutithasan
rics,7th edn.WBSaunders,London
additional advantagethat returns tooestrus innon-
AshmawyAA,VogtDW,GarverickHA,YoungquistRS1992
pregnant cows are either synchronized or occur ata
JAnim Breed Genet 109:129
predictabletime(Cavalerietal2000a,b).
AyalonN1978ReprodFertil54:483
AyalonN1984In:Proceedingsof the10th Intermational
Congressof Animal Reproduction and Artificial
References
Insemination4:11141
AyalonN,Weis Y,Lewis I1968In:Proceedings of the 6th
International Congress of Animal Reproductionand
Afiefy MM,Abu-FadleW,Zali W1973Zentbl Vet20A:256
Artificial Insemination 1:393
Agthe D,Kolm HP 1975」 ReprodFertil43:163
AyliffeTR1979PhDthesis,University of London
Alawneh II.Williamson NB,Bailey D 2006NZVet I54:73
AyliffeTR,Noakes DE1978VetRec 102:215
Albright Il.1994Proc Nat Reprod Symp 27:171
Bage R2003 Reprod Domest Anim 38:199
Albright JL,Arave CW1997Thebehaviour ofcattle.CAB
Bage R,Gustafsson H,Larsson B etal 2002a Theriogenology
International,Wallingford,Oxon
57:2257
Al-Dahash SYA,David JSE1977aVet Rec 101:296
BageR,MasiniB,ahinLoriuMarineH
Al-Dahash SYA,David JSE 1977b Vet Rec101:323
Reprod FertilDev14:461
Al-Dahash SYA,David JSE1977cVetRec101:342
BageR,PetyimSLarsonBetal2003Reprod TertilDev15:
Alderman G1970VetRec70:35
115
Alderman G,Stranks MH 1967|SciFood Agric18:151
Bagnato A 2004 PraxVet(Milan) 25: 10-12
Allison RD,Laven RA 2000 Vet Rec147:703
BaneA1964BrVet] 120:431
AlmediaAP,AyalonN,Faingold 5,Marcus S,LewisI1984 In:
BanosG,BrotherstoneS,CoffeyMP2004J DairySci87:2669
Proceedingsof theIoth Intermational CongressofAnimal
Barker R,Risco C,Donovan CA1994 Comp Cont Educ Pract
Reproduction and Artificial Insemination3:438
Vet16:801
466
Chapter
22
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
Barrett DC,Boyd H,Mihm M 2004In:Andrews AH (ed）
Boos A,Stelljes A,KohtesI 2003 Cells Tissues Organs 174:
Bovine medicine,2nd edn.Blackvell Science,Oxford,
170
p552-577
Booth JM1988Vet Rec123:437
Bartlet PC,NgategizePK,Kaneene JBetal 1986PrevVet
Borsberry S,Dobson H 1989a Vet Rec 125:103
Med4:33
Borsbeny S,Dobson H 1989b Vet Rec 124:217
Bauman DE,CurrieWB1980」Dairy Sc 63:1514
Bosu W1K,Peter AT 1987 Tleriogenology 28:725
BeamSW,BulerWR19991ReprodFertil Suppl54:411
BouneN,Laven R,Wathes DCetal 2007Theriogenology
BeeverDE,HalanA,Reynolds CK,Cammell SB2001
67:494
In:Diskin MG（ed)Fertility in the high-producing
BousquetD,ouchard EDuTremblayD2004Medt
dairy cow.British Society of Animal Science Occasional
Quebec34:59
Publication26.British Society of Animal Science,Penicuik,
BoutersRVanderplasscheM1977IS AfrVetMed Assoc42:
Midlothian,p 119-131
237
Beever DE,WathesDC,TaylorVI2004 CaitlePract12:31
Boyd H,Reid HCR 1961Agriculture68:346
BellowsRA,Short RE,StaigmillerRB1994IAnimSci72:
BozworthRW,Ward G,CallEPBonewitzER1972DairySci
2991
55:334
Ben-David B1962RefuahVet19:16
Brandley P),Migali G 1963Ann NYAcadSci 108:872
Bendixen PH,VilsonB,EkesboI,AstrandDB1987PrevVet
Breden KR,Odegaard SA 1994 In:Proceedings of the
Med4:377
18th World Buiairics Congress,Bologna,ltaly, vol. 2,
BeneschF1930Veterinary obstetrics.BailliereTindall,
p1095
London
Breen KM,Stackpole CA,Clarle etal 2004Endocrinology
Berry MJ,BanuL,Larsen PR 1991 Nature 349:438
145:2739
Berry DP,Buckley EDillon P,Evans RD,Rath M,eerkamp
BreenKM，Billings HJ,Wagenmaker ERetal2005
RF2003JDairy Sci86:2193
Endocrinology146:2107
Berry DP,Buckley FDillon Pet al 2004 Irish J Agric Food Res
Breier BH 1999Domest Anim Endocrinol 17:209
43:161
BretzlaffKN1988BovineProc20:71
BertchtoldMPBrummerH1968Berl MunchTierarzl
Bretzlaff KN,WhitmoreIIL,pahrSL,OuRS1982
Wochenschr S1:238
Theriogenology 17:527
BerichtoldMP,RuschP,ThunRKingS1980Zuchthygine
Britt JH 1980 In:Morrow DA (ed)Current therapyin therio-
15:126
genology.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
Bhupender S,Saravia E Bage R,Rodriguez-Martinez H 2005
Britt JH,ScotRG,ArmstrongID,WhitacreM1986」Dairy
Acta Vet Scand 46:1
Sci 69:2195
BicalhoRC,CheongSH,WarnickLD,Guard CL2007Dairy
Brooks 1,ShengC,Tortonese D),McNeillyAS 1999 Reprod
Sci90:1193
Domest Anim 34:133
Bierschwal Cl1966JAmVe1Mel Assor1491951
Brown J,SchoenemannHM,ReevesI1986Theriogenology
Biggers JD,McFeely RA 1966AdvReprod Physiol 1:29
17:689
BiggersBGBuchananDS,WeemannRP1986Animal
Brown Cl,Buddenberg B,Peterson HP,Brotwn AH 1991
scienceresearch report -Agricultural Experiment Station,
ArkansasAgricExper Stn SpecRep147:15
Oklahoma StateUniversity.MP-118:303
BrusDHI 1954 PhDThesisUniversityofUuecht
Bindas EM,CwazdauskasFC,AielloRJ CE1983| Dairy Sci
Brzezinska-SlebodzinskaE2003Med Wei59:382
67:1249
Buckley FO'SullivanK,MeeJEEvansRD,DillonP2003
Bjorkman N,Sollen P1960Acta Vet Scand2:157
IDairy Sci86:2308
BlauwiekelR,KincaidRL,Reeves ]11986JDairy Sci 69:439
Bulman DC,Lamming GE 1978 」 Reprod Fertil54:447
BlazquezNB,Long SE,MayhewTM et al 1994Res Vet Sci 57:
Burton LHarris B 1999 DairyfarmAnnu 51:59
277
ButlerWR1998Dairy Sri 81:2533
Bloch A,Folman Y,Kaim Met al 2006Dairy Sci 89:4694
ButlerWR2000AnimReprodSci60-61:449
BloomfieldGA,MorantSV,DuckerMI1986AnimProd
ButlerWR2005CatlePract13:13
42:1
ButlerWR,SmithRD1989IDairy Sci72:767
Bo GA,Cutaia LE,Souza AIIBaruselli PS007a In:ProcSot
Byers ]H,Jones JR,Bone JF1956DairySti39:1556
Dairy CauleVetNZVA24:155-168
Calder MD,Salfen BE,Bao Bet al 1999JAnim Sci 77:3037
Bo GA,Cutaia LE,Peres LCet al 2007b 1n:Juengel JIMurray
CalderMD.Manilkkam M,Salfen BEetal 2001 BiolReprod
JF,Smith MF(eds)Reproduction in domestic ruminants.
65:471
Nottingham Lniversity Press,Nottingham,vol VL,
CarpenterCM,WilliamsWW,Giman HL1921 IAmVetMed
p223-236
Asoc59:173
Boichard D 1990Livestock ProdSci 24:187
CarrollDPiesonRAHauserERtal9Therigenology
Boichard D,Manfredi E 1994 Acta AgricScand 44:138
34:349
BolinderAguinBKindhaltal98Thrigenlogy
CarstairsA,Morrow DA,Emery RS1980AnimSci51:
30:45
1122
Bondurant RH1999JAnimSci 77:101
CasettaJ 1991BovinePract26:4
Boos A,Kohtes],StelljesAetal 2000IReprod Fertil 120:351
CasidaLE,ChapmanAB 1951|Dairy Sci 34:1200
467
Part
51
Subfertility andinfertility
Cavaleri),EaglesVE,Ryan M,Macmillan KL200a ProcSoc
Dillon P,Buckley F1998 ProcRurakura Farm Conf50:50
Dairy Cattle Vet NZVA 17: 145
Dillon P,Snijders S,Buckley F ei al 2003 Livestock Prod Sci
Cavaleri I,EaglesVE,Ryan M,Macinillan KL2000bProcSoc
83:35
Dairy CattleVet NZVA 17:161
DiskinMG,Sreenan JM 1986 In:Sreenan JM,Diskin MG
Cavestany D,Focte RH 1985 Cornell Vet 75:441
(eds）Embryonic mortality in farm animals.Martinus
Cavestany D,Cibils1.Freire Aet al 2003AnimReprod Sci
Nijhoff,Dordrecht
77:141
DobsonH,RankinIEE,WardWR1977Vet Ree101:459
ChapaAM,McCormickME,FernandezMet al 2001|Dairy
Dobson H,RibaduAY,NobleKMet al 2000 Reprod Fertil
Sci84:908
120:405
ChebelRC,Santos JEP,Cerri RLA etal 2006」Dairy Sci
DohmenMIw,Lohuis JACM,Huszenicza G,Nagy P,Gacs M
89:4205
1995 Theriogenology 43:1379-1388
Chenault JR,McAllister JF ChesterSTetal2004Am Vet
Dohoo IR,Martin SW,MeekAHI,Sandals WCD 1983PrevVe
Med Assoc224:1634
Med1:321
Chew BP,Keller HE ErbRE,Malvern PV 19771Anim Sci
DosogneHBurvenichC,Lohuis ACM1999 Theriogenology
44:1055
51:867-874
Chew BP,Erb RE,Fessler IFet al 1979IDairy Sci 62:557
DouthwaiteR,DobsonH2000VetRec247:355
CohenRHD 1975Aust MeatRes CommitteeRev23:1.Cited
Dransfield MBG,Nebel RL,Pearson RE,Warnick LD 1998
in McClure1994
JDairy Sci 8l:1874
Cohen RO,Bernstein M,ZivG1995Theriogenology 43:
Drew B 2004 In:AndrewsAH (ed) Bovine medicine,2nd
1389-1397
edn.Blackwell Science,Oxford,p54-67
CookDL,Smith CA,Parfet JRetal 1990 Reprod Feril
DrillichMWittkeM,TenhagenBA,nsickerCeuwies
90:37
W2005Tierarzil PraxG33:404-110
Cook DL,ParfetJR,Sni CAetal 1991 J Reprod Fertil 91:19
DrillichM,Arlt Setal 2006DairySci 89:3431
Cooke BC1978 Anim ProdAbstr26:356
Dubois PR,Williams Dj 1980 In Proceedings of the Xlth Inter
Corah L1996AnimFeed Sci Technol59:6l
national Congress onDiseases of CatleTel Aviv,p988-993
CorahLR,IvesS1991Vet Clin NorthAm FoodAnimPract
DuckerMl,YarrowNH,Bloomfield GA,Edwards-WebbJD
7:41
1984Anim Prod39:9
CoulsonA 1978Ve1Rec103:359
DuckerMJaggeRA,FisherWMorant SV1985Anim
Curtis CR, Erh HN, Sniffen CI, Smith RD etal 1983 J Am Vet
Prod41:1
Med Assoc183:559
Duncansson GR 1980 In:Proceedings of the British Cattle
David JSE 1965PhD Thesis,University of Bristol
Veterinary Association,p58-62
David JSE,LongSM,Eddy RG 1976VetRec98:417
Dunlap SE,Vincent CK1971IAnim Sci32:1216
Davies Cl.HilI JR,Edwards 1L,Schrick FNet al2004Anim
Dyer RG1985OxfordRevReprodBiol7:223
Reprod Sci82/83:267
Ealy AD,Drost M,Hansen PI1993」Dairy Sci76:2899
DawsonFLM1963|Reprod Feril5:397
Eddy RG1994 Catte Prac12:39
Dawuda PM,ScaramuzziRI,LeeseHletal 2002
EdwardsMJ 1961Thesis,UIniversity of Liverpool
Theriogenology58:1443-1455
EdwardsJS,Bartley EE,DaytonAD 1980Dairy Sci 63:243
Day N 1991Vet Med86:753
EilerH,Hoplins FM 1993 AmVet MedAssoc203:436
De Silva M,Reeves 11 1988 Biol Reprod38:264
Eiler I,Fecteau KA 2007 In;Youngquist RS,ThrelfallWR
DeVries A,CraneMB,Bartolome JAet al 2006Dairy Sci 89
(eds)Current therapy in large animal theriogenology,2nd
3028
edn.Saunders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO,p345-354
DeasDW,MelroseDR,ReedHCBetal 1979 In:LaingA
ElmoreRGierhwalCoungquisRCantleyTl
(ed)Fertility and infertility in domestic animals.Bailliere
1975VetMedSmall Anim Clin70:1346
Tindall,London,p137
Elrod CC1992CitedinLean etal1998
DeBois CHW 1982In:Karg H,Schallenberger E (eds) Factors
Elrod CC,ButlerWR1993]AnimSci 71:694
affecting feruility in the post-parum cow.Martinus Nijhoff.
El-Zarkouny SZ,Cartmill JA,HensleyBA,StevensonIS2004
TheHlague
I Dairy Sci 87: 1024
DeBois CHW,ManspeakerVMD 1986 In:MorrowDA [ed)
Emmanuelson UIBendixen PH 1991 Prev Vet Med 10:261
Current therapy in theriogenology.2nd edn.WBSaunders,
EradusWJBraakeHIAB1993Arificialintelligencefor
Philadelphia,p424
agriculture and food. p 265
DebusNenKMarrllKl00Enrnly
Erb RE,Gaverick HA,Randel RD,Brown BL,Callahan C
143:3748
1976Theriogenology 5:227
DechowCD,RogersGW,Klei Letal2004|DairySci87:3534
ErbHN,Martin SWIsonN,SwaminathanS1981 Dairy Sci
DeKruif A1976Bovine Pract11:6
64:272
DelwicheM,TangX,BonDurant R,MunroC01Trans
ErikssonK1943 Cited in:McEntee1990
ASAE44:1997-2002,2003-2008
EsslemontR 1973PhDThesis,Universityof Reading
Dematavewa CMB,Berger PJ 1998IDairy Sci81:2700
Esslemont RJ1974ADASQRev 12:175
Dijkhuizen AA,Stelwagen J,Renkema JA 1985 Prev Vet Med
Esslemont Rj 1992 Daisy Dairy Information System.Report
3:251,265
no1.University ofReading,Reading
468
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertilityinthecow
EsslemontRI2003 CalulePract 11:237-250
Gerloff Bl.MorrowDA1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Currenuther-
Esslemont Rl Bryant 1976Vet Rec 99:472
apy in theriogenology Znd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
Esslemonr Rl,Kossaibati MA 1996Vet Rec 139:486
Glencross RG,Esslemont Rl,Bryan1 MJ, Pope GS 1981 App
Esslemont Rl,Kossaibati MA 1997Vet Rec 140:36
AnimEthol7:141
Esslemont RJ,Peeler E 1993 BrVet1149:537
Gonzalez HE I984 Thesisniversity of Athens,Georgia.
EsslemontR),SpincerI1992The prevalence and costs of
Cited from:Dissertation Abstracts International B45:1073
diseases in dairy herds.Report No 2,The Dairy
CossenN,Hoedemaker M2005Berl MunchTierarzt
Information System (DAISY).UIniversity of Reading
Wochenschr118:326-333
Reading
GoshenT, Shpigel NY2006Tlieriogenology 66:2210-2218
Esslemont R],GlencrossRG,BryantMI,Pope GS19s0Appl
GossenN,FiezeS,Mosenfechtel S,HoedemakerM2006
Anim Ethol 6:1
DeutschTierarztl Wochenschr 113:171-177
EyestoneWH,AxRL1984Theriogenology22:109
Gracey JF 19G0 Survey of livestock diseases.HMSO,Belfast
FaheyJ,McNamaraS,Murphy 1etal2005VetRec156:505
Gregory SI,Townsend IMcNeillyAS,TortoneseDJ 2004 Biol
Fallon GR1962BrVetJ118:327
Reprod70:1299
Farin PW,Estill CT1993 Vet ClinNorthAm9:291
GreveT,Lehn-Jensen H 1982 Theriogenology 17: 91
FarinPWYoungquistRS,ParfetJRGaverickHA 1992Am
Griffin jFTHartigan PLNunnWR1974Theriogenology
Vet MedAss0c200:1085
1:91-106
FayeB,Fayet J-C,Brochard M etal 1986AnnRech Vet 17:257
GrimardB,Freret S,ChevallierAetal2006 Anim Reprod Sci
Feket,HuszeiaG,ellmsRal96AaVeng
9:31
44:309
GrohnYT,ErbHN,McCulloch CE,Saloniemi HS1990Prev
Ferguson JD 1990 Cited in Lean et al1998
Vet Med8:25
FergusonID,ChalupaW19891Dairy Sci72:746
CrossTS1988Cited in Peters&Laven1996
FettmanMJ1991 Comp ContEducPractVet13:1079
GrossTS,WilliamsWF 1988Biol Reprod38:1027
FincherMG1946TransAmSocStudy Steril 1:17
GrossTS,WilliamsWEManspeaker IE 1985 Biol Reprod
FincherMG,WilliamsWL1926Cornell Vet16:1
Suppl1:32:154
Fir Rtamunger002rhTrz453
GrossTSWilliamsWEMorelandTW1986Theriogenology
FlamenbaumI,WolfensonD,BermanA1988In:
26:365
Proceedings of the1lthInternational Congress of Animal
GrossTS.Williams WE,Manspeaker IEet al 1987
Reproduction andArificial Insemination4:530
Prostaglandins34:903
Flint APF2006Cattle Pract14:29-32
Grunert E 1984 In:Proceedings ofthe 10th International
FoldagerI,SejrsenK1982World CongressonDisenses of
Congressof Animal Reproduction and Artificial
Cattle,Netherlands,vol 1,p45
Insemination 4:17
Folman Y.Ascarelli 1,HerzZet al 1979 BrINutr41:353
GrunertE1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapyin
Fonseca FA,Britt JH,McDaniel BTetal 1983Dairy Sci
theriogenology.2nd edn.WBSaundersPhiladephia
66:1128
Gnnert E,Grunert D 1990Tierarzl Prax 18:473
FooteRH,Olenacu EAB,MellingerNRetal1979 j DairySci
GimenA:Wiltbank MC2002BiolReprod 66:1689
CimenA.WiltbankMC2005Theriogenology 63:202-218
ForbesD)2000 CattlePraci8:305-310
GmenA,Sartori R,CostaFMI.WiltbankMC2002 Dairy
FrankT,Anderson KL,SmithARet al 1983Theriogenology
Sci85:43
20:103
GumenA,Guenther JN,Wiltbank MC2003」Dairy Sci 86:
FrazerGS2005Vet ClinNorhAmFoodAnimPract 21:
3184-3194
523-568
Gundelach Y,Hoedemaker M 2007Tierarztl Llmsch 62:
Frerking112003Tierarztl LImsch58:352-354
291-299
FujimoloY1956IpnJVetRes4:129
Gunnink JW1984VetQuarterly 6:49
Funston RN,Roberts AI,HixonDLet al 1995 Biol Reprod
Gupta S,Gupta HK,Soni」2005Theriogenology 64:
52:1179
1273-1286
GarciaA,BartheAD,MapletoftR]1992 CanVetJ33:175
Gustafsson H 1985Theriogenology23:487
GardnerIA,HirdDW,nerbackWWetal 1990PrevVet Med
GustafssonB,BaclstromG,EdquistLE976Theriogenlogy
8:157
6:45
Garm O1949 Acta Endocrinol 11(Suppl 3）:1
Gwazdauskas FCBibbTL,McGilliard MLLineweaver A
Garnsworthy P2006CatulePract 14:13-15
1979 J Dairy Sci 62:678
GarverickHA 19971Dairy Sci80:995
GwazdauskasFC,Lineweaver JA,McGilliardML1983|Dairy
Garverick HA 2007In:Youngquist RS,ThrelfllWR(eds)
Sri66:1510
HamiltonSA,Gaverick HA,Keisler DHetal 1995Biol
Saunders-ElsevierSt Louis,MO,p379-383
Reprod53:890
Garverick HA,Erb RE,Randel RD,Cunningham MD 1972
Hampton JH,SalfenBE,BaderJFetal2003DairySci86:1963
JDairy Sci54:1669
GearhartMA,CurtisCR,EbHN,Smith RD1990IDairy Si
Hansel W,SpaldingRW.Larson LLet al 1976I Dairy Sci
3132
59:751
469
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Hansen PI 2007In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR(eds)
Jeffcoate1A.AyliffeTR1995VetRec136:406
Current therapy in large animal theriogenology,2ndedn.
JoorritsmaRoorritsmaHSchukkenYH,WentinkCH000
Saunders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO,p 431-441
Theriogenology:1065
HardieAR,AxRL1981] Dairy Sci64Suppl 1:149
Joosien L,HensenEJ 1992AnimReprod Sci28:451
Harrison H,HancockDD,Conrad HR1986aDairy Sci
Joosten I,Stelwagen1,DijkhuizenAA1988VetRec123:53
69:421
JordanW119521CompPathol62:54
HarrisonH,HancockDD,S PierreN et al 1986b Dairy Sci
JordanER.SwansonLV1979 J Dairy Sci 62:58
69:421
Jordan ER,ChapmanTE,Holtan DW,Swanson LV1983
Hart B,Mitchell GL 1965AusiVet」41:305
IDairy Sci66:1854
HartiganPj 1978Vet Sci Comm 1:307
louP,Buckell BC,Liptrap RM et al 1999Theriogenology52:
HartiganP),Murphy IA,NunnWRGriffn JFT 1972 Irish Vet
923-937
26:225
JubbTF,AbhayaraineD,MalmoI,Anderson GA 1990Aust
HartiganPIGriffin JHT,NunnWR1974aTheriogenology
Vet ]67:359
1:153
JulienWE,Conrad HR,Jones E,MoxonA 1976a |Dairy Sci
Harigan R],Nunn WR,Griffin JFT 1974bBr Vet|130:160
591954
Hattan AI.BeeverDE,Cammell SB,SuttonJD2001 In:
JulienWE,ConradHR,lones JE,MoxonA197GbDairySi
Chwalibog A,Jakobsen K (eds) Energy metabolism in
591960
animals.EAAP Publication No 103.Wageningen Press
KadarmideenHN,Wegmann S2003IDairySci 86:3685
Wageningen.p325-328
Kaneene JB,Hurd HS 1990 Prev Vet Med 8:103
Heres L,DielemanS),vanEerdenburg FICM 2000Vet
Kaneene JB,Miller R1995PrevVet Med 23:183
Quarterly 22:50-55
Kankofer M,Guz L2003DomestAnim Endocrinol 25:61
Hernandez↓,RiscoCA,Elliot IB 1999」AmVetMedAssoc
Kankofer M,Maj IG1997Deutsch Tierarzil Worhenschr104:
215:72
13-14
Herschler RC,LawrenceIR1984VetMed79:822
KankoferM,HoedemakerM,SchoonHA,Grunert E1994
HeuweiserW,Grunert E1987Theriogenology27:907
Theriogenology 42:1311-22
Hignet SL,HlignettPG1951VetRec63:603
KankoferM,Wiercinski ),ZerbeH2000 Reprod Domest
Hixon DLFahey GC,KeslerDl,Neumann AL 1982
Anim35:97
Theriogenology 17:515-525
KargH,SchamsD1974JReprod Fertil39:463
Hodel F Moll I,KuenziN1995Lives1ock Prod Sci 41:95
Kasimanickam R,Duffield TFFoster RA ctal 2005
HoekstraJ,van derLugtAWvan derWerf JHil.Ouweltjes W
Theriogenology 63:818-830
1994LivestockProd Sci40:225
KawateN,ItamiT,Choushi Tetal 2004Theriogenology 6t:
Hoffmann B,Hlamburger R,GunzlerOet al 1974
399-406
Theriogenology 2:21
KeltonDF,LeslieKE,EtheringtonWG etal 1991 CanVet32:
Hong IS,Li CHBurgess JRetal 1989|Biol Chem246:
286
13793
Kendall NR,BoneP2006CattlePraci 14:17-22
Hooijer GA.LubbersRBF;DucroBl etal 2001I Dairy Sci
Kerbrat S,Disenhaus C2004AppAnimBehaviour Sei 87:
84:286
223
HopkinsFM1983Cited inPeters&Laven1996
Kerr OM,McCaughey Wj1984Vet Rec114:605
Hossain KM 1993Thesis,University of Queensland
Kesler D),Garverick1HA1982]AnimSci55:1147
Hudson RS 1972Bovine Pract 7:34
KeslerDl, Garverick HA,CaudleABeial 1978|Anim Sci 46:
Hudson RS198G In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy in
719
theriogenology.2nd edn.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
KeslerD),Elmore RG,Brown EM,GarverickHA 1981
Hull FEDimockWW,Ely EMorrisonHR 1940 BullKYAgric
Theriogenology16:207
Exp Stn462
Kessy BM1978 PhD Thesis,University of London
HurleyWL,DoaneRM1989DairySci72:784
Kessy BM,Noakes DE 1979a Vet Rec105:414
Hurnik JEKing G),Roberison HA 1975Appl AnimEthol 2:55
Kessy BM,Noakes DE 1979b Vet Rec 105:489
ljaz A,FahningML.Zemjanis R 1987BrVet I143:226
Kiddy CA1977|Dairy Sci 60:235
Ikeda S,Kitagawa M,Imai H,Yamada M2005Therolesf
Kilgour R,Dalton C1984 In:Livestock behhaviour-a practi-
vitaninAforcytoplasmicmaturation of bovineuocyies.
cal guide.Boulder,Colorado:Westview Piess
J Reprod Dev51:23
Kimura K,Goff JP,Kehrli MEJ,ReinhardtTA2002|Dairy
Il-HlwaK.Gook-Hyun S 2003 Theriogenology 60:1445
Sci85:544
l-Hiwa K,Gook-Hyun S,DongSoo S 2003Theriogenology
King GI.Hurnick IE,Robertson HA 1976| Anim Sci 42:688
60:809-817
Kirk Jl,Huffman EM,LaneM 1982|AmVetMed Assoc181:
InCalf 2000 The'InCalf Project:Progress Report No 2.At:
474
hup://www.inealf.com.au/mediaLibrary/files/InCalf
KittockRH,BritJH,Convey EM1973JAnimSci37:985
progress_reports/AdviserS.pdf(accessed 17-8-07)
Kiwood SE,PhilipsCIC,WeiseM1993Theriogenology
JacksonPGG1981VetAnnu21:255
40:559
Jackson PS, Iohnson CT,Bulman DC,Holdsworth RJ 1979
Kolver ES,Roche IR,Aspin PW 2006ProcNZSocAnim Prod
BrVet135:578
66:403-408
470
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in thecow
KossaibaiMA,EsslemontR) 1997Vet]154:41
Ley S],Waterman AE,LivingstonA,ParkinsonT1994Res
Kothari B,Renton JP,MunroCD,Macfarlane1978Vet Rec
Vet Sci 57:332
103:229
Liebermann J,SchamsD,MiyamotoA 1996Reprod Feril
KruipTAM,Meijer GAL,RuklwamsukT,WensingT 1998 In:
Dev 8:1003
Production diseases in farm animals:10th international
LillieFR 1916 ScienceNY43:611
conference.Wageningen Press,Wageningen,Netherlands,
Lipurap RM,McNally PJ1976AmIVetRes37:3G9
p183
Littlejohn A.Lewis G1960VetRec72:1137
KruipTAM,WensingT,Vos PLAM 2001 In:Diskin MG (ed)
LoganEESmyth JA,Kennedy DG etal 1991Vet Rec 129:99
Fertilityin the high-producing dairy cow.BritishSociety of
Long SE 1990 In Pract 12: 208
Animal Science Occasional Publication26.British Society
LopezH,SatterLD,WiltbankMC2004AninReprod Sci
ofAnimal SciencePenicuik,Midlothian,p6379
81209
KuhlmanAH,GallupWD 1942I Dairy Sci 25:688
LotthammerKH 1979 Feedstuffs 51:16
Kulasekar K,Saravanan D,Kumar GSetal2004 Indian
Lotthammer KH,Schams D,Scholz H 1978Zuchthygiene
IAnim Reprod25:154
13:76
KungL,HuberT1983Dairy Sci 66:227
LuSY,YangTW,LeeKH et al 1992ChinSoc AninSci
Lafi SQ,KaneeneJB1988VetBull58:88
21:369
LagerlofN1939In:Proceedings of the5th International
Lucey S,Rowlands GI.Russell AM 1986VetRec 118:628
Veterinary Congress,Copenhagen,p 609
LucyMC 20011 Dairy Sci 84:1277
LagerlofN,BoydH1953Cornell Vet43:52
Lucy M2006 CattlePract14:23-27
LambRC,BarkerBO,AndersonMJ,WallersJL1979Dairy
LucyMG,CrookerBA2001 In:Diskin MG（ed）Fertility in
Sci 62:1791
the high-producing dairy cow.BritishSociety of Animal
Lamming GE,Bulman DC1976BrVet132:507
Science Occasional Publication 26.BritishSociety of
Lammiing GE,FosterIP,Bulman DC1979Vet Rec 104:156
AnimalScience,Penicuik,Midlothian,223-236
Lamming GE,WathesDC,PetersAR1981 Reprod Feril
LucyMC,liang H,Kobayahsi Y2001 J Dairy Sci 84[E Suppl):
Suppl30:155
E113-E119
Lamming GE,DarwashAO,BackHL1989Reprod Fertil
Lukaszewska],HanselW1980]ReprodFertil59:485
Suppl37:245
LymioZC,NielenM,OuweltjesWetal 2000Theriogenology
Laporte HM,ogeveenH,chukkenH,Noordhuizen
53:1783-1795
1994 Livestock Prod Sci 38:191
MaatjeK,LoefflerSH,Engel B1997Dairy Sci0:
LarsonLL,MarbruckHS,Lowry SR1980IDairy Sci 63:283
1098-1105
LarsonSF,ButerWR,CurrieWB1997IDairy Sci80:1288
McClureT]1975 Cited by Lean ctal1998
Laven RA 1995CattePract3:267
MeClurel]1994Nutritionalandmetabolicinfertilityinthe
Laven RA 2003CattlePract 11:263-270
cow.CABlntemational,Wallingford,Oxon
Laven RA,Livesey CT2005 CatulePract13:55-60
McClureT1,Eamens GI,HealyPJ 1986AustVetJ 63:144
Laven RA,PetersAR1996Vet Rec139:465
McConahaMP,SengerPl,O'ConnorMLetal1994IDairy
Laven RA,Leung ST,ChengZ1998CattlePract 6:291-296
Sci 77(Suppl 1):67
LavenRA,Scaramuzzi RJ,Wathes DCetal2007VetRec160:359
MacDiarmid B1999ProcSucDairy CattleVet NZVA16:79
Lean Il 1987Nutrition of dairy cattle.UIniversity of Sydney.
McDonaldLE1954In:Proceedings ofthe91st Annual
Sydney,NewSouth Wales
Congressof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicineAssociation,
LeanII,Westwood CT,Rabjee AR,Curtis MA1998 In:Proc
Seatle,Washington
Soc Dairy Cattle Vet NZVA 15:87
McDonaldLE1980VeterinaryEndocrinology and
Lean 11,Rabiee AR,Stevenson MA 2003 Proc SocDairy Catle
Reproduction,3rd edn.lea&Febiger,Philadelphia
Vei NZVA20:327-351
McDonaldLE,Pineda M1 1989Veterinary endocrinology
LeBlanc Sl,Duffield TF,LeslieKEetal 2002aJDairy Sci 85:
andreproduction,4th edn.Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia
2223
McDougallS2001NZVe1J49:60
LeBlancSl,DuffieldTFLeslieKEetal 2002b] Dairy Sci 85:
McDougallS,Murray S2000ProcSocDairy CattleVetNZVA
2237
17:109
Lee CN 1993Vet ClinNorh Am9:263
McDougall s,RhodesF2007Treaumentof cowsnotdetected
Lee CN,Ax RL,Pennington IA 1981I Dairy Sci 64(Suppl 1):
in oestrus.Available on line at: hutp://www.dcv.co.nz/
Abstr163
members_section/technical_information/info_on_
LeechFB,DaviesME,MacralWD,WithersFW1960Disease
oestradiol_alternatives/Acccssed2October2007
wastage and hushandry in British dairy herds.London,
McDougallS,CullumAA,AnnisFM,RhodesFM2001
HMSO
Vet]49:168
Leidl W,Bostedt H,LamprechiWet al 1979Tierarzt LImsch
McEnteeK1990Reproductivepathologyof domesticmam
34:546
mals.AcademicPress,San Diego,CA
LesieKE,BosuWTK1983CanVetJ24:352
McEvoyTG,SinclairKD,StainesMERobinson 1997
LevineHID 1999 Bovine Pract33:97
1Reprod Fertil AbstractSeries
Lewis CS,Aizinbud E,Lehrer AR1989Anim ReprodSci
McGowanMR,VeerkampRFAndersonL1996Livestock
18:183
Prod Sci46:33
471
Part
5]
Subfertility and infertility
McGuireMA,Vicini JLBaumanDE,VeenhuizenJI 1992
MillerBl,LodgeJR1984Theriogenology22:385
|Anim Sci 70:2901-2910
Miyoshi M,Sawamukai Y,IwanagaT2002ReprodDomest
MacmillanKL,CurnowRJ 1977NZExpAgr5:357
Anim37:53
MacmillanKL,Pickering GE1988In:Proceedings of the
MollerK,ShannonP1972NZVetI20:47
11th International Congressof Animal Reproduction and
MollerK,NewlingPE,Robson HIet al 1967NZVet」15:111
Artificial lnsemination:Abstr442
Montes Al,Pugh DG1993 Comp ContEducPract Vet 15:
MacmillanKL,TaufaVK,DayAM1986AnimReprodSci 11:1
1131-1137
McNamara S,Murphy 11,Rath MO'Mara FP2003Livestock
MorganWF,Lean 1 1993Aust Vet 170:205
ProdSci84:195
MorrisRS1976Diagnosis of infertility in larger dairy herds.
MeNeil J,Moss N,Schouten BW2003 ProcSocDairy Cattle
Procno28.Refresher CourseforVeterinarians,Sydney
Vet NZVA20:89-99
Morris CA, Cullen NG 1998NZJ AgricRes 31:395
MacPherson A,Kelly EFChalmers JS,Robers Dj 1987 In:
MorrisonRA,Erb RE 1957WashingtonAgric Exp StnBull 25
Hemphill DD(ed)Trace substances inenvironmental
MorrowDA 1969Cited in:Lean 1998
health-XXI.University ofMissouri,St Louis,MO
MorrowDA,Robers SJ.McEnteeK,Gray HF1966Cornell
MadanML,Johnson HD19731Dairy Sci56:1420
Vei59:173
Madsen LL,Davis RE 1949 IAnim Sci 8:625
Morton|2000aProcSocDairy CattleVet NZVA17:5,43
Maiero S,RenavilleB,CominAetal 2006）AnimVetAdv
Morton } 200ob The InCalf Project,Progress ReportNo.2,
5:1062-1066
Dairy Research and Development Corporation,Ausiralia,
MalikSZ.Chaudhry MA,Ahmad N,Rehman N 1987
p42
Pakistan Vet 17:G0
MossN,anIIReidSW,HdgonDR2002PrevVetd
Malmo .Beggs D 2000 Proc Soc Dairy Cattle Vet NZVA
54:91
17:229
MullerLD,OwensM111974|Dairy Sci57:725
MannGE2004 Cattle Pract 12:57-60
Muller C,Ladewig ,SchlichtingMC et al 1986KTBI
Mann GE,KeatingeR,Hunter M et al 1998CattlePract 6:383
Schrif,Kuratorium furTechnik und Bauwesen in der
Mann GE,Fray MD,Lamming GE2006Vet J171:500
Landwirtschiaft eV.Darmstadt,Germany 311:37
Mansell PD,CameronAR,TaylorDP,Malmo2006AustVet
MulvehillPSreenanJM19771ReprodFertil50:323
184:312
Murugavel K,Yaniz IL,Santolaria P et al 2003
Mantysaari Evan Vleck LD1989I Dairy Sci 72:2375
Theriogenology 60:583-593
Marai IIM,ElDarawany AA,asrAS et al 1998 In:1st
NakaoT,Narita S,TanakaKetal 1983Theriogenology 20:11
International Conferenceon Animal Production and
Nanda AS,Dobson H 1990 Res Vet Sci 49:25
Health in Semi-arid Areas.Suez Canal University,El Arish
NandaAS,WardWR,WilliamsPCW,DobsonH1988VetRec
Egypt,p 159
122:155
Marcek IM,Apell LH,HoffmanCLetal 1985DairySci
Nanda AS,Ward WR,Dobson H 1989VetBull7:537
68:71
NandaAS,Ward WR,DobsonH1991 ResVetSci51:180
Marion GB,GierHT 1968IAnim Sci 27:1621
NationDP,Rhodes FM,DayAM,MacmillanKL1998Proc
Markusfeld O1984VetRec114:539
NZ SocAnim Prod58:88
MarkusfeldO1985VetRec116:489
Nebel RL,McGilliardML1993IDairy Sci76:3257
MarrALPiepenbrinkMS,OvertonTRetal2002DairySci
NebelRL.WalkerWL,McGilliardMLetal 1994DairySci
85(Suppl1):66
77:3185-3191
Martin LR,Williams WF,RussekE,GrossTS1981
Nebel RL,WalkerWL,Kosek C1.1995|Dairy Sci78
Theriogenology 15:513
(Suppl1):225
MartinezJ.Thibier M1984Theriogenology21:583
Nebel RL,Dransfield MG,Jobsi SM,Bame JHI 2000Anim
Martinez MEKastelicJP,Adams GPMapletoft R) 2002
Reprod Sci 60:713
JAnimSci80:1746
NielsonF1949In:Proceedings of the14thInternational
Masera I,Gustafsson BK,Afiefy MM etal 1980 | AmVet Med
Veterinary Congress,London,Sect 4（c),p105
A5s0c176:1099
Noakes DE,Wallace L,Smith GR1991VetRec128:440
MaurerRR,Echternkamp SE1985IAnim Sci61:642
Norris HI.Taylor HB,Garner FM 1969Pathol Vet 6:45
MauriceE,Ax RL,Brown MD 1982JDairy Sci65（Suppl 1):
Nunez-Dominguez R,Cundiff LV,Dickerson GEet al 1991
Abstr 179
1Anim Sci 69:3467
MayneCS2007CatulePract 15:47-51
O'BrienT,Stot GH 19771Dairy Sci 60:249
MeeF1991VetRec129:201
O'Connor ML 2007 Estrus detection.In:Youngquist RS,
MeeJF2004Catue Pract12:95-108
Threlfall WR (eds) Current therapy in large animal
MeierS2000 ProcNZSocAnimPtod60:297
theriogenology.2nd edn.SaundersElsevier,StLouis,MO,
Melendez P,Donovan GA,Risco CA et al 2003
p270-278
Theriogenology 60:843-854
Odore R,ReG,Badino Petal 1999Pharmacol Res39:297
Melendez P,Gonzalez G,Aguilar Eet al200GJDairy Sci89:
O'Farrell Kj1998CatlePract 6:387
4567
OFarrell KJ,Crilly 1,Sreenan JM,DiskinM 1997Proceedings
Milian-Suazo F,ErbHN,Smith RD 1988PrevVet Med6:243
ofthe National Dairy Conference,Fermoy,Co Cork,Irish
Miller GY,Dorn CR1990PrevVet Med 8:171
Republic,p 84-102
472
Chapter
221
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthecow
OhgiT,Kamimura S.Minezaki Y,Takahashi M 2005Anim
Platen M,LindemannE,Munnich A 1995 Tierarzil Umsch
Sci176:549-557
50:41
OlsonJD,Ball L,Mortimer RGetal 1984Am」VetRes45:
PursleyIR,Silcox RW,WiltbankMC1998DairySci 81:2139
2251
Putney D1DrostM,ThatcherWW1989Theriogenology
OmarEA,KirrellaAK,FawzySA,El-KerabyF1996Alexandria
31:765
JAgricRes 41:71
RadfordHN,Nancarrow CD,Matuner PE1978J Reprod Fertil
O'RourkePK,Doogan VI,Robertson DI,Cooke D1991 Aust
54:49
JExp Agric 31:9
Raheja Kl,Nadarajah K,Burnside EB1989JDairy Sci72
OxenreiderSL,WagnerWC19711AnimSci33:1026
2679
PaisleyLG,MickelsenWD,Anderson PB1986
Rajaoski E,HlafezESE 1963Anat Rec147:457
Theriogenology 25:353
RamakrishnaKV1996Indian|AnimReprod17:30
Palmer CC1932IAmVet MedAssocS0:59
Refsal KRJarrin-Maldonado JH,Nachreiner RF1987
Pandit RK,Shukla SP,Parekh IIK1981 IndianJ Anim Sci
Theriogenology28:871-889
51:505
Reid IM 1984 1n:Eddy RG,DuckerM] (eds)Dairy cow fertil-
ParkerBN),BloweyRW1976Vet Rec98:394
ity.BritishVeterinaryAssociation,London
ParkinsonTJ,Lamming GE 1990J Reprod Fertil90:221
Reid IM,Roberts Cl,Manston R1979Vet Rec104:75
ParkinsonTJ,Vermunt JI.Malmo」2007ProcSocDairy
Rezac P,Olic 1,Posthl M1991 Sci AgricBohemoslovaca
Catile VetNZVA 24:139
23:231
ParkinsonT,Vermunt ,Malmo」20osDiseases ofcattle in
RhoadsMLGilbertRO,LucyMC,ButlerWR2004Dairy S
australasia.VetLearn,Palmerston North,NewZealand
87:2896
PallonRS,SorensonCE,HippenAR2004 Dairy Sci
RhodesFM,McDougallS,VerkerkGetal2000ProcSoc
87:2122
Dairy CattleVetNZVA 17:125-134
Palton 1,Kenny DA,McNamara S et al 2007 I Dairy Sci
RibaduAYDobson1I,WardWR1994BrVetI150:489
90:649
Ribeiro AC,McAllisterAl,deQueiroz SA 2003 Rev Bras
Payne IM,Dew SM,Manston R.Faulks M1970 Vet Rec
Zo0tec32(6,Suppl 1) 1737-1746
87:150
Rind MI,Phillips CJC1998Anim Sci68:589
Pecsok SR,McGilliard ML,Nebel Rl.1994a |Dairy Sci
Risco CA,Youngquist RS,ShoreMD2007In:Youngquist RS,
77:3008
Threlfall WR(eds)Current therapy in large animal
PecsokSR,McGilliard MLNebel RL1994bDairy Si
theriogenology2nd edn.Saunders-Esevier,St Louis,MO,
77:30016
p339-344
PenavinVLocvanicH,MutevelicA 1975Veterinaria24209
Rivera H,Lopez H,FrickePM20051 Dairy Sci 88:957
PenningtonA,Albright IL,Callahan CI 1985| Dairy Sci 68:
RobertsS)1955Cornell Vet45:497
3023
RoberisS)1971Veterinary obstetricsandgenitaldiseases.
Pennington JA,Albright IL,Callahan Cl 19861 Dairy Sci 69:
Published by theauthor,Woodstock,VT
2925
RobertsSj 1986Veterinaryobstetrics andgenital diseases,
Pepper RT 1984 Thesis,University of Liverpool
3rd edn.Published by the author,Woodstock,VT
Perez CC,Rodriguez I,Espana F et al 2003 Vet Med 48:1-8
RobinsonT) 1979 In:Cole HH,Cupps PT (eds)
PeterAT2004Reprod DomestAnim39:1
Reproductionin domestic animals,3rd edn.Academic
Peters Al,Laven RA 1996aVet Rec139:535
Press,New York,p 433
Peters A),Laven RA1996bVetRec139:465
Robinson ll,McEvoyTG1996Cited in:Webb etal 1997
PetersAR2005Anim Reprod Sci 88:155
RocheJF2006AnimReprod Sci96:282
PetersAR,Lamming GE 1990 In:Milligan SR(ed) Oxford
Roche JR.Berry DP,Kolver ES20061 Dairy Sci 89:3532
reviews of reproductive biology,vol12.Oxford University
Roche JR,Macdonald KA,Burke CRet al 2007 I Dairy Sci
Press,Oxford
90:376
PhatakA,TouchberryRW1988 JDairy Sci71(Suppl 1):136
RoelofsJB,vanEerdenburgFJCM,SoedeNM,Kemp B2005
PhillippoM 1983 In:Sutle NF(ed)Trace elements in
Theriogenology63:1366
animalproductionandvelerinary practice British Society
RoineK1973NordVet25:242
for Animal Production,Milton Keynes.p 51
Roman-Ponce H,ThatcherWW,Wilcox CI 1981
PhillippoM,lumphriesWR,LawrenceCB,Price19S2Ar
Theriogenology 16:139
Sci Camb99:359
RowsonLEA,Lamming GE,Fry RM 1953VetRec65:335
PhillippoM,HumphriesWRAtkinsonTet al1987Agric
Roy JHIB,PerfiMW,GlencrossRG,TurveyA 1985VetRec
Sci Camb 109:321
116:370
PhogatJB.Smith RE:Dobson H 1999 Anim ReprodSci
Royal MD,FlintAPF2004 Cattle Pract12:21-29
55:193
RoyalMD,PryceIE,WoolliamsIA.FlintAPF2002|Dairy Sci
Pickering JP1975Vet Rec97:295
85:3071
Pinney DO,Pope IS,Van Cotthem C,Urban K1962 Cited by
RuderCA,SasserRG,WilliamsRJetal1981Theriogenology
Young JS 1974 Proc Aust SocAnim Prod 10:45
15:573
PittsWJ,MillersWI.FosgateOTetal 1966DairySi
SagartzJW.HardenbroolFIG1971 J AmVetMedAssoc
49:995
158:619
473
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
SakaguchiM,SasamotoY,Suzuki Tet al200GVetRec159:197
MG(ed) Embryonic mortality in farm animals.Martinus
SakaseM,Kawate N,Nakagawa Cet al 2007Vet I 173:691
Nijhoff,Dordrech p 1-11
Salveti NR,AcostaIC,Gimeno ] etal2007VetPathol 44:373
Staples CR,BurkeM,Thatcher WW1998aIDairy Sci81:
Samarutel JLing K,JaaksonHet al 2006VetZonter36
958
69-74
Staples CR,Mattos RRisco CA,ThatcherWW1998
SandalsWCD,CurticRA,Cote IEMartin SW1979 Can Vet]
Feedstuffs 70:12
20:131
StarbuckGRDarwashAO,LammingCE 1999 CatulePract7
SangsritavongS,CombsDK,SartoriRetal2002Dairy Sci
397-399
85:2831
SteffanJAdriamangaS,ThibierM1984AmVetRe45:
Sarges IHeuwieserW,Schluns],Drewes B1998IVetMedA
1090
45:1-10
StevensI,Burton L,Rendel I 2000 ProcSocDairy CartleVet
Schels HFMostafawi D 1978 Vet Rec103:31
17:79
Schmidt-AdamopolouB1978DeutschTierartzlWochenschr
Stevens RD,DinsmoreRP 1997JAmVet Med Assoc211:1280
83:553
Stevenson JS,Schmidt MK,CallowEP 1984| Dairy Sci G7:140
SchofieldSA 1990Thesis,UniversityofWales
StevensonJS,Kobayashi YShipa MP,Rauchholz KC1996
Scholl D1,BonDurantRH,FarverTB1990AmVetRes51:314
J Dairy Sci79:402
SchoutenBW2003ProcSocDairyCatleVetNZVA20:101
Stevenson JS,Kobayashi Y,Thompson KE 1999Dairy Sci
SegersonEC,Riviere GJ,BullockTRetal1980Biol Reprod
82:506
23:1020
Stevenson JS.PursleyIR,Garverick HA etal 2006| Dairy Sui
SeguinBE,Morrow DA.LouisT 1074Am JVet Res35:57
89:2567
Sheehy G|1946Nature(Lond)157:442
Stoebel DP,Moberg GP 1982IDairy Sci 65:92
Sheldon IM1997 Catule Pract5:339
Stot GH,Rheinhard EI19781Dairy Sci 61:1457
SheldonIM.Dobson H1993Vet Rec133:160
StuderE,HoltanA 1986BovinePractitioner 21:159
SheldonIM,Dobson H2003ReproductionSuppl61:1-13
StuderE,MorrowDA1978IAmVetMedAssor172:489
Sheldon IM,Iewis GS,LeBlancS,Gilbert RO 2006
Summers PM1974AustVet I50:403
Theriogenology 65:1516
SuttleNF 1994 Recent advances in animal nutrition-1994
Short RV,Smith 1.MannTet al 1969Cytogenetics8:369
173-187
SilvaLAF SilvaEB,Silva LM2004RevBrasSaudeProdAnim
SultleNF2002 Catile Pracu 10:275
5:9-17
Suttle NF 2004Trace element disorders.In:Andrews AH [ed)
Simpson RB, Chase CC,Spicer L] et al 1994|Reprod Fertil
Bovinemedicine,2nd edn.Blackwell Science,Oxford
102:483
p294-308
Singleion GH,Dobson H 1995Vet Rec136:162
Suurmaa A,Jarv PKaartT 2001Trans EstonianAcad Agric
SlamaH,Vaillancort D,GoffAK1993CanIVet Res57:293
Soc15:93
Slama H,Vaillancourt D,GoffAR1994 DomestAnim
TanabeTY,Almquist O 1960Cited in:Albright&Arave1997
Endocrinol 1l:175
TanaheTYHawHWHaJ1985Thriogenlog23:7
SmithHA1965Pathol Vet2.68
Tassell R1967BrVet123:459
Smith AK 2004In:Andrews A(ed) Bovinemedicine,2nd
Taylor RF Puls R,McDonald KR 1979Proc Am AssocVet Lab
edn.Blackwell Science,Oxford,p634-651
Diag 22:77
Smith GW2005VetClinNorthAmFoodAnimPract21:595
TernantB,Peddicord RG1968Conell Ve58:185
Smith RFDobson H 2002 Domest AnimEndocrinol23:75
Thatcher WW,Collier R) 1986In:MorrowDA(ed)Current
Smith Bl,Donovan GA，Risco Cetal 1998Dairy Sci 81:1555
therapy in theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders.
Smith RE Ghuman SPS,EvansNPet al 2003Reproduction
Philadelphia
Suppl 6l:267-282
ThatcherWW,delaSota RL,SchmittEJPetal199GReprod
SnijdersSEM,DillonP,O'CallaghanD,olandMP000
Fertil Dev8:203
Theriogenology 53: 981-989
Thun R,Kaufmann C,Binder H et al 1996Reprod Domest
Spain JN,LucyMD,HardinDK2007Effectsofnutritionn
Anim 3l:571
reproduction in dairy cattle.In:Youngquist Rs.Threlfall
Todorolki J,Kaneko H 2006|ReprodDev52:1
WR(ed) Current therapy in large aninal tlieriogenology.
Todoroki I,Yamakuchi H,Mizoshita Ket al 2001
2nd edn.Saunders-Elsevier St LouisMO,p442-450
Theriogenology 55:1919-1932
SpallholzE,Boylan MLLarsen HS1990AnnalsNYAcad
Trimberger GW 1948 Nebr Univ AgricExpStn Res Bull:120
Sci587:123
TrinderNR,Hall RI,Renton CP1973VetRec93:641
SpeckG1948Amcr]ObstetGynecol55:1048
Tunon G,Parkinson THolmes CW,Chagas LM 2006 Rev
SpielmanAA,PetersonWE,FilchIB,Pomeroy BS1945
Vet17:11-19
Dairy Sci28:329
UllahG,Fuquay JW,KeawkhongTeal1996Dairy ci79
Spitzer IC1986In:MorrowDA (ed) Current therapy in
1950
theriogenology,2ndedn.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Underwood El. Surtle NF 1999 Cobalt.1n:The Mineral
Sreenan JM,Diskin MG1983Vet Rec 112:517
Nutrition of Livestock,3rd edn.CABI Publishing
Sreenan M,DiskinMG1986Theextent and timingof
Wallingford,Oxon,p251-282
embryonicmortalityincattle.In:Sreenan IM,Diskin
Vailes LD,Britu JH1990Anim Sci 68:2333
474
Chapter
221
Infertility and subfertility in the cow
VandeplasscheM,Bouters R 1982 In: Karg Hl, Schallenberger E
Whittaker DA 1980 Br Vet J 136:214
(ed) Curreni topics in veterinary medicine and animal sci-
Whiuaker DA 1997 Ca1tle Pract 5: 57-60
ence. Martinus Nijhoff,The Hlague
Whitaker DA 2004 Metabolicprofiles.In:Andrews AH(ed)
Van Eerdenburg FICM. Karthaus D,Taveme MAM et al 2002
Bovine medicine,2nd edn.Blackwell Science, Oxford,
1 Dairy Sci 85: 1150
p804-818
Van Giessen RC1991 Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 106: 881-883
WichtelII1998aNZVet14G:47
VanholderT,Opsomer G,de Kruif A 2005 Reprod Nutr Dev
Wichtel J11998bNZVet146:54
46:105
Wichtel 1.CraigieAl,FreemanDA et al 1996] Dairy Sci79:
Van Vliet H,van Eerdenburg FJCM 1996Appl AninBehav
1865
Sci 50: 57
WijeratneWVS,Munro1B,Wilkes PR1977Vet Rec100:333
Varner M, Maatje K,Nieles M,Rossing W 1994 In:
Wilde D 2006 Anim Reprod Sci 96:240
Proceedings of the 3rd International Dairy Housing
WilkesPR,Wijeratne WVS.Munro IB1981VetRec108:349
Conference, Otario, p 434
WilliamsRl,Stol1 GH 1966Dairy Sci 49:1262
VenableJ.McDonald LE1958Am J VetRes 19:308
Williamson NB,Morris RS,Blood DC,Cannon CM 1972Vet
Verkerk G 2000 Proc Soc Dairy CattleVet NZVA 17: 63
Rec 91:50
Vermeulen GTl 1988National dairy cattle performance and
Wischral A,Nishiyama-Naruke A,Curi R,Barnabe RC 2001a
progeny testing scheme.Republic of South Africa.Annual
Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat 65: 117
repon7:79
Wischral A,Verreschi ITN, Lima SB et al 200ib Anim Reprod
Vos P 1999 Cattle Irac17: 1-4
Sci 67:181
Waiblinger S,Menke C1999 Anthrozaos 12:240-247
WiseME,Rodriguez RE,Armstrong DVet al 1988
WalkerWL,Nebel RL,McGillard ML 1995Dairy Sci
Theriogenology 29:1027
78(Suppl 1): 307
Wolfe DW 1986 In: Morrow DA (ed) Current therapy in
Wall E,Brotherstone S,Kearney IFet al 2005Dairy Sci 88:
theriogenology 2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
376
WolfensonD,Flamenbaum 1,BermanA 1988IDairySci 71:
WalshRB,leBlancSl,DuffeldTF etal2007Theriogenology
809
67:948-956
WoodPDP1976Anim Prod22:275
WangY.Eleswarapu S.Beal WE et al2003 I Nutr 133:2555
Xu ZZ.Burton LI 2000ProcSocDairy CattleVet NZVA 17:23
Warnick AC,Kirst RC,BurnsWC,KrogerM 1967 IAnimSci
Yaeger MJ, Holler LD 20u7 Bacterial causes of bovine infer-
26:231
tility and abortion. In: Youngquist RS, Threlfall WR (eds)
Warren WC, Spitzer IC,Burns GL1988 Theriogenology 29:
266
5aunders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO,p389-399
WashbumSPSilvia W1,Brown CH et al 2002I Dairy Sti 85:
Youngquist RS 1986 In:MorrowDA(ed)Current therapy in
244
theriogenology,2nd edn.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Wathes DC,Taylor VI,ChengZ,Mann GE 2003 Reproduction
Zaaijer D,Noordhuizen IPTM 2001 Cattle Pract 9:205-210
Suppl 61:219-237
Zaied AA,Carverick HA,Bierschwal C) et al1980 IAnim Sci
Wathes DC,Cheng Z, Bourne N 2007 Domest Anim
50:508
Endocrinol 33:203
Zaied AA,Garverick HA.Kesler DI et al 1981 Theriogenology
Watson A 1988 In: Laing IA,Morgan WJB,Morgan WC (ed)
16:349
Fertility and infertility inveterinary practice.Bailliere
Zaiem N, Tainturier D,Abdelghaffar T, Chemil J 1994 Rev
Tindall,london
Med Vet 145:455
Watson CL1996 Cattle Praci4:277
Zavy MT, Giesert RD 1994 Embryonic mortality in domestic
Watson CL 1998 CatulePrac16:311-315
species. CRC Press, Bota Raton, FL
Watson CL,Cliff A)1996In:Proceedings ofihe 19th World
ZerobinK, Sporri 1 1972AdvVetSci Comp Med 16:303
Buiatrics Conference,2:345
Zulu VC, Penny C 1998 J Reprod Dev 44:191
Webb R, Garnsworthy PC, Gong IG, Logue D et al 1997
Zulu VC,Sawamukai Y,Nakada Ket al 2002a IVet Med Sci
CaulePract 5:361
G4:879
Wehrend A,Rcinle T, Herfen K,Bostedt H 2002 Deutsch
Zulu VC,NakaoT,Sawamukai Y2002b JVet Med Sci 64:
Tierarztl Wochenschr 109: 56-61
657
Weiss B 1994 Feedstuffs 66:14-16
Zwald NR,Weigel KA,Chang YMer al2004a 1 Dairy Sri 87:
Weller111989 / Dairy Sci72:2644
4287
Whitmore HL,TylerWI,Casida LE1974J AmVet MedAssoc
Zwald NR, Weigel KA,Chang YM et al 2004b J Dairy Sci 87:
165:693
4295
Witnore HL,Hurtgeni JP,Mather ECSeguin BE 1979 A
Vet Med Assoc 174:979
475
123
Chapter
Tim Parkinson
Specific infectious diseases causing
infertility and subfertility in cattle
Many of the infectious diseases of cattle adversely
most developedcountriesover thepast40-50years.
affect reproductive performance,either by direct
The classic venereal diseases, campylobacteriosis
effectsupon thereproductivesystemorviaindirect
and trichomonosis,havebeenlargelyeradicated in
effects upon the general state of health of affected
dairycattlebytheuseofartificialinseminationwith
animals.In this chapter,theeffectsof enzooticinfec-
semenfrom disease-freebulls.The control hasbeen
tious diseases upon reproductive performance are
less effective in beef cattle,in which natural ser-
considered;the effects ofnon-specific infections of
vice remains the predominant method of breeding.
thereproductivetract,such as thosethat occur after
MostWesterncountrieshavesuccessfullyeradicated
calving.wereconsidered in Chapter22
brucellosis through programmes based upon vac-
Infectious diseases can affect the reproduictive sys-
cination, blood testing and slaughter. Conversely,
temin the following main ways:
other diseases,such as infectious bovine rhinotra
impaired sperm survival or transport in thefemale
cheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis (IBR-IPV),
tract,leadingtoreducedfertilizationrate
bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD) and leptospirosis have
assumed much greaterimportance because of either
·direct effectsupon the embryo-this includes
a genuine increase in prevalence or the development
infections that result inearly embryonic death
of better diagnostic methods.Other diseases,whose
andthosethatinfectthemoreadvancedfetus or
effects upon reproduction were hitherto unrecog-
itsplacenta,resultingin abortion,stillbirthsor the
nized, are now ascribed significance as reproduc-
birthofweakcalves
tive diseases.Examples include ureaplasmosis,
·indirect effects upon embryo survival-this
Haemophilussommusinfections and abortions dueto
includes infections that have adverse effects upon
Neospora caninum.
uterinefunction and those thatinfect themater-
Yet,even though there has been a change in the
nal component of the placenta.Again,theseresult
importance of different specific infectious agents in
in embryonic death,fetal death with abortion,
causing infertility,none should be forgotten when
mummification or stillbirth.
investigating subfertility in a herd. Diseases that
have been considered as being eliminated can still
Systemicillnessresulting in fetal
recrudesce and can cause catastrophic effectsif they
loss (e.g. pyrexia-induced abortion)
gain entry to a herd with a low immune status to
or directly impairing reproductive
that disease.
cyclicity
Estimates oftheprevalenceofinfectious diseases
ofreproduction largely depend upon the success-
The patterns of enzootic infectious diseases that
ful diagnosis of causes of abortion.The data pro-
affectreproductionhavechangedconsiderablyin
videdfromthissourceprovideonly an approximate
476
Chapter
23
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
guide to the prevalence of diseases, however, since
early importations of catle. Today, venereal campy-
the percentage of fetopathies from which a specific
lobacteriosis is still one ofthe most important
infectious agent is identified is relatively small. In
infectious causes ofinfertility in cattle throughout
the results from the Velerinary Laboratories Agency
the world, despite prolonged efforts to eradicate it.
of the Department for Environment,Food and
Wherever the main method of breeding is by natural
Rural Affairs (Uk), positive results were obtained in
service (notably in beef herds) its venereal route of
=10-14% of suibmissions.When statutory submis-
transmission has ensured that ihe organism remains
sions for brucellosis screening are omitted, the diag-
a threat to cattlefertility.Most beef-producingcoun-
1ostic rate is =20-30%.Nonetheless, such data do
tries are affected,either with continuous epizootic
show that theprevalence of manyinfectiouscauses
presence of the disease (as in Australia and South
of abortion has bcen relatively static in the UK
America;Villar& Spina 1982.Hum 1996)orwith
(Table 23.1) since fist publication of the Veterinary
reappearance of the condition after a long period of
Investigation Diagnosis Analysis (VIDA I1) in 1977
supposed absence(as in theUK;MacLaren & Wright
(Veterinary Laboratories Agency 2006).
1977).Where artificial insemination is the main
method ofcattle breeding (notably in dairy cattle)
the incidence of campylobacteriosis has declined
Bacterialagents
significantly over the past 50 years.
Bovine venereal campylobacteriosis
Aetiology
Canpylobacteriosis was spread around the major
Campylobacter fetus(originally classified as Vibrio
livestock-producing regions of the world with the
foetus) is divided into two main subspecies.The
Table 23.1 Percentage frequency of isolation of paihogens from1 bovine feiopathies examined by the Veterinary Laboratories Agency
of the Department for Env ronment, Food and Rural Affairs(UK) (source: Veterinary Diagnosis Information Service 1997-1998)
1977
1984
1987
1992
1997
2002
2005
Arcanobacterium
20.2
25.5
5.3
3.8
4.0
6.3
6.2
pyogenes
Bacilius licheniformis
NR
NR
NR
8.2
7.5
10.9
16.4
Brucella abortus
52.3
2.0
0.3
NR
0
0.1
0.1
Campylobacter spp.
0.4
1.1
0.4
1.3
2.3
3.1
2.9
Leptospira spp.
NR
10.9
33.5
43.2
12.4
3.2
1.9
Listeriamonocytogenes
0.6
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.8
3.0
4.1
Salmonella dublin
9.3
10.5
15.4
11.8
10.2
14.3
10.7
Saimonellatyphimuriun
0.5
1.3
0.9
0.5
0.8
0.1
0.2
Cther Salmcnelia
0.8
1.4
1.0
1.5
1.0
0.3
0.6
serotypes
Bovinc herpesvrus-1
NR
4.5
5.4
5.2
5.6
1.1
0.6
(IBR-IPV)
Bovine viral diarrhoea
NR
7.6
10.8
8.7
8.2
4.0
7.1
Neospora caninum
NR
NR
NR
NR
34.7
36.9
30.3
Oiher protozoa
NR
NR
NR
NR
1.3
NR
NR
11.4in 1995:38.1 in 1996
Fungi
8.2
15.3
9.7
6.0
8.1
4.5
5.7
Other pathogens
7.6
18.6
16.2
8.4
13.6
12.4
13.4
Total identified
1675
1402
1524
1604
1790
1037
1008
477
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
mostimportant of these,in termsof causingbovine
When exposed to natural or artificial infection,few
infertility,is the subspeciesvenerealis（CFV),which,
bulls less than4years old remained infected formore
as its name suggests, is spread through coitus.The
than a few days,whereas bulls more than 4years
subspeciesfetis(CFF,ofwhichthereare two main
old generally became persistently infected (Dufty
serotypes) is not spread venereally and is not nor-
et al 1975）.Among older bulls there is less change
mally considered to be a major cause of infertility,
in susceptibilitywith age:a studyof bullsbetween
althoughitcancausesporadicabortions(Thompson
41and74monthsofage（Bieret al1977)showed
&Blaser2000).In addition,intermediate'strainsof
no increasein susceptibility over thatperiod.Once
CFFhave occasionallybeenreportedasacauseof
infection is established,it doesnotusually undergo
infertility akinto thatproduced by CFV(MacLaren
spontaneousrenission:thebullremains infected
&Agumbah 1988).Therehavebeen many changes
for life.Typical patterns ofpersistent infection are
tothenamesgiven to the subspecies of C.fetus over
shown inFigure 23.1.
the yearswhichmakeit difficul tofollow the early
literature.
Infectioninthecow
Other species of Campylobacter(C.coli,C.lyointes-
tinalis,C.jejuni and C. sputorum) have been impli-
Between40%and 75%ofnon-immune female
cated in bovine abortions(Newell etal2000).In
cattle become infected after a single service by an
addition,there are a number of saprophytic spe-
infected bull (Clarke 1971）.The organism initially
cies of Campylobacter,whichmay be present in the
colonizes the vagina, occasionally producing visible
alimentary tract of cattle or in the prepuce of the
mild,mucopurulent vulval discharge.The organism
bull.Themainsignificanceoftheselatterorganisms
multipliesinthevaginaand,withinaweek,spreads
（in terms ofvenereal campylobacteriosis)is that
to the uterus（Dekeyser 1984).Infection remains
they can interferewith thediagnosis ofpathogenic
confined tothevagina in 10-20% of infected ani-
species.
mals(Clarke1971).
The organism causes a mild,subacute,mucopu-
rulent endometritis,in which there is a substan-
Infection in thebull
tialperiglandular accumulationoflymphocytes
Infectionofthebull doesnotcause anyvisiblelesions
(Dekeyser 1984).Exudate collectswithin the lumen
ofthe genital tract,nor does it cause interference
of the uterine glands and the uterine lumen, with
toitsreproductivebehaviouroritssemen quality.
the severity of the endometritis peaking some-
Thus,thebull acts simply as a carrierand transmits
wherebetween theSthand13thweekaftertheini-
the infection at service to the female.The primary
tial infection(Estes et al 1966,Dekeyser 1984).The
routeofinfectionisvenereal transmission.Thereare,
endometritisissufficienuymild thatitcannot be
however,alsoreports thatbullscanbecomeinfected
appreciated by rectal palpation of the uterus.There
through contaminated bedding(Schute1969) and
isinfectionoftheuterinetubesinabout25%of
bull-to-bull transmissionmay occur throughmount-
ingwhenbullsareconfined together(Wagner et al
1965).Infection through contaminated semen col
lectionequipmentisawellrecognizedvariantofthe
12-
venerealroute oftransmission.
The organismisconfinedtothepenileintegument,
glans penis,prepuce and distal urethra(Thompson
infe
8
&Blaser 200o).Since the organism lives in the
crypts of the penile integument, the likelihood of
bulls becoming persistently infected increases with
age, as the crypis become deeper and more exten-
sive（Samuelson&Winter1977,Kennedy&Miller
2
3
4
5
>6
1993).It is relatively unusual for bulls less than 4
Age of bulls(years)
yearsoldtobecomepersistentlyinfected(Philpou
1968a).Earlywork showedthatonly5%ofbulls
Fig.23.1Relativeriskof bullsof different agesbecoming
persistentlyinfectedwithCampyiabacterfetus subsp.fetus.
under 4 years old carry the infection (Adler 1956).
478
Chapter
231
Specificinfectious diseases causinginfertility and subfertilityin cattle
animals,sometimes causing salpingitis (Roberts
at2-4months ofgestation （Frank etal1964),
1986).Inflammation ofthecervix may also occur,
although neither large numbers of abortions nor
causing an increased secretion ofmucus.After ser-
abortion storms are characteristic of venereal
vice,thismucus can be mixed with theuterine exu
campylobacteriosis.
date to form a mucoflocculent vulval discharge,
Immunity (immunoglobulin (lg)G-based) devel-
although this is not nearly so conspicuous a symp-
opsrelatively slowly within theuterusbut,when it
tom as occurswith trichomonosis(Arthur1975).
hasdone so andtheinfectioniseliminated from
Infeclionwith CFVdoesnotinterferewith the
the uterus,cows conceive and remain pregnant
process of fertilization but the endometritis that
（Thompson&Blaser 2000）. Hence,after an average
it causes results in a uterine environment that is
ofabout five services,themajority of cowsbecome
incompatible with embryonic survival (Dekeyser
pregnant and carry their calves to term.A propor-
1986).Fertilization occurs in the majority of suscep-
tionofsusceptiblecowsandheifersconceivetofirst
tiblefemalesthat areserved by an infected bull but,
servicebyan infected bull and carry theircalves to
becausetheuterine environment isunabletosustain
full term.
a pregnancy as a consequence of the inflammation,
Vaginal immunity is less effective than that within
the embryo dies at a variable time after conception.
the uterus, as the main antibody produced in the
Hence,when infection is introduced intoa sus
vagina is a non-opsonizing IgA.Thus,even when
ceptible herd,a dramaticdecrease in conception
cows have developed immunityin their uterus,
rate occurs(Roberts 1971).Infected cows return
infection canpersist inthevaginaforaconsider-
to oestrus, typically at an interval that is greater
able period of time. Vaginal infection persists in
than the normal 18-24 day interval, depending
mostcowsforupto6months andinup to50%
on thetime atwhich theembryo dies.Embryonic
of cows up to 10 months after the initial challenge
deaths occurring after recognition of pregnancy
(Vandeplassche et al 1963,Plastridge etal 1964).
result in later returns to oestrus,which occur
While most (>95%) cows manage to eliminate
irregularly at more than 25 days after service (Fig.
theinfectionfrom thevaginabytheend ofanor-
23.2). A small number of animals abort, typically
mal gestation, some remain infected after calving
(A) Maiden heifers
(B) Cows that have calved for
(C)Multiparous cows
the first time
Per serviceconception rate:62%
Per service conception rate:35%
Per service conception rate:47%
70-
09
vals
inter
50
vice
40
30
Inter
20
%
10
6
卡
4
8
Interserviceinterval in days
Interservice interval in days
Interserviceinterval indays
Fig.23.2Distributionofin:erserviceintervalsin a dairy herdinwhich thereisenzootic infectionwithCampylobacterfetus.
cows,interserviceintervalsshowedevidenceofembryonicdeath,whichwasaccompaniedbypoorconceptionrates.（C）Inthe
oldercows,interserviceintervalsandconceptionrateswereimproved,althoughchroniccampylobacteriosisremainsevident.
479
Part
Subfertility and infertility
and occasional animals (1-2%) remain permanent
In a naive herd,per-service conception rates can
vaginal carriers (Clarle 1971, Dekeyser 1984).
be as low as =2Q%.Ihe number of animals thiat
The development of the persistent vaginal carrier is
eventually coneeive depends on the length of the
partly a result of the lirmited ability of vaginal secre-
breeding season:usually there are several returns to
tory IgA to promote opsonization and phagocytosis.
service before sufficient immunity develops for the
However, CFV is also able to alter iis expression of
maintenance of a pregnancy. Most animals eventu-
surface antigens (surface layer proteins) in response
ally become pregnant if the breeding season is long
to thepresenceofhostantibodies(Garciaet al1995).
enough.
It appears that this antigenic shift is the primary
means by which the organism escapes the host's
immune system (de Vargas etal 2002) in field
Clinical signs
infections.
The first sign of genital campylobacteriosis is a
Vaginal infection can bere-established fairly read-
marked increase in the number of females returning
ilyif a recovered cow is served byan infected bull
t0 oestrus, some regularly and some irregularly,after
in the following breeding season:vaginal infection
service by a newly introduced bull.Sincereturns
occurs in 30-70% of cows that have previously been
are not observed in many beef herds, the first sign
exposed to infection when mated by an infected bull
seen by a herd manager is that often there is a disas-
(Clarke 1971). Such infection does not establish
trously low proportion of cows pregnant at the end
well within theuterus,so the cow's fertilityismuch
of the breeding season.
less impaired than during the initial episode of dis-
After experiencing serious infertility for about 6
ease.Nevertheless,fertility neverreturns to norinal:
months,a herd gradually becomes immune and
overall conception rates are lower than in unin-
mostof tliecows that manage toconceivewill befree
fected cows,some animals abort (Roberts 1986)
ofinfection after they havecalved.If infected bulls
andoccasional animals arerenderedsterilethrough
remain with the herd,re-infection of some cows
salpingitis (Clarke 1971).Hum (1996) estimated
when they are re-bred results in a similar, but much
that pregnancy rales in a newly infected, season-
less severe,infertility problem.Eventually,affer 2-3
ally calving, beef herd fall to about 40%, recovering
years, the fertility of such cows becomes acceptable,
tobetween 60% and 75% in a chronically infected
with only vague and intermittent infertility occurring
herd. These figures compare with a 90% pregnancy
(Arthur 1975, Roberts 1986).
rate in an uninfected herd.
On the other hand, among incoming heifers and in
However, naive animals (typically either maiden
any newly acquired cows (i.e. in those animals that are
heifers or first-calf heifers, depending on the herd’s
not immune to the disease) campylobacteriosis will
breerling policies, i.e. type of bull chosen for this
be perpetuated. In situations where detailed fertility
class of animals: virgin bull versus non-virgin bulls)
records of such a herd are available,a relativelynormal
will continue each year to exhibit grossly inpaired
distribution of interservice intervals will he present
reproductive performance when they are first
aong themature cows of the main established herd.
exposed to infecied bulls.
Whiere maidenheifers are bred to an infected
bull,they will exhibit the low conception rates and
Clinical presentation
irregular returns to oestrus that are characteristic of
Overview
campylobacteriosis. If, however, they are bred to a
virgin bull,they will not contract the disease until
The presence of venereal discase (although not spe-
after their first calving,so will have normal fertility
cifically campylobacteriosis) should be suspected
when there are high empty rates and/or a high pro-
second.Purchased animals,likewise, show the most
portion of late conceptions in natural-service herds
significant effects of the disease during their first sea
that cannot be explained in terms of failures of
son in the herd.Ifinterservice intervais are available,
other aspects of management. Occasional abortions,
they resemble the pattern in Figure 23.2, in wlich
mostly at 2-4 months of gestation, may be seen. If
the mature animals display a pattern that is not as
inter-service intervals are available,inspection of
bad as that ofnewly infected animals but is less
them can be diagnostic for the established presence
good than uninfected animals.
of venereal diseasewithin a herd.
Bulls are asymptomatic carriers of ihe infection.
480
Chapter
23
Specificinfectious diseases causinginfertility and subfertility in cattle
Diagnosis
medium(Lander1990) isrecommended.1f thisis
not feasible, the sample must be at the laboratory
Methodsthathavebeen usedtodiagnoseCFVinfec-
within6hours.After threedays ofincubation of the
tioninclnde:
Lander'smediumundermicro-aerophilicconditions,
culture
it can be subcultured onto blood agar and further
serology,including immunofluorescence,vaginal
incubated under micro-aerophilic conditions.
mucus agglutination or vaginal mucus enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)tests
Serology
polymerase chain reaction(PCR).
Serological tests based on humoral antibodies are
of litte ornovalue,sincegenital campylobacterio
sisdoesnotresultin ameasurableserum antibody
Culture
response ineithermalesor females.
Campylobacter fetus isa difficult organism logrowin
Serologicalmethodsbaseduponthevaginal IgA
culture. It is micro-aerophilic, fragile, fastidious in
responsehavebeenwidelyused as,eventhoughthat
its media requirements and generally obtained from
antibody is not particularly effective at eliminating
anenvironment that is heavily contaminatedwith
CFV infeciion,itis a rapid and persistent response.
other bacteria.Consequently,although positive cul-
However,serological methods do not accurately
ture results are diagnostic of the infection,negative
differentiatebetween CFVand CFF(Clarke 1971).
results must be interpreted with considerable caution.
Hence,in situationsinwhich cattle may havebeen
Samples that can be collected for culure include:
exposed to CFF thereliability of tests based on vagi
Vaginal washisapossibility,but isolationratesfrom
nal mucous IgA decreases.
Test based on vaginal IgA include:
females are extremely disappointing,unless the
animal is very recently infected.Pregnant animals
·Vaginal mucous agglutination test.Many authors
are exceedingly unlikely toyield positive results;
agree that this test can be very useful at herd
non-pregnant animals area little more hopeful
level (50%ofinfected animals will be detected),
·Preputial scraping or the preputial wash.Swabs
althoughresults atindividual animal level can be
aremuch less effective than either of these meth-
very misleading(MacLaren &Agumbah 1988).
ods.Bulls are much more likely to yield positive
The testhas,howeverlargely falleninto disuses
results than cows.A devicefor collecting preputial
it cannotdifferentiatebetween CFFand CFV
scrapings is illustrated in Figure 23.3
·IgA ELISA.An indirect ELISA testfor theidentifi-
Samples from abortus material: Many of the isola-
cationofimmunoglobulin A(IgA ELISA) invagi-
tionsof CFVhavebeenmadefrom abortedmate
nalmucous sampleswas developed in Australia
rial from cows,mainly from stomachcontents of
(Hum et al 1991).Field evaluation of the test sug-
abortedfetuses.Despitetheproblemsimplicitwith
gestedaspecificityof98.5%fortheidentification
of CFV-infected herds (Hum et al 1994).Where
mustering ofanimals inhill country specific effort
CFF infection of cattle may occur (e.g.where cat-
needstobe devotedto thesearchforsuchaborted
fetuses in the paddocks given the diagnostic
tle and sheep run together), the cross reactivity
value of aborted fetuses.
between CFF and CFV limits the usefulness of the
test（McFaddenetal2004,Benqueletal2005)
Because the organism is so fragile,it does not sur-
Despitethis limitation,the test is recommended
vivefor longin flushing media,Hence,immediate
by OiE for the diagnosis of the presence of CFV.
inoculationintotransportmedium,such asLander's
Immunofluorescence,alone orin combination with
culture,wasconsideredtobeavaluableadjuncttothe
diagnosis of campylobacteriosis.Indeed,Dekeyser
（1984)considered it tobe'a quick,convenient
and accurate method of diagnosing carrier bulls.
In combination with culture,immunofluorescence
Fig.23.3Device for collecting preputial scrapings from
cansuccessfullyidentifyupto98%ofinfectedbulls
bullsfor the diagnosisofvenereal campylobacteriosisor
(Winter elal 1967,Philpott 1968b).Dufty (1967)
trichomonosis.
advised thatabullcouldbedeclarednon-infected
481
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
after four consecutive negativefluorescent antibody
Eradication
tests,although Barr&Anderson (1993) considered
EradicationoffVfrom infectedherds isbasedon
culturetobeofgreatervaluethanfluorescent anti
three features of its cpidemiology:
body testing.
transmission is exclusivelyvenereal
bulls remain permanentlyinfected
Polymerase chain reaction
·infectedcowsovercome theinfection inaperiod
Many of the difficulties of culture and of cross-
of3-6months after theinitialinfectiveservice.
reactivity between CFF and CFV can potentially, be
In situations where cattle can bebred by Al,this is
obviatedbytheuse ofPCRmethods.Over thepast
probably themost effectivemeans of control,since
decade,PCR tests that have been developed(Hum
incominguninfectedanimals donotcontractthe
etal1997,Schulze etal2006)thalcan differenti-
disease and infectedanimals eventually become
atebetweenCFFand CFVinculture.Morerecently,
immune,whileremoval ofbullsfrom theherdpre-
a sensitive PCR has been developed for use in the
vents furthervenereal transmission of the disease.
field that appears to be able not only to differenti-
Although CFV does not survive through anormal
atebetweenCFFand CFVbut also toidentifythe
gestation in most cows,there are occasional per-
presence of CFV in grossly contaminated samples
sistentlyinfectedanimals（Frank&Bryner 1953).
（i.e. preputial scrapings) or in samples from which
Hence,iihas beenrecommended thatone should
culturehasnotbeenpossible(McMillenetal2006).
continue insemination until every exposed cow has
This test is currentlyin widespread usein Australia
completed two normal pregnancies (Arthur 1975).
and New Zealand, where its sensitivity and speci-
Othermeans oferadication include:
ficity are being investigated in relation to cultural
·Split herd management.Rigid segregation of
identification of the organism.
‘clean' animals (ie.virgin animals or cattle that
have never been mated by an infected bull) and
Prevention,control and eradication
infected’ animals (i.e. all others), with progressive
replacement of thelatterbytheformer has been
Prevention
recommended,although the effort required o
SinceCFVisonlyspreadthroughthevenerealroute
maintain segregation is enormous(Arthur 1975)
(or by contact with contaminated objects),preven-
·Bullmanagement.Peter(1997) hasrecommended
tative management aims to ensure that infected ani-
the culling of older bulls(as these are more likely
mals are not introduced into a susceptible herd.
to be persistently infected).sexual rest and testing
BreedingbyartificialinseminationAlisprobablythe
of young bulls before the start of mating
mosteffectivepreventativemeasureofall,although
·Antibiotic treatment.Infected bulls can be effec-
this is not always feasible,especially in beef herds.
tively treated with systenic or topical admin-
For beef herds,such measures include（Peter 1997）:
istrations of dihydrostreptomycin or topical
bulls should not be shared or rented,unless it is
administration of neomycin and erythromycin
absoluutelycertainthattheyaredisease-free
(Dekeyser 1986). However bulls that have been
culledbullsshouldbereplacedwithvirginbulls
treatedwithantibioticswillbesusceptibletorein-
culledcows shouldpreferablybereplaced with
fectionif theymatewithinfectedcows.Antibiotics
virgin heifers,although the risk posed by heavily
have lirtle beneficial effect in the cow,whether
pregnant or freshly calved cows is small
administered locallyor parenterally
(Arthur
1975).
·keeping the breeding season short (2-3 months)
· avoiding common grazing with animals from other
herds and ensuring that fences in and around the
Vaccination
farm are stockproof
Vaccination programmes prevent the development
where CFVvaccine is available,all incomingbulls
ofcampylobacteriosisin susceptiblecows and elim-
shouldbevaccinatedar thetimeofbreeding sound
inate infection from affected cows(Schuriget al
ness examination and all other animals should be
1978,Eaglesome et al 1986).Vaccination should
vaccinated before the start of the breeding season.
preferably be carried out 30-90 days before breeding
482
Chapter
231
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
commences and,since the inmunity is relatively
thecaseremains the subject ofdebate:it hasbeen
short-term,yearlyrevaccinationbeforethestartof
suggested therelevant strain of CFFwas actually an
thebreeding season should beundertaken(Hoerlein
alypical CFV.
1980).Dekeyser(1986)reportedthat vaccinated
females conceivenormally,although many acquire
Brucellosis
avaginalinfectioniftheyareservedbyaninfected
bull.
Bovine brucellosis is usually caused by B.abortus,
Vaccination can be used for prevention and treat-
althoughBrucellamelitensis,transmittedfromsheep
ment ofcampylobacteriosis in bulls(Clarke et al
and goats,can also cause disease in cattle. Brucella
1974).Some studies(Bispigetal 1981,Vasques etal
suis has been isolated from cattle in contact with
1983,Hum et al1993),have suggested that vaccina-
infected pigs,but does not appear to cause disease
tion alone is not effective at eliminating infection,
in cattle(Robinson 2003).B.abortus affects Bovidae
so haverecommended concurreni treatmentwith
other than Bos taurs,including Bos indicus,yaks,
topicalorsystemicantibiotics.Morerecentstudies
domesticbuffaloes and bison,and wild Bovidae,
have shown thatprotection of themalecanbereli-
Cervidae and Camelidae,with the resuli thatinfec
ably achievedbythieuseofdoubledoses ofvaccine
tion can be maintained in wildlife populations.
givenon twooccasions(Cortese1999a)
Brucellosisresults in abortion,usuallyin the second
halfofpregnancytogetherwithmetritisandretained
Infection with Campylobacter fetus
fetal membranes (RFM).In bulls,it can cause orchi-
tis,epididymitis and infections of the accessory sex
subsp.fetus
glands(Nicoletli 1986).
Campylobacterfetus subsp.fetusiscommonlypresent
B.abortusoccursinmostcountriesoftheworldwhere
in thegastrointestinal tract ofcattle and sheep.lt is
cattle are kept in any significant numbers.Because of
transmittedthroughcontaminatedfeedandwater
the enormous losses that the disease causes to dairy
and thevenerealroute isnot generally regarded as
andbeefcattleindustries,it has been the subject of
being a significant means of transmission.It is gen-
eradication schemes in many countries. Currently, B.
erallyassociatedwithsporadic abortions and isnot
aborlus is found worldwide incattle-raising regions,
usuallya causeofconceptionfailure.Infectionwith
except for Japan, Canada,Scandinavia,Luxembourg
CFFresults in a transientbacteraemia,afterwhich
and the Netherlands, some central European coun-
the organism localizes in the placenta,causing abor-
tries,AustraliaewZealand andIsraelwhereithas
tion. The majority of such abortions occur between
been eradicated (Anon 1997).The UIK is considered
the 4th and7ti months of gestation(Thompson&
tobefreeof thediseasewhilemostofthestatesof
Blaser 2000)
the mainland USA are also free (Yaeger & Holler
The placenta is usually autolysed,indicating that
2007).Themost seriously affectedareas are around
death preceded expulsion by a significant inter-
theMediterranean basin,theMiddleEast (excepting
val. Placental lesions are very similar to, although
Jordan and the United Arab Emirates). western Asia,
less severe than,those caused by Brucella abortus.
parts of Africa and LatinAmerica
Typically,there is necrosis,with yellowish-brown
discolorationofthefetalcotyledonsandleather-
Aetiology and pathogenesis
likethickeningoroedemaof theintercotyledonary
allantochorion.Lesions in thebovine fetus are not
Mostherdoutbreakshavebeencaused bytheintro
specific(KennedyMiller 1993):a situation that is
duction of carrier animals.Infection occurs primarily
markedly different from the pathognomonic liver
by ingestion butcan also occurvia mucousmem
lesions in aborted ovine fetuses (see p.569).
branes The principal source of infection is aborting
Althoughthevenerealrouteoftransmissionis
cows;in which the fetus,placenta,fetal fluids and
not regarded as ofimportancefor CFF,it hasbeen
milk are all heavily contaminated. Ingestion of con-
reported that some strains can be transmitted by
taminatedpasture,bedding,foodorwater,orlickin
thatroue,resulting in a syndrome hat is more like
an aboried fetus,infected afterbirth orgenital exu-
classical venereal canpylobacteriosis than the syn-
datefromarecentlyabortedcowarecommonmeans
dromemorenormallyassociatedwiththeorganism
by which transmission occurs.Infection mayeven
(Maclaren&Agumbah1988).Whetherthisisinfact
occur throughtheteatbyinfectedmilkofanother
483
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
cow,or through thevagina by infected semen.Calves
In addition, or as an alternative, specific cell-medi-
can become infected through contaminated millk or
ated orserologicalresponses to Brucella antigens calt
at the time of parturition.
be demonstrated'(Robinson 2003).
The organism colonizes the udder and supra-
The organism can be identified in stained smears
mammarylymphnodes of non-pregnant ani-
prepared from suspected contaminated naterial.
mals. In pregnant animals, production of erythritol
either using a modified Koster and Ziehl-Neelsen
within the placenta allows rapid multiplication
method ora fluorescent antibody technique(Brinley
of the bacteria, leading to endometritis, infection
Morgan &MacKinnon 1979).B.abortus can be iso
of cotyledons and placentitis.The fetus is aborted
lated bymicrobialculturefromthefetalstomach
48-72 hours after death,by which time a degree
of an abortus, from fresh afterbirth or from uiter-
of autolysis has occuirred. The fetal memhranes are
ine exudaie. PCR methods have also been devel-
very frequently retained. For a day or two before,
oped that allow identification of different strains
during and for about a forunight after abortion the
(Ocampo-Sosa et al 2005) and between pathogenic
genital discharge of the infected female is highly
stains and vaccinal strains (e.g. S19 or RB51 strains;
infected.When the fetal membranes are retained,
Garcia-Yoldiet al 2006).WhietherPCR is more effi-
cient than culture for the routine diagnosisof cases
about a month after delivery.After the completion
is yet to be established (O'Leary et al 2006).
of uterine invalution, the organisms colonize the
Diagnosis at the herd level as part of eradication
udder and supramammary lymph nodes, whence,
schemes has largely relied upon serological tests
in the next gestation,infection of theplacenta may
upon biological materials such as milk, serum, vagi-
again occur. B. abortus may live for months outside
nal muicus and semen (Brinley Morgan&Mackinnon
the animal body in aborted fetuses or fetalmem
1979). Serology has also been used to confirm pre-
branes but when exposed to drying and sunshine it
sumptive diagnoses based upon Ziehl-Neelsen stain-
is soon killed.The infantile uterus becomes infected
in a very small proportion of calves that are born
are currently in use for screening or diagnosis include:
alive and surviverearing(Wilesmith 1978).
the rose Bengal plate test, which was introduced
intotheUKin1970 as themaininitial screening
Clinicalsigns
test of serum samples in the bruicellosis eradica-
tion scheme (Brinley Morgan&Richards 1974)
The main sign of brucellosis is abortion, which
• the plate agglutination test, This test was rated
occurs mainly in the second half of gestation,Earlier
highest,in terms of sensitivity and specificity, of
abortions may occur at the beginning of an out
the conventional tests and is better than either
break. Occasionally, fetal death is followed by mum-
rose Bengal or complement fixation tests (Gall &
mification or maceration rather than abortion. Late
Nielsen 2004).
aborted fetusesmay beborn alive but either die
'These two tests are known to have significant false-
shortly after birth or areweak,unthrifty and at risk
positive rates (i.e. they identify some non-infected
of succumbing to calf diarrhoea.
animals as positive), so positive samples are re-
Most cows thatabort haveRFM.Theplacenta appears
examined using a more specific serological method.
cry, thickened, cracked and covered by a yellowish
The milk ring test, which detects Brucella antibod-
exudatein the intercotyledonary areas.Cotyledons
appear necrotic and may also be covered with an exul-
ies in milk,is very useful in screening the presence
date.RFM is more common in cows that abort in later
ofbrucellosis inherdsby collecting bulk milk sam-
gestation and those hat carry to term. Such animals
ples or in individual animals(Robinson2003)
show delayed involution of theuterus and areprone to
·Indirect ELiSAs can be used for screening or diag-
secondary bacterial invasion with resultant puerperal
nosis. They have the advantage of being cheaper
metritis.
andeasier to use thanmany other methods(Gall
&Nielsen 2004), and their diagnostic accuracy is
at least as good as that of the complement fixation
Diagnosis
test (Wright et al 1993, Nielsen et al 1996). Some
Diagnosisis based upon the isolation of B.aborius
ELISAsallow differentiationbetweenvaccinated
from abortion material, milk or necropsy material.
and infected animals(Nielsen et al 1989)
484
Chapter
23
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
·The complement fixation test (CFT) and serum
Phase 3: Test and removal, segregation or slaughter.
agglutination test (SAT). The SAT is no longer
Herds are tested for animals that are seropositive
regarded as suitable for the diagnosis of brucello-
to virulent strains:these animals are segregated or
sis (Robinson 2003), as its specificity and sensitiv-
slaughtered. Radostits ct al (2007) suggesied 1hat the
ity are poorer than those of the other tests (Brinley
incidence of infection has tobereduced to about
Morgan & MacKinnon 1979).The CFT identifies
4% of the bovine population before a slaughter-
infected adults before the SAT and, as the disease
based eradication programme is likely to be feasible.
beromes chronic,the titres detected by the SAT
As eradication progresses, the proportion of false
tend to fall belowdiagnostic levels,whereas titres
positives from the cross teaction between S19 and
detected by the CFT persist at diagnostically signif-
virulent strains reaches a point whereit is more cost-
icant levels. The CFT is also more effective than the
effective to desisi withvaccination.Later in the erad
SATin differentiating titres arising from infection
ication process,monitoring at a herd level (e.g. using
from vaccination. In calves vaccinated with strain
bulk mill) or in markets or al slaughiter is more cost
19, titres detected by the CFT hecome negative in
effective than individual animal testing. The scheme
most casesby 6 months after vaccination,whereas
that was used in the UK during this phase of the
ann 18-month period is required for the SAT.
process is shown in Figure 23.4.
It should be noted that, during an active infection of
Phase 4:Freedom.Criteria thathave to be met to
a herd,theresults oftests should beinterpreted with
allow a region tobe officiallybrucellosis free include
some caution.Negative reactions will occur during
that the condition is notifiable,that reactors are
the incubation period and, furthermore, it is quite
slaughtered, that vaccination is notused and thatthe
common to get a negative reaction at the time of, and
national/regional brucellosis infection rate has not
for a few days after, a brucellosis abortion. Infected
exceeded 0.2%for at least 2years.These criteria are
bulls sometimes fail to react to theblood test,and
reflected in current European Union regulations.
it is considered that, if the agglutination test is per-
In the Uk,the brucellosis eradication scheme also
formed on seminal plasma rather than blood, a ber-
requires:
terindication ofinfection will be obtained.
·positive identification of cows and their calves
·traceable movements of catile, so that potential
Control
carriers and in-contact animals can be found
secureboundaries to individual farins or to erad-
Eradication
ication areas,in order that uncontrolled move-
The Food and Agriculture Organizationrecommends
ments of animals are prevented
the following sequence of action for eradication of
regular testing of all cows,followed by immediate
brucellosis from a nation or region (Robinson 2003).
slaughter of reactors - compensation payment for
Phase 1:High or unknown prevalence,with no
slaughtered animals isneeded to ensure farmers
control programme. The first step is to idlentify the
full participation in the scheme
prevalence and distribution of the infection through
·isolation and testing ofany cows that abort or
programmes such as investigation of abortions
have premature calvings. In the Uk, any animal
and surveys of cattle on-farm and in markets or at
calving at less than 271 days of gestation has ro be
slaughter.
sampled for brucellosis.
Phase 2: Mass vaccination.In the LIK the first mass
vaccination was undertaken with vaccines prepared
Localcontrolofanoutbreak
from killed cultures of McEwan's B.abortus S45/20.
This was later replaced with strain S19,a smooth
Should an outbreal of brucellosis occur, the disease
variant of a strain of B.abortus ofreducedvirulence
is controlled on-farm as far aspossible by strictly
but of high anigenic quality.Strain RB51 (a rough
isolating any animals that abort. Rigorous cleaning,
strain) is also being used for vaccination; its advan-
disinfection and disposal ofinfective material are
practised. The complete isolation of the reactor from
with serological tests forvirulent strains.Vaccination
4 days before calving or abortion to 14 days after-
should be supported by checks on-and off-farm that
wards isthekey to successful reductioninincidence
aninals are seropositive.
of the disease on the farm.Calfhood vaccination
485
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Herd owner applies to
join scheme
Herd inspected
Positive=fail
Positive
SATand CFT
Blood samples
collecl for
RBPT
Negalive=pass
1st tesl
Negative=pass
2nd testas above RBPI,SAT and CT
Pass
3rdand
final test (as aboveRBPT,SATand CFT)
Pass
Accredited
MonthlyMRTonherd
and annual blocd
Fig.23.4Brucellosis testing scheme used in theUK,aspartofphase3of the OlErecommendationsfortheeradicationof the
disease.MRT,milk ring lest;RBPT,rose Bengal plate test.(AfterBrinley Morgan&MacKinnon 1979.)
shouldbeperformed intheseinfected herds.When
Tuberculosisofthegenitalia
theincidence ofinfection is sufficiently reduced,the
reactorsmay be slaughtered.
Bovine tuberculosis has been eradicated in many
Lastly,in heavily infected herdswith current abor-
countriesoftheworld.However,beforeeradication
tion,the spread of infection must be controlled in
schemeswere implemented it was an important
everypossibleway.Itisbestto isolaleall parturient
causeofinfertility and thus,wherebovinetubercu-
orabortinganimalsfrom4daysbeforeto14days
losis still existsit should alwaysbeconsidered asa
after parturition.Disposal of infected material,thor-
possible cause. Infection may reach the tract either
ough cleansingand disinfection afteran abortion and
by spreadfrom theperitoneumvia theuterine tubes,
segregation of reaciors are practised.There will be a
or by penetration of the serosa,or by bloodstream
shortage of young stock on such a farm, and this can
invasion,inwhich casetheendometrium may be
bemadegood bybuying in calves fromfree herds;
involved in the absence of serous or tubal lesions.
thesecalves andallotheryoungstockarevaccinated.
Occasionally,primaryuterine infections may arise
When the disease becomes quiescent - as shown by
from contaminated instruments or handsduring
further blood tests - disposal of reactorsmay begin.
gynaecological or obstetrical interferences.
486
Chapter
231
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
Tuberculosis of the uterus is not aninevitablebar-
leptospirosis is of considerable public heath
rier to reproduction,for itispossiblefor a calf to be
importance.In NewZealand,a veryhigh incidence
born from a grossly infected uterus (the calf itself
ofhumanleptospirosisoccurred duringthe1950s,
being affected bythecongenital form ofthedisease)
due to the high prevalence of the infection among
butitisprobablein such casesthat theuterineinfec-
dairy cows andthehighproportion oftheNew
tion was acquired or,atleast,developedrapidly,dur-
Zealandlabour-forcewho worledinlivestock
ing pregnancy.The diseaseis also liable to develop
industries（Kirschner & McGuire 1957).Therisk
in thereproductive organs afterparturition.
ofhumanleptospirosiswasconsideredofsuch
significance that various programmes were intro-
duced tolimitthespreadofthe diseaseto humans,
Leptospirosis
culminating in a vaccination programme for dairy
cows（Oertley 1999).In excess of 90%of New
Leptospirosis isan important zoonotic diseaseof
Zealand dairy cows are now vaccinated against
cattle andothermammalsthat is caused bypatho-
serotypesharijoand pomonaand,wherehuman
genic spirochaetes of the genus Leptospira.Ulntil
leptospirosis does occur among farm workers,up
recently, pathogenic leptospires were classified as
to 90% of cases are associated with herds that are
Leptospira interrogans and non-pathogenic strains as
unvaccinated(Marshall&Chereshsky1996)
L.biflexa(Eaglesome & Garcia 1992).Thegenus is
Transmission of leptospirosis depends on condi-
now classified into seven species,with numerous
tions favouring the survival of the organism in the
serovarsthat crossspecies divisions.Reclassification
environment,onthenumber ofcarrier animalsin
basedonmolecularrather than serological charac-
apopulation and on thelength oftimeforwhich
teristics is likely (Levett 2001).Each serovar tends
to be adapted to a particular mammalian species,
carrieranimalsshed leptospires.Therisk ofinfection
increaseswhen thereisa high density ofcarrier and
known as a maintenancehost.Levett(2001) defined
susceptible animals.Survivalof Lepiospirainthe envi-
a maintenancehostasa speciesinwhichinfection is
ronmentdependsonvariationsintemperatureand
endemicandinwhichitisusuallytransferredfrom
humidity.Drying andpHvalues outsidetheneutral
animal to animal by directcontact.In themainte
nance host the serovar causes relatively minor symp-
range(6-8) aredetrimental toits survivalin the envi-
ronment:whereaswarm,moistconditionsfavourits
toms,butmoreseverediseaseoccurswheninfection
survival.Theorganism can survive for long periods
ofan incidental (i.e.non-maintenance) host occurs.
inwel soil orstagnantwater and theriskofinfection
Themain host-adapted strainsofcattle areL.interro
with Leptospira organisms increases during periods
gans serovarhardjo typehardjo-prajitno intheUKand
Leptospira borgpetersenii serovar hardjo typehardjobo-
ofhighrainfall orflooding.Effluent is animportant
sourceofleptospiresforfeedlotcattle.
vis in the USA and Australasia.These serovars will be
referred to subsequently in thischapter asLeptospira
hardjo.Serovars thatcommonlycausediseaseincat-
Aetiologyandpathogenesis
tle,arethepigadapted strain,eptospirapomona,and
rodent-adapted strains.
Infection can enter via skin abrasions or through
Leptospirosis has a worldwide distribution. Large
the mucous membranes of the eye, mouth or nose.
numbers of cattle are affected.In the UK,Ellis et al
It can also be transmitted in semen after natural
（1986)estimated itsprevalence at=60%basedon
service(Ellis etal 1986).After infection,a short
microbiologyand27%based on serology.InNew
latentperiod(5-14days)is followed by abacte
South Wales,King(1991) estimated that 27%of
raemia,which if caused by a host-adapted serovar
cattlewerepositivetoL.pomon:16%positiveto
(e.g.L.hardjo)causesrelatively mild symptoms but
L.hardjo,and 31% positive toboth.In the stud
if caused by a non-adapted strain (e.g. L.pomona)
iesofHellstrom (1978)and Blackmore（1979)in
results inanacute,severe,sometimesfatal,disease.
New Zealand: S1% of herds had active or previous
Thebacteraemialastsforsome4-5days,afterwhich
infectionwith L.hardjoand36%hadevidenceof
the animalmounts an immune response against
L.pomona infection.
the leptospires.Thereafter,the organisms local-
Accidental infection of humans with animal-
ize in tissues that areinaccessible to antibodies,
adapted strains of Leptospira results in a severe,
particularly kidney tubules,cotyledons and fetus
flu-like,sometimes fatal,zoonoticdisease.Hence,
(Higgins etal 19s0).Colonization ofthekidney
487
Part
151
Subfertilityandinfertility
resultsin excretion ofleptospiresintheurinefora
the cotyledonsmaybefawn-coloured andflac
periodoftimethatlastsbetweenseveralweeksand
cid.Abortedfeguses areusually severely autolysed,
theanimal'sentirelifetime(Thiermann1982,Ellis
althoughsonearequitefreshiandoedematous.
1984),providinga sourceofenvironmentalcon-
If fetal interstitial nephritis is present,it is patho-
taminationandofdirectinfectionbothofother
gnomonic. lt is theoretically possible to ideniify
cows and of humans.Renal damage can be severe,
Leptospira organisms by dark-field microscopy of
which is more serious in non-maintenance hosts
fetalfluids or in cow urine,orbyfluorescent anti-
than in maintenance hosts.Other pathological
body staining techniques but,in practice,these are
changes, such as haemolysis, nephritis and hepati-
time-consuming and relatively unsuccessful.
tis,can also be serious in non-maintenance hosts.
Diagnosis thereforereliesprimarilyupon serology
Fetal infection,as a result ofplacentitis and lep-
upon maternal or fetal blood,for which themost
tospires crossing the placenta,varies in outcome
widely used test is the microscopic agglutination test
depending on the stage of gestation.Abortion may
(MAT).Nonetheless,diagnosis is not straightfor-
result, or the fetus may produce antibodies and sur-
ward.High titres againstnon-host adapted serovars,
vive,oritmaybestillbornorbebornweakandlatently
together with clinical signs of disease, can be diag-
infected. Leptospires can be present in puerperal dis-
nostic,although abortion can occur in the absence
charges forup to S days(Ellis1984)and can persist in
ofhightitres.Adapted serovars aremore difficult.
thepregnant and non-pregnant uterus for up to=150
Even though activeinfectionwith Leptospira causes
and=100 daysafter infection,respectively.
rising titres in paired sera,high MAT titres usually
persist only for up to about 3 months after infec-
tion.Hence, titres are generally in decline by the
Clinicalpresentation
time abortionoccurs,sincethereisusuallyaninter
Infectionof naivecattlewith L.hardjogenerallyresults
valof6-12weeksbetween infectionofthedamand
in a mild disease.Most animals show no clinical signs
fetal expulsion(Ellis 1984-1985).By that time, the
but become carriers and excrete the organism in the
dam's antibody titre is either falling, static or not
urine.In other animals,clinical signs include:
detectable.As a result, examination of paired sera
a transient rise in temperature and/or the appear-
（taken atabortionand 2-3weekslater) fromindi-
anceof being unwell or inappetent fora fewdays
vidual animals is of minimal diagnostic value.
It is therefore preferable to use serology to iden-
mastitis (flabby bag')or a sudden drop in milk
tify the presence of active infection by using the
production(Ellis&Michna 1976)
MAT as screening test in herdsin which the disease
abortionorstillbirthmayoccurupto6oreven
maybe endemic.Numbers ofanimals from which
12weeks aftertheacutephaseofaninfection.
samples should be collected are suggested in Table
Itcanoccur atanytimefromthe4thmonth to
23.2.Interpretationrequiresdifferentiationofactive
term;itismostcommon after6months.Abortion
infectionfromvaccinal titres:
can occur in the absence ofany clinical signs of
disease（Thiermann 1982).
Infectionwith
non-adapted
serovars(notably
Table23.2Numberof cows to be sampled for the diagnosis
pomona,canicola,copenhageni,icterolaemorrhagiae
ofleptospirosis
and grippotyphosa)results in an acute febrile dis-
ease,characterized by temperatures of 40Cor
Total herd size
No. to be sampled
more, together with haemoglobinuria,icterus and
20
16
anorexia.Leplospiral mastitis may also be present.
Deaths may occur,especially in calves,and there
40
21
maybesporadic abortions or an abortion'storm
60
23
90
25
120
26
Diagnosis
160
27
Thierearenolesionsthatarespecificforleptospiro
300
28
sis.The placenta of animals that have aborted may
450+
29
exhibit oedema of theintercotyledonary tissue and
488
Chapter
23
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
·Titres of<1:400 probably reflect historical infec-
between6monthsand3yearsofage(Ellis 1984).
tion orvaccinationtitres.Most animalshavetitres
Vaccines are based upon bacterins,which pro-
<1:100from=3months aftervaccination
ducerelativelylow antibody titresbutwhichcon-
·Titres of 1:100 are present in 40-70% of cattle
fer protection for about 12months.There is little
naturallyinfectedwithL.hardljoregardlessoftheir
or no cross-protection between the main sero-
varsthat affect cattle,so the use ofbivalent vac
vaccination status
cines (L. hcrdjo and L.pomona) or trivalent
Titres of> 1:1600 are indicative of active infection,
vaccines (L.lurdjo,L. pomon and L.copenhageni)
but animalscan have activeinfection with titres of
iscommon （Radostits et al 2007).In situations
<1:100（Ellisetal 1982)
where thelosses due to leptospirosis arelow,vac
Wheremore than20%oftheherd areseropositive
cination may not be cost-effective.However,the
orif titres are over1:1600,activeinfectionispres
zoonoticriskof the diseaseis such that,even when
ent and further spread of the disease ispossible
Iosses are not great,publichealth auhorities may
(Anon1992)
（asinNewZealand)exertconsiderablepressureto
·Titres after acuteinfection can be>1:25000and a
ensurethatsusceptiblecattlearevaccinated
significantincreasein titres occursif the samples are
Thespread ofinfectionvia the environmentshould
collectedduringan acuteepisodeofleptospirosis.
alsobecontrolled.Striculy avoidingcontactbetween
cattle and pigs, avoiding spreading pig effluent on
grazing pastures and fencing off or draining contam-
Treatment and control
inatedwatersourcesarerecommendedtoreducethe
environmentalloadoforganisinstowhichcattleare
Generalcontrolmeasuresrelated togoodhygiene,
exposed.
thus minimizing ihe riskof infection with
leptospires from other host species,should be
implemented.These include the strict segregation
Salmonellosis
ofcattlefrom pigs,rodentcontrol and the drain-
Abortion due to salmonellae has been reported
ing or fencing off of contaminated water sources.
from many countries.Salmonellaemay cause abor-
Therole ofshieepin the epidemiology of L.hardjo
tion as a result of prolonged pyrexia or as a result of
is still not clear;however,since they have been
shown to excrete the organism in their urine,it
infectionof thefetoplacentalunit.
seems prudent not to graze them together with
cattle.
Aetiologyandpathogenesis
Therearetwomethodsofspecifictreatmentand
control: the use of a vaccine or parenteral strepto-
In Britain,Salmonella-induced abortion has per-
mycin/dihydrostreptomycin,ora combination of
sisted as a continuing,although not a major,prob
both.Theantibioticshouldbeusedatadoserate
lem for some time(Table 23.1).The main organism
of25mg/kgbyintramuscularinjection.Repeated
involved is Salmonella dublin,which isresponsible
doses may be necessary. Streptomycin is effective
for 80%of salmonella abortions (Hinton 1973).
inclearingL.pomonafromtheurineofinfected
Salmonella dublinisnotcvenlydistributed through-
cattle, and treatment with antibioticplus vaccina-
outthe world.lt iscommon in theuk(nota
tionhasbeeneffectiveinarresting theprogressof
bly Dorset, Somerset and south-west Wales)and
an abortion storm. In countries in which strepto-
Europe, South Africa and paris of South America.
mycin is not registered for used in food-producing
In the USA,it was confined to California and other
animals otlier antibiotics(e.g.tetracyclines,ampi-
regions wesl ofthe Rockies until recently, but has
cillin or amoxicillin) may be can be used. L. hurdjo
spread eastwards through the movement of infected
mayalsobelesssusceptibletostreptomycinthanto
cattle（Bulgin 1983,Radostits etal2007).Salmonella
alternative antibiotics(Prescott&Nicholson 1988,
typhimurium is endemic in cattle throughout the
Radostits etal2007]
world but is not a major cause ofreproductive fail-
In closed herds,vaccination ofall members of
ure.S.newport isprobablythe most common of the
theherd should be done annually.In open herds,
exoticsalmonellaetoinfecicattlebutawidevariely
thefrequency should beincreasedto6-monthly
ofother species areisolated duringindividual out-
intervals;thisis particularly importantfor heifers
breaks.In New Zealand,S.dublin isnot present but
489
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
S. brandenbug is a significant cause of abortion in
have also been used,largely against S. typhimrium,
cattle (Clark et al 2004).
but their effectiveness has been a matter of debate
The disease is contracted fallowing the consuming of
(Radostits et at2007).
feedstuffs or grazing of pasure that has beenn contami-
nated with faeces from infected animals,slurry from
Listeriosis
animal units, human sewage or infected river water.
After infection,hereis an initial bacteraemia during
Listeria monocyiogenes isprimarily apathogen of the
which the organism spreads to the liver, spleen, lungs
central evous system in sheep and cale,nwhich
and lymph nodes of the dam. Infection localizes into
it causes encephalitis. It is consistently, if not fre-
placentomes 6-8 days later, causing a recruidescence of
quently, isolated from bovine abortuses, and is also
pyrexia. Death of the fetus and subsequent abortion
a cause of abortion in sheep and goats (Ch. 25).
occur as a consequence of he resulting placentitis.
Other species of Listeria (L. ivanouii and L. seeligeri)
are also rare causes of ahortion in catle.
Clinical signs and diagnosis
Aetiology and pathogenesis
The classical signs of salmonellosis in adult cattle
include a marked pyrexia (>40°C), severe diarrhoea
Listeria monocyiogenes is ubiquitous in the environ-
and dysentery,which may be associated with abor-
ment, being present in the soil, sewage effluent,
tion.More frequently,salmonella abortions occur
bedding and foodstuffs; it persists, as it is particu-
in late pregnancy in the absence of any other clini-
larly resistant to the effecis of drying, sunlight and
cal signs, although malaise, pyrexia and inappetence
extremetemperature.The source ofinfection in cases
have also been recorded in some animals aborting
of abortion is almost always grass silage that is either
because of S.dublin infection (Hlinton 1973).RFM
grossly contaminatedwith soil,has a low dry matter
isa common sequel (Hall & Jones 1977).
content,or has undergone inadequate fermentaiion,
The proportion of the herd that is affected depends
resulting in a high-pH,butyric silage.Cross-infection
upon the stage of gestation of animals at the time of
between sheep and cattleispossible;and there is evi-
infection. Commonly only a small number of ani-
dence thar some individuals become symptomless
mals aborl,although significant aburtion storins
carriers, excreting e organism in faeces and milk.
can also occur.
The organism gains entry by ingestion or by penetra-
A definite diagnosis depends upon the isolation of
tion of mucous membranes of the respiratory system
the organism from fetal tissues and membranes, uter-
or conjunctiva,as well as the central nervous system.
ine discharges or vaginal mucus. Serological tests can be
The organism has a predilection for the placenta, caus-
used, for S. dublin, the SAT, although agglutinins fall to
ing a placentitis,death of the fetus and abortion.
low tiures fairly soon after the event (Hinton 1973).
Clinical signs
Control
Abortions are usually sporadic, occurring towards
Cows that have aborted only excrete the organism
the end of gestation. However, there are rare
for a very short period of time, unlike the contin-
reports of serious outbreaks,or abortion storms,
uous or intermitent excreters that occur following
in some herds. In some individuals, there may be
enteric infection.Potential excreters need to be iso-
pyrexia before, at the time of or after abortions have
lated until vaginal discharge ceases;fetuses and fetal
occurred. The aborted fetus is usually autolysed but
membranes together with contaminated bedding
generally lacks specific lesions. However, the pres-
should be disposed of safely. Adequate cleansing
ence of multiple yellow or grey necrotic foci in the
anddisinfection ofpremisesshouldbeperformed.
liver and coryledons, similar to those described for
Vaccination has been used to control salmonello-
sheep,is characteristic of the disease.
sis.S.dublin can be controlled by vaccination with
the strain 51 live vaccine (which also gives signifi-
Diagnosis
cant protection against S. typhimurium), when its
use is combined with a closed-herdpolicyand effec-
This is dependent upon the identification of thc
tive hygiene measures. Killed vaccines and bacterins
organism in the abomasum and liver of the fetus,
490
Chapter
231
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
and in the placenta and vaginal discharges, by a direct
H. somni is a relatively uncommon cause of abortion
smear or by immunofluorescence. Culture of the
in cattle,havingbeen recorded in 0.4% of diagnosed
organism is not easy, although a series of subcultures
abortions in New Zealand (Thornton 1992)and 1.7-
following refrigeration has proved to be successful.
3% of aborions in Germany (Kiupel & Prehn 1986).
Serological tests are not used in its diagnosis.
Lesions of tlie aborted fetus and placenta arenon-
specific: typically an acute, non-suppurative placen-
Treatment and control
titis mainly within the cotyledons (Jubb etal 1993).
Diagnosis can be made by culrure of the organ-
The possibility of preventing further abortions
ism,which can be difficult because of overgrowth
occurring in a herd might be considered by using
by contaminants. Recognition of the organism may
oxytetracycline orpenicillin;however,thisis rarely
not always be straightforward,as it is pleomorphic.
practicable. If silage is being fed this must be con-
Serological tests are currently unreliable.
sidered to be a potential source of infection and, if
There are few reports on the treatment of infected
possible, withheld from pregnant cows.
cows.Penicillin and streptomycinhavebeen reported
to be succcssful in treating cows where H. sommi was
Histophilus somni
frequentlyisolated from cervicovaginalmucus and
where fertility was depressed (Eaglesome & Garcia
Histophilus somni (formerly Haemophilus sonuus)
1992). Since the organism colonizes the genital tract
is a fairly common inhabitant of the genital tracts
ofthebull and can be isolated from semen,this nay
ofmale and female cattle.The organism can be
well be an important source ofinfection of cows and
routinely isolated from the mucosal surfaces of the
heifers.Good hygiene and the use of combinations
urogenital tract of normal healthy cattle (Eaglesome
ofantibiotics should control infection followingAl.
&Garcia 1992).in the absence ofany macroscopic
lesions. In the literature the organism has been iso-
latedfrom28%ofnormalcows(Slee&Stephens
Bacillus licheniformis
1985) and 90% of normal bulls (Janzen et al 1981).
Abortion due to Bacilhus licheniformis occurs in
H.somi also infects sheep but the strains differ
some parts of the LiK, notably northern Scotland
berween cale and sheep, so that cross-infection
and Cumbria (Counter 1984-1985).Although
between species does not occur (Ward et al 1995).
B.licheniformis is ubiquitous,the main source of
H. sommi causes a number of syndromes in cattle
infection issilage,orwater,otherfoodstuffs and be
(Radostiis et al 2007):
ding that become contaminated with silage effluent.
·septicaemia
Wet, spoilt hay can also be a source.The method of
* polyarthritis
infection is notknownbutit isprobably haematog
* pneumonia/pleurisy
enous following entry via the gastrointestinal tract.
Sporadic cases occur in the third trimester of gesta
·thrombotic meningoencephalitis
tion. There are also reports of small outbreaks in two
·reproductive disorders: strains of H. somni affect-
consecutiveyears (Counter 1984-1985).Sometimes
ing the reproductive tract differ from those that
live calves can be horn with some evidence of placen-
cause systemic disease(Szalay et al 1994)
tal lesions. B. licheniformis causes a necrosuppurative
·endonetritis
placentitis, in which the allantochorion is dry, leath-
·vaginitis and cervicitis (Patterson et al 1984,
ery and yellow or yellowish-brown in colour, is some-
Stephens et al1986)
times oedematous and has necrotic foci 2-3 mm in
diameter.When the fetus hasbeen infected therewill
 granular vulvovaginitis (a differential diagnosis
usuallybeevidenceofabronchopneumonia,fibrinous
ofureaplasmosis)(Roberts 1986)
pleurisy, pericarditis and peritonitis. Purulent exudate
infertility associated with early embryonic
is often present in the airways.There are no systemic
death (Kaneene et al 1987, Ruegg et al 1988)
signs of disease in the cow (Counter 1984-1985).
and abortion (Stuart et al 1990)
Diagnosis is by culture from the fetus (especially
· testicular degeneration,orchitis, epididymitis
the abomasum),placenta and vaginal swab.The
in the bull (Corbel et al 1986, Jubb et al 1993,
only means of control is to avoid feeding infected
Barber et al 1994).
silage or hay.
491
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Otherbacterial causesofinfertility
repeat breeders and subfertile cows in which no otlier
cause of infertility could be determined (Langford
Many
other
species of bacteria
(notably
1975,Nakarafa et al 1977,Kirkbride 1987).The
Arcanobacterium
(formerly Actinoniyces)
pyogenes,
organism may also cause granular vulvovaginitis
Aeromonas sp.,Fusobacteriumnerophorum,scherichia
(Afshar et al 1966, Irons et al 2004),although the
coli and Sireptococcus spp.: Table 23.1) are periodically
evidence for its role in natural occurrences of the dis-
isolated frombovine fetopathies(Rowe&Smithies
ease is not unequivocal, and it has been suggesied that
1978, Moorthy 1985, Smitl 1990). These organisms
a considerable degree of strain-to-strain variability in
are not regarded as primary pathogens but may be
pathogenicily exists (Saed & Al-Aubaidi 1983).
accidental contaminants of the uterus, probably affer
M.bovigenitalium isalso a common isolatefrom
haermatogenous spread in thie dam.
semen and preputial washes of bulls (Fish et al 1985;
Abortionsmayoccuratanystageofgestation,although
Kirkbride 1987} and spread of the organism from
most commonly in the last trimester. Diagnosis is usu-
affected bulls to cows has been demonstrated.M.
ally made by the isolation of the organism from the
bovigenitalium has been implicated as a cause of sen-
placenta, abomasal contents or feial tissues; where the
inal vesiculitis, as it is both isolated frequently from
organism isisolated in pure growh ofbacteria from fetal
clinical cases and can infect the vesicular glands after
viscera (particularly liver and lung) or stomach contents
experimental inoculation.Whenit infects the testes
it is very probably that it was the cause of the abortion,
or epididymides, it may cause detrimental changes
especially if lesions consistent with a bacterial infection
to semen quality, especially after cryopreservation.
are present and othercauses forabortion have been ruled
M. bouis is commonly isolated from caitle in the
out.Since theabortionsare sporadiciherearenosuitable
UK and USA (Nicholas & Ayling 2003,Ayling et al
methods of treatment or control.
2004). It causes respiratory disease and polyarthritis
in calves (Henderson & Ball 1999; Nicholas & Ayling
Mycoplasma,ureaplasmaand
2003)mastitis in adults(Kirketal1997)and infects
acholeplasma infections
the female genital tract (lrons et al 2004). It is a suc-
cessful colonist ofthevagina and uterus,causingper-
sistent infections(for 1 and 8 monihs respectively),
There are many species of Mycoplasma,Ureaplasma
extensive endometritis,salpingitis andeven peritoni-
and Acholeplasma,which are found as commensals
tis; natural and experimental infections cause abor
ofmany species of animals.They havebeen impli-
tions(Stalhcim ct al 1974).Since itis seldom found
cated in disease, in as much as they are commonly
in the reproductive tracl ofnormal cows,isolation
isolatedfrom diseased tissue.However,they are also
of the organism from the placenta or aborted fetus
found in healthy tissues and experimental studies
can be considered significant (Kirkbride 1990b).
to demonstrate pathogenicity are relatively limited
M. bovis is found in bovine semen but is less com-
(Eaglesome&Garcia1992),soitismore likelythat
mon than M. bovigenitalium. Whether it is as patho-
in most situations theyare opportunistic,ather than
genic for the bull has not been established.
primary, pathogens.For example,Ball et al (1978)
Other Mycoplasma species (eg. M. allealescens,
recovered mycoplasmasfrom 23.7% ofabartedpla-
aginin, M.bovihinis,M.californicum,M.
centalmaterial and none from normal controls,and
canadense,M. mycoides subsp.vrycoides (LC) and group
from 4.4% of aborted fetuses and 1.3% from non-
7 Mycoplasma) have been isolated from abortuses, the
aborted controls. On the other hand,infections with
genital tracis of cows and bulls, and semen (Boughton
various Mycoplasma species and with Lreaplasna
et al1983,Kapoor et al1989,Gibert&Oettle1990,
diversum havebeen associatedwithfemaleinfertility,
Hum et al 2000). Hlassan & Dolhan (2004) sugges1ed
abortion and male infertility,and for some species
that interpretation of a causal role for these organisms
(notably Mycoplasma hovigenitalimn and M.bovis)
in an aborion should rest upon demonstrating the
there is reasonably conclusive evidence of a role as
presence of lesions in the fetus that are compatible
a pathogen.
with the known pathological effects of mycoplasmas.
Mycoplasma spp.
Ureaplasma diversum
M. bovigenitalium is commonly found in the vaginal
Ureaplasma diversum is a comimon inhabitant of the
mucus of normal cows (Trichard & Jacobsz 1985),
genital tract of the cow. lt persists only briefly in
492
Chapter
23
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
the uterus and uterine tubes but is most commonly
Diagnosis
found in the vagina and vestibule. Differences in
virulence of strains probably account for the pres-
Mycoplasnas ate fragile organisms that require care-
ence of the organisms in normal reproduclive tracts.
ful handling for successful microbiological culture.
Specialized transport media are therefore recom-
U.diversum infection has been associated with granu
lar vulvovaginitis (Schweighardt et al 1985, Rae et al
mended (Yaeger & Holler 2007). Provided sanples
1993, Farstad et al 1996). Acute infection produces
are appropriately collected, most bovine mycoplas-
mas can be recovered using conventional Mycoplasma
granules around the clitoral region and on the lat-
media, although some may require special supple
eral walls of the vagina, which are accompanied by
ments or conditions for optimum growth (Eaglesome
hyperaemia of the vulva and a profuse, mucopuru-
lent vaginal discharge Large, purulent lesions may
&Garcia 1992).Samples should be collected from
areas of active inflammation for diagnosis of gran-
also be present, which resemble those of infectious
pustular vulvovaginitis (IPV; see below). These may
ulomatous vaginitis. For he diagnosis of abortion,
samples should include lung, placentome, stom-
give way to less obviously inflamed, chronic lesions.
ach contenis and amniotic fluid (Yaeger & Holler
U.diversum can also produce endometritis and
salpingitis (Kirkbride 19s7）. These lesions have
2007).If Ureaplasma has caused the abortion,the pla
centa is likely lo be thickened and opaque, accom-
been associated with high levels of embryonic death
and returns to oestrus, which are accompanied by
fibrosis and interstitial necrosis; while the lungs dis-
a mucopurulent vaginal discharge. Abortions mmay
also occur, as may the birth of weak calves, but
play a non-suppurative alveolitis, with ononu-
Ureaplasma may often be isolaied as an incidental
clear inflammation of the tissues surrounding the
airways (Jubb et al 1993). Placentitis, suppurative
finding from calves that have been aborted for othier
reasons. Hence, unless there are histological lesions
fetal broncliopneumonia,myocarditis and epicardi-
in the abortus that are characteristic of ureaplasmo-
tis may be present in calves that have aborted due to
sis (Murray 1992)or thepresence ofavirulent strain
M.bovis infection (Yaeger & Holler 2007)
is demonstrated, Ureaplasma isolations should be
interpreted with a degree of caution.
Treatment and control
U.diversum can infect the penis and prepuce of
Spread of mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas is largely
the bull and has occasionally been isolated frorn
through infected semen or via the respiratory route.
all parts of the male tract. It is generally regarded
as non-pathogenic in the male, although some have
It isthereforebetter to useAl rather than natural
service until bulls are known to be free of infec
attributedlow-gradelymphoidgranulomasonthe
tion. However, since AI may also play a role in the
penile integument to the presence of the organism.
The main means of transmission of the infection is by
spread of infection,it is suggested that the standard
Cassou pipette should be protected by a dispos-
the venereal route. Infected semen used in AI seems to
able polythene sheath to prevent vulval or vaginal
beof particularimportance, since its deposition into the
uterus allows the development of chronic endometritis
contanination before it is introduced through the
rather than of acute vulvovaginitis. However, infection
a solution containing lg of tetracycline or spectino-
of virgin females and males has been described and it
has been suggested that direct ransission between
mycin one day after insemination,a treatment
females, or even transmission by dogs sniffing the vul-
that has been shown to improve pregnancy rates.
Likewise, oral chlortetracycline before breeding has
vas of cows (Doig et al 1979), may occur. Whether in is
also been associated with improved conception
transmilted between bulls is uncertain.
rates (Rae et al 1993).
Acholeplasma spp.
A number of antibiotics have been incorpo-
rated in semen for the control of these organisms.
Three species of Acholeplasma have been isolated
A combination of lincomycin,spectinomycin,
from cattle:A.modicum,A. laidlawii and A.axanii
tylosin and gentamicin added to raw semen, and
(Kirkbride 1987). Of these,A. laidlawii has been iso-
non-glycerolized whole-milk- or egg-yolk-based
lated most often, largely from the bull. The current
extenders has been shown to control M. bovis,
consenisus is that Achioleplasma is a non-pathogenic
M.bovigenitalium and Lreaplasma spp.(Shin et al
commensal.
1988).
493
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Chlamydialagents
isvariable,ranging from 5-125 days in experimen-
talinfections(Storz&McKercher1962).Moreover,
Mammalian strainsofChilanydiapsittaci havelong
some animalsbecome infected and abort in the
been associated with abortion andinfertility but,
same season whereas others become infected in
until recenuly, the literature has been fragmen-
one season,remain infected and abort in the sub-
tary and complicated.Recentreclassification of the
sequent season(Aitken 1983).Re-infectionofcattle
Chlamydiaceae into species that are more closely
previously exposed to the organisin also results in
alignedwith host speciesanddisease syndroines
reducedfertility(DeGravesetal2004).On theother
has considerably clarifiedunderstanding of their
hand,carrier states appearto becommon,even in
role in bovine infertility. There has also been con-
virgin animals(DeGraves etal 2003).
fusion with thecondition of foothill abortion (see
Abortionsusually occur afterthe 7thmonth
p.51l) since at one time, this was believed to be
ofgestationbuthavebeenreported from the5th
caused by C. psittaci. Since both abortion due to
month.Abortions are more likely tobe sporadic in
C.abortus and foothill abortion are sometimescalled
cattle than in sheep,although abortionstormsofup
epizooticbovineabortion,thereremainsa degreeof
to 20% of pregnancies have been reported.Infection
confusionin theliterature.
inthelasttrimesterofpregnancymayalsoresultin
There aretwospecies ofchlamydia that affectrepro-
thebirth oflive,weakly,calves.Most cows showno
duction in cautle:Chlanrydophilaabortus and C.peco-
signs prior to abortionbut experimental infection
rum.Therecentlyrecognized chlamydia-likeWaddlia
has resulted in an intermittent,mucoid,vulvar is
chondrophila may also be of significance Livingston
charge,together with transient diarrhoea,pyrexia
&Longbottom2006).Chlamydophilaabortus,which
and lymphopenia (Anon 2007).Retention of the
ismorecommonlyknownasthecauseofovineenzo-
fetal membranes after abortion is common.
oticabortion(seepp.562-566),alsocauses abortion
In bulls,C.abortus infection can cause epididym-
in cattle (epizootic or enzootic bovine abortion).
itis, seminalvesiculitis and testicular degeneration
C.pecorum has been associated with abortion, as
(Storz etal 1968), which may progress to atrophy.
well as conjunctivitis,encephialoinyelitis,enteritis,
Humans who work with aborting ewes can
pneumonia andpolyarthritis[Andersen 2004).
become infectedwith C.aborus,and abortionshave
The role of chlamydial agents in bovine fertility
Occurred in pregnant women (Aitken & Longbottom
has not been considered as a major threat to cat
2004).Presumably the same could alsooccur by
lle industries （Livingston & Longbottom 2006).
contact with aborting cattle.
Many animals appear to be carriers of the infec-
tion（DeGraves eial 2003)but the incidence of
Chlamydophilapecorum
abortion due to the organisms appears tobe low.
Developmentofmore sensitive diagnostictests
Chlanydophila pecoruninfectionisalsoassociatedwith
maylead togreatersignificancebeingattributedto
uterine infection,infertility and abortion.Infection
Chlamydia(Boreletal 2006) but thequestionof the
mayresultinendometritis(Wittenbrinketal1993a)
presenceoftheorganismversusitsroleasapathogen
although more severe disease,includingmetritis and
remains to be established.
salpingitis,has results from experimentalinfection
(Wittenbrinkelal1993b;lonesetal 199S).Pyrexia,
Chlamydophilaabortus
malaise and/orapurulentvaginal dischargehave also
been reported (Livingston& Longbottom 2006).
Ovine enzootic abortion occurs throughout most
Moreimportantly thian itseffects uponreprodue-
of the world, particularly Europe,the LSA and the
tion,however,are the severe diseases with which
Indian subcontinent (Anon 2007),with the bovine
C.pecor infection is associated,including polyar-
disease having a similar distribution.Infection
hritis,enteritis,keratoconjunctivitis, pneumonia
is probably by ingestion of infected material but
and,most importantly,sporadicbovine encephalo-
venereal spread via the semen ofinfected bulls
myelitis (Livingston& Longbottom 2006).
also seems probable (Storz et al 1976).After infec-
tion ofthe cow,thereis colonization and replica-
Diagnosis
tion in theendometrium,resultingin endometritis
(Bowen etal 1978) and embryonic death (Yaeger&
Thie
gross
pathologyofabortionsdueto
Holler 2007).Theincubation periodfor the disease
Chilanydophila spp.in cale is similar tothat
494
Chapter
23
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
occurring in ovine enzootic abortion.The intercoty-
prevalence ofinfection can behigh where dairy
ledonaryareasoftheplacentaaremorefrequently
herdsarebred bynaturalservice.Ahighprevalence
affected,beingthickened andleatheryinappearance
has been reported from many countries,including
with areddish-white,opaquediscoloration;oedema
some states oftheUSA(eg.California(Skirrow&
is quitecommon(Shewen 1986).Intheaborted
BonDurant1988,BonDurantetal1990)andFlorida
fetus,theliver is enlarged with a coarsely nodular
(Rae et al 2004),but not North Carolina (Foxet al
surface,a firm consistency and a mottledreddish-
1995),Colorado or Nebraska(Grotelueschen et al
yellow colour(Shewen 1986).The fetusmay have a
1994)), Canada (Copeland etal 1994), South Africa
pot-bellied appearance due to ascites and theremay
(Eaglesome&Garcia 1992),Brazil(Jesus etal2003)
be subcutaneous oedema(Anon 2007).
and Australia （Dennett etal 1974).Geographical
The organism can be cultured from aborted fetuses
isolationhaspermitted thevirtual eradication of
and discharges following the use of transport media.
trichomonosis intheUK and NewZealand yet,
Tissue can be used to prepare Giemsa-stained smears
even in these countries,occasional recrudescences
fortheidentificationofelementarybodiesorinclu-
ofthediseasecanoccurfrom timeto time(Taylor
sions,whileantigendetectionELiSAand immuno
etal 1994,Oosthuizen 1999).Hence,whenever
staining can alsobe used (Aitken& Longbouom 2004).
natural serviceisused,trichomonosismust not be
Serologicaltestsincludethecomplementfixationtest
overlooked as a cause of infertility.
andELISAbutbothlackspecificity.Morerecently,PCR
testshavebeen developed(Borelet al2006,Menard
et al2006)that can be used for identification of
Aetiology andpathogenesis
Chlaydoplila spp.in thefieldorafterculture.
T.fetus is an obligatevenereal pathogen.Theparasite
can be identified by the presence of three anterior
Control
flagellae and a characteristic undulatingmembrane
that isvisiblebecauseof itswave-likemotion on
Tetracyclines could be used io treat pregnant cows
one sideof theorganism whenviewed underphase-
that havebeen exposed to infection but this isnot
contrast or dark-field microscopy (Fig.23.5). In wet
really practicable because it requires knowing that
preparationsitscharacteristicjerky,rollingmotion
the secondary chlamydaemia hasnot occurred.
canbeseen at100xor250xmagnification.
and animals must be treated until normal calving.
Pregnant animals should be segregated from poten-
tial sources ofinfection.Vaccines are availablefor
Thebull
useinsheepbutnonehasyetbeen developedfor
usein cattle.
T. fetus causes an asymptomatic infection of the
bull,residing in the crypts of the penile integu
ment and preputial mucosa.Onceinfected,bulls
Protozoalagents
can remain life-long carriers. Younger bulls are
less liable tobecomepersistentcarriers than older
Trichomonosis
bulls because the crypts of the penile integument
and preputial mucosa areless developed in young
TherecognitionofTritrichononas（formerly
than older animals(Peter 1997).Hence,bulls that
Trichomonas)feuus infection asa cause ofinfertil-
are less than 3years old are likely to have short-
itywas an important advance in our understanding
term infections or to be transient carriers,while
of theroleofspecificvenereal pathogens in cattle
older animals aremorelikely tobecome persis-
(Riedmuller 1928).Enzootic trichomonosis was
tently infected and to perpetuate the infection
broughtunder control in thedairyherdsofmany
from season to season (Table 23.3).Infection of
countriesbythewidespreadintroductionofAI dur-
bullsusuallyoccurs as aresult ofcoituswithan
ingthe 1950sand 1960s.However,worldwide
infected cow;however itcan alsobetransmitted
T.fetusremains a majorcause ofreproductive failure
though infected semen collection equipment.
that ispresentatahigh prevalencein manygeograph-
It has been suggested that bull-to-bull transmis-
icalregionsinwhichnaturalserviceisthepredomi-
sioncouldoccurthroughbullsridingeach other,
nant means of mating.Characteristically,thismore
but thereisnoconclusive evidenceforthe spread
commonlyinvolvesbeefthandairyherdsbutthe
ofinfection in this way.
495
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Thecow
Persistently infetted bulls are the primary source of
infection,although there can bepassive transfer from
a previously uninfected bull that hasrecently served
an infectedcow（Rae&Crews2006).Infection can
alsobedisseminatedbyartificialinseminationwith
infected semen,as T.fetus survives routineprocess-
ingof semenforAl.Veryrarely,cows can be infected
viafomites,such asacontaminatedvaginalspecu-
lum.Although thenumber oftrichomonadsneeded
to establish an infection in the cow is large (prob-
ably several thousand;Clarkectal 1974),transmis-
sionrates are high.Under conditions ofheavy work,
thenumber oftrichomonadspresent intheprepu
tial area of thebull isreduced,so transmission may
beless than 100%,but undernormal conditions,it
is common for virtually every cow that is mated by
aninfected bull tobecomeinfected.
T.fetus colonizes the uterus,cervix and vagina
but survivespoorly on thevulva.It causesa mild
catarrhalendometritisandvaginitis,withoedema
ofvulva,perivaginal tissue and uterinewall.It does
notgenerallyinvadethroughtheepithelialsurface.
The disease does not prevent fertilization but causes
embryonicdeath,resultinginanirregularlyextended
return tooestrus.Manypregnanciesfailatbetween
30 and 50 days of gestation (Parsonson et al 1976),
although somemay occur at a sufficiently advanced
Fig.23.5ScanningelectronmicrographofTritrichomonas
stageof gestation toberecognized as an early abor-
fetus(x16500)
tion. lt has been suggested (BonDurant 1997) that
Age of bulls (years)
Numberofbulls
No.infected
%infected
<2
38
0
0
2
221
1
<0.5
2
137
7
5.1
156
5
3.2
5
86
8
9.3
6
55
7
12.7
>6
31
2
6.5
Summary
<2
259
1
<0.4
>2
465
29
6.2
496
Chapter
23
Specificinfectiousdiseasescausinginfertilityandsubfertilityincattle
embryonicdeath occurs as aresultof damage to the
become pregnant and carry to term without
developing placentomes.A few animals exhibit nor-
clinical signs of infection developing
mal,or even short,returns to oestrus.Embryonic
return tomultiple servicesbut shownoobvious
death is not infrequently （up to 10% ofcases)
signs of infection;oestrous cycles may be regular
accompanied by thedevelopmentofpyometra,in
or irregular
which theuterusisfilledwithenormousquanti-
·fail to becomepregnant and develop an oedema-
ties of trichomonad-filled,thinnish pus.Vaginal
discharge of this pus is common.
tousconditionoftheendometriumwith amuco-
flocculent discharge
Antibody-mediated (IgGand IgA) immunitydevel-
· become pregnant but abort at 2-4 months of
opsoverseveralmonths[Slirrow&BonDurant1990)
so,after a series ofreturns to estrus,cowsdevelop
gestation
sufficient immunity to maintain a pregnancy to term.
·develop pyometra and become acyclic.
Manycows experienceaseries ofembryonic deaths
before they become pregnant and carry the calf to
Abortions
term.Epizooticsofthe disease inthe1940swere
characterizedby an averageoffivereturnstooestrus
Someabortionsoccurbetweenthesecondandfourth
beforeconception occurred(Bartlett 1948).Thetime
months ofgestationbutveryfewoccur after the
taken forclearance of infection from affected cows is
fourth month.Inlater-term abortions,trichomonads
very variable,ranging from 95 days in heifers to 22
can be found in the chorion,fetal lung and fetal gut.
months Parsonson et al 1976,Skirrow& Bon Durant
Thefetusis smallerthan is appropriate totheperiod
1990).Mostcows that calvehave successfully elimi-
ofgestation,because ofgrowthretardation.Insuch
nated the infection and do not pose a risk as long-
abortion cases,thefetus,which s grey in colour,is
term carriers,but some animalsbecomepersistently
generally expelled complete in its membranes.There
infected (i.e.through a gestation and into the follow-
are no signs ofputrefaction and T. fetus can read
ingbreeding season;Rae&Crews2006)and act as
ily be demonstrated in fetal fluids.Parasites quickly
areservoir ofinfection to theherd(Skirrow 1987).
disappearfromthevaginal discharges after abortion
lmmunity is short-term,probably lastingno more
(usually within 7 days).
than 15months(Clarke etal1983a),sothat cows are
fully susceptible o infection in successive seasons.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of trichomoniasis is much easier
Clinical signs
than campylobacteriosis.A positive diagnosis of
Subfertility
trichomoniasisdepends ona demonstration of live
T. fetus organisms from specimens obtained from
Introduction of trichomonosis into a herd is asso-
the genital tract of female cattle, preputial material
ciated witha disastrous decline in fertility,with
ofbullsor abortedfetal andplacentaltissues.
extendedreturns tooestrus,long intercalvinginter-
valsandanincreasedproportion ofanimalsculled
for failing to conceive.The presence of pyometra and
Diagnosticsamples
early-gestation abortions isalso suggestive of the
Diagnosis inthecowisbest achievedbydemonstrat-
presenceofthedisease.Animals thatfail to conceive
ing the presence of trichomonads in uterine pus,
often exhibitmucopurulentvaginaldischargeatthe
vaginal discharges, cervical mucus or abortus mate
time ofreiurn tooestruswhilemanipulation of the
rial.The best source of material is the fetal mem-
uterus often provokes a dischargefron the vulva in
branes or the organs of an aborted fetus (especially
whichmotile trichomonadscan be demonstrated.
the abomasum).Elimination rates ofinfection are
Likewise,the uterine contents in pyometra follow-
highlyvariable afteran infected mating,so failure to
ing T. fetus infection is usually voluminous,fluid
demonstratethepresenceoftheorganismdoesnot
odourless,greyish-white and contains trichomonads
necessarilyimply itsearlier absence.Materialcon-
in great numbers.
taminatedwithfaecesshould bediscarded,because
Infectedcartle,therefore,havethefollowingclinical
non-pathogenictrichomonad-like organisms (Taylor
presenitations:
etal1994)maybepresent
497
Part
5
Subfertilityand infertility
In the bull, diagnosis is made by the collection
trichomonads at200-400x magnification.When
of preputial scrapes or preputial washes.Vigorous
present,thetrichginonads areusually found in the
scraping of the preputial mucosa, to obtain as much
cormers andnearthebottomof thelowerorincuba-
smegma as possible (Eaglesome & Garcia 1992),
tioncompartmentof thepouch.They areidentifi
isthe traditionalmethod ofcollection.Stoessel&
ableby thieir size,thepresenceofflagellae and the
Haberkorn（1978)suggestedthat‘rough'scraping
‘undulating membrane'（OiE2004).For samples
of theprepuce was needed to diagnose thepresence
collected frombulls,thesensitivityof heInPouch
of trichomonads but Oosthuizen (1999)reported
system has been estimated at between S4% and
avery highreliability ofpreputialwashings(using
96%and thatofDiamond'smediumas78-99%
about50mlofphosphate-bufferedsalineorlactate
(OIE 2004). Specificity approaches 100%. Hlence, a
Ringer's solution) collected from heavily sedated
proportion of infected bulls will not be detected at
bulls.Thebull should beallowedaperiodof5-10
the firstexamination（Schonmann et al 1994),so
days of sexual rest before sampling so that the
asecondor thirdexaminationmayberequired to
number of trichomonads can increase.
ensure that abull really isnegative.
PCR methods have recently been developed for the
diagnosis of trichomonosis(Ho et al 1994,Felleisen
Demonstrationoftheorganism
et al 1998).These can differentiatebetween T. fetus
Whatever thesource of thematerialthatmightcon-
andfaecal trichomonadsthatcontaminatethebovine
taintrichomonads,it should behandledwith care,
preputialcavity（Dufernezet al2007),canbeused to
as theorganism isfragileanddegeneratesveryrap-
confirm theidentificationofT.fetus after initial cul-
idlyafter death.Hence,unless samples are handled
ture(Parker etal2001,Grahn etal 2005)and can
properly, the organism may be absent by the time
beusedfordirectdiagnosisoftrichomonosisinfield
thesamples are examined.
samples(Makayaetal2002,Mukhuflhietal2003)
Various media can be used for culture,including:
withmuch higher sensitivity than usingculture alone
·Clausen's medium (Ministry of Agriculture,
(McMillen &Lew2006）.However,samples must be
Fisheries and Food 1986)
assessed soon after collection:sensitivity declines
rapidly with storage (Mukhufhi et al 2003).
Diamond'smedium(Diamond 1983)
·InPouch TF system (Biomed Diagnostics Lid)
Treatment and control
(Borchardtetal1992)
Organisms arevisualized after culture.It is recom-
Control canbe attemptedby:
mended thatsamples aretransportedtothelabora-
eliminatingbulls andreplacingnatural servicebyAl
toryinaDiamond'sorInPouchmediumrather than
active management of groups of cows and use of
ina simplebuffer（Rae&Crews2006).Temperature
bulls
shouldbemaintainedbetween22°Cand 37°C.
·treatment and/or vaccination of cows and bulls.
Culturesystems usingmodifiedDiamond'smedium
and theInPouchTFhavebeenconsideredasa‘gold
Artificialinsemination
standard’for the diagnosis of trichomonosis(Rae&
Crews 2006).
Control throughAlisbasedupon theassumption
TheInPouch TF system forfield cultureconsists
thatrecoveryin thefemaleisspontaneous,andthat
of a clear flexible plastic pouch with two com-
infection of healthy animals cannot occur if natu-
partments.The upper compartmeni contains spe-
ral serviceis replaced by AI using semen from non-
cialmedium intowhich the sampleisintroduced.
infected bulls.Of all ofthe availablemethods,the
Fieldsamplesfordirectinoculationintotheculture
eliminationofbullsfromtheherdandAlwith
pouchwould normally becollected by thepreputial
uncontaminatedsemenisby far themosteffective
scraping technique.Following mixing,the medium
and efficient means ofcontrol.The method does
isforcedintothelowercompartmentandthepouch
requirethatcowsshouldbebredexclusivelybyAl
is then sealedand incubated at37C.Microscopic
throughout atleast one,andpreferably,twoseasons.
examinationfortrichomonadscanbedonedirectly
PregnancyratestoAI arelikelytobepoor duringthe
throughtheplasticpouch.Apreliminary diagno-
initial periodofitsintroduction,sincemanyof the
sisoftrichomoniasisismade,by observingmotile
cowsmay still beinfected.
498
Chapter
23
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
Group management
ina mineraloil adjuvant (Clarkeet al 1983b),which
helped eliminaie infection from bulls.However,
Many different ideas have been suggested as ways
most development has been based upon fragmented
ofmanaging trichomoniad-infected herds without
cells or isolated membrane fractions,which stimu-
resorting to the total use of Al. Most of these are
lale a significant antibody response (Schnackel et al
similar to the controlmethods forbovine venereal
1990). These too lave helped prevent and/or elim-
campylobacteriosis (see p. 482).
inate infection in cows and bulls (Kvasnicka et al
An alternative strategy relies upon the limitation
1989,Hall et al 1993,Hudson et al 1993a,b)
of effects of the disease by only using young bulls
In the USA, a vaccine against T. feus is available
for breeding.It is argued that, since 2-year-old
[l'richGuard:Fort Dodge).It requires two subcutane-
bulls are relatively resistant to infection,their use
ous injections 2-4 weeks apart with the last injection
in breeding will result in less spread of the disease
given 4 weeks before the beginning of the breeding
than occurs with older bulls. However, reliance
season (Rae & Crews 2006).Each subsequent year
upon thie resistance of young bulls is unlikely to
all cows shouldreceiveabooster injection 4weeks
result in elimination ofinfection (Christensen et al
before the beginning of the breeding season.The vac-
1977).although their use may well help to reduce
cine doesnotpreventinfectionordiseasebut reduces
the level of infection that ispresent.
the incidence and duration of infection of cows
after service by an infected bull (BonDurant 1997)
Treatment and vaccination
However,asthevaccine doesnotcompletelyprotect,
it can only be used as an adjunct to other control
Treatment
or prevention methods (Cortese 1999b). Curiously.
As a general principle, carrier bulls should be culled,
although early studies in Australia suggesied ihat
since infection persists indefinitely.Bulls can poten-
vaccination conferred protection upon bulls, more
tially be treated with topical substances (e.g. iodine-
recent American studies have found that vaccination
based compounds, acriflavine and imidazoles) but
has little effect upon either the incidence or the dura-
success rates arevariable,elimination of infection is
tion ofinfectionin themale(Cortese1999b)
not reliable and the application of such substances
is anything but straightforward
Neosporosis
Alternatively,treatinentwith imidazoleshasbeen
reported as both feasible and effective.Dimetridazole
Neospora caninuni was first discovered as a proto-
ormetronidazole can be given orally or inirave-
zoan parasite that causes encephalomyelitis of dogs
nously. They have unpleasant side effects but are rel-
(Dubey et al 1988).Neosporosis is now recognized
atively effective.Ipronidazole can beused but has to
asa significant cause ofbovine abortion in most
beprecededby theuse of broad-spectrum antibiotics
of thie major cattle-producing regions of the world.
to kill non-specific bacteria in the prepuce that break
Ithas been recorded in the UK,the USA{Dubey&
downi thieimidazole(Skirrow et al1985).Resistance
Lindsay 1996), Canada (Alves ct al 1996), Argentina
to the entire group of imidazoles is easily induced
(Campero et al 1998), South Africa (Jardine & Last
by the use of subtherapeutic doses.Unfortunately,
1995), Zimbabwe (Wells 1996), Australia (Obendorf
none of these therapeutic substances is licensed for
etal 1995),NewZealand (Thornton et al 1991) and
many other countries. In 1999, Tenter & Shirley sug-
use in cattle in the UK or LSA.A newer antibiotic,
trichostatin, has been found to be effective against 
gested hat N.canium was responsible for 6000
T. felus in vitro and in vivo (Otoguro et al 1988).
abortions per annum in the UK. It has been estimated
Even when treatment ofindividual animals is
that neosporosis costs the Californian dairy industry
effective, it has no impact upon the presence of
US$35 million per year (Berry et al 2000). Pfeiffer
disease in the herd unless other steps are taken to
et al(i998)estimated that the diseasecost theNew
ensure its eradication.
Zealand cattle industries NZ%24 million per year.
Vaccination
Aetiology and pathogenesis
Manyattempts havebeen madetodevelop a vaccine
The dog is both the definitive host and an interme-
against T.fetus.Initial work used killed trichomonads
diate host for the parasite (McAllister et al 1998).
499
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
The life cycle consists of three infectious stages:
calf,although stillbirths also occur.Thus, fetuises
tachyzoites, tissue cysts and oocysts (Dubey 2005).
may be resorbed,mummified,autolysed,stillbon,
Following ingestion of tissue cysts, dogs may pass
born alive with clinical signs or born clinically
small numbersofunsporulatedoocystsintheirfae-
normal but chronically infected(Dubey 2005）.A
ces,whichmaycontaminatefeedorwaterofgrazing
congenitally infected heifer calf is capable of verti-
animalsandwhich arereasonablyresistantinthe
cally transmittingtheinfection to thenext genera
environment.It is lilely that other canids(e.g.foxes,
tion whien she becomes pregnant,thus maintaining
coyotes) and scavenger species may also be defini-
infection within aherd.
tive hosts (Wapenaar et al 2006).When sporulated
Up to40%of aherdmay abort in one seasoni.
oocysts are ingested by an intermediate host (dogs,
Repeat abortion may occur in some infected animals
grazing species and birds) sporozoites are liberated
(Anderson elal 1995).Abortionsmay present as:
intotheintestinal tract,whichthenpenetrate cells
to become tachyzoites.These divide rapidly,causing
circumstances in which this occurs:
tissuedamage,and thenspreadtoavarietyoftissues
·simultaneous exposure cattle to infective
including neural cells,macrophages,fibroblasts,
oocysts from a definitive host
vascular endothelial cells,hepatocytes and pla-
· exposure to another infectious agent (e.g.
centa.Thereafter,the parasite forms bradyzoites(tis-
sue cysts),predominanily in neural tissue(Antony
BVDvirus)orfactor that suppressesimmunity
&Williamson 2003,Weston 2008).These tissue
（Antony&Williamson2003)
cysts can subsequentlybeeatenbya definitivehost,
·sporadic abortions in endemically infected herds.
thereby perpetuating the cycle.Thelife cycle of the
Abortions can be an ongoing problem, with an
parasite is shown in Figure 23.6.
abortion rate that is high but not catastrophic.
Vertical transmissionvia theplacentato thefetus
Other herdsexperienceclustersofabortions over
isconsideredtobethemainroutebywhichcattle
a periodof2-3months,presumablyreflecting the
became infected(Anderson et al 2000).Horizontal
timing of exposure to the parasite (Weston 2008).
transmissionfrom cow tocow doesnottakeplace
Patterns of abortion also differ beiween congenitally
(Anderson etal1997).However,epidemiological evi-
infectedanimalsand thosethatbecome infected
dence from abortion storms suggests a point source of
after birth. Congenitally infected animals are per-
infection(McAllisteretal 20oo).Routes of horizontal
manently infected and are at a high risk of abor-
infectioncouldincludecolostrum,fetalmembranes
tion,particularly in their first gestation.Thereafter,
and fluids from infected cows or oocyst-contami-
they aremore likely toproduce live calves,although
nated feed.Likewise,horizontal transmission could
there is a very high probability (75-90%) of their
occur ifcattleingesttachyzoite-contaminatedpas
offspring also being congenially infected. Animals
ture and have oral lesions (particularly such as occur
infected by horizontal transmission may abort or
when permanent incisors are erupting) that would
may produce uninfected or congenitally infected
allow haematogenous spread.None of these routes
calves depending upon their immune status and the
of infection has been convincingly proved,although
stage of gestation at which they were infected.
there is a clear association between the presence of
Calves that are congenitally infected with N,cani-
Neospora infection in farm dogs and the risk of abor-
mmmaybeunderweightand/orhaveneurological
tion in dairy cows (Bartels et al 1999,Wouda et al
signs,including ataxia,impaired proprioception or
1999).On the other hand,some farms have a high
an inability to rise. Neurogenic flexion or hyperex-
proportion ofadult cattlethatseroconvertwithout
tension ofthe limbs may occur （Barr et al 1993).
any increasein the occurrence of abortions.
Exophthalmia, asymmetry of the eyes and hydro-
cephalus have also been reported（Dubey 2005).
Clinical signs
However,mostcalves that arecongenitally infected
are clinically normal (Thorntonetal 1991).
N.canirum infection causes abortion at anytimeafter
3months of gestation,although abortions aremost
Diagnosis
commoninthe5thto7th months.Infection ofan
immunologically competent fetus most commonly
Abortion due to N. caninm may need to be dif
results in the birth of a live,congenitally infected
ferentiated from other protozoalagenis such as
500
Chapter
23
Specificinfectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
Dog def nitive host
Tissue cysts
ingested by dog
Unsporulatedoccysts
passed in faeces
Tissue cysis in
intermaciatehosis
Oocysts in
Tachyzci:es Iransmitted
food,vater,
lhroughplacenta
orsoil
Coniamina:ed
fcodand water
Sporulated occysts
Irtected fetus
ntemmediete
hosts
Fig. 23.6 Life cycle of Neospora caninum
Toxoplasma gondi or Sarcocystis. Abortion diagnosis
infection is relatively straightforward, using serol-
is made by a combination of serology, with immu-
ogy and/or demonstration of tissue cysts.N. cani-
nohistochemisty and histopathology of aborted
num infection can cause lesions in several organs,of
fetuses (Berry et al 2000).
which fetal brain is the miost consistently affected,
Typically, there is a focal encephalitis character-
Aborted fetus
ized by necrosis and non-suppurative inflamma-
tion. Because most aborted fetuses undergo rapid
Fetuses aborted due to N. caninum infection are
autolysis,even semi-liquid brain tissue should be
characteristicallymoderately lo severely autoly-
fixed in10%bufferedneutral formalin for histo-
sed(Abbitt & Rae2007).DiagnosisofN.caninum
logical examination.Non-suppurative lesions are
501
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
also present in the placenta,myocardium, skeletal
transmission occurs makes control difficult.There
muscleand,occasionally,theliverandlung(Weston
are three main strategies that are in use:culling
2008).Confirmation ofa presumptive diagnosis on
carrier animats,limiting the circumstances for
thebasisofhistologyrequiresdemonstration ofthe
horizontal spread and vaccination.None are fully
presence of tissue cysts by either immunocytochem-
effective but,depending on the circumstances of
istry orserology.
the herd,allmay help to reduce the incidence of
In calves that are congenitally infected with
abortions.There is no effective means of treatment.
N.caninum,the specimens of choice for diagnosis
Where the proportion of infected animals in a herd
are precolostral serum from live calves or brain and
isrelatively small,carriers canbe identified by serol
spinal cord from dead calves.
ogy and culled (Reichel & Ellis 2002), thereby pre-
PCR methods are heing developed for the diagno-
venting vertical uransmission.If calves are required
sisofN.caninum infectioninbothfetal tissues(Reitt
from infected cows (e.g.wherevaluable genetics need
etal2007)and colostrum（Moskwa etal2007）.
tobe conserved),these can be derived by embryo
However,Mclnnes etal(2006)noted that,while
transfer,provided uninfectedrecipients are available.
thepresence of N.caninum canbedemonstrated by
Measuresthatcan be taken tolimithorizontal
PCR,neither the presence nor absence of N.cai
spread include:
mm antibodies or DNA could unequivocally sup-
·ensuringthat cattle donot have access tocontami-
port or exclude it as the cause of abortion.Hence,
natedfeedorwater
they concluded that additional criteria arerequired
·removal and disposal ofabortus material and
for a positive diagnosis of neosporosis as the cause
afterbirthsimmediatelyafterbirth
of an abortion.
·preventing dogs from having access to cattle feed,
effective rodent control and preventing wild carni-
Serology
vores from having access to abortus material.
Thereareseveralteststhat canbeusedtodetect the
A killed N.caniu vaccine hasbeen available since
disease in dairy herds.Immunofluorescent anti-
200l.Useofthevaccinecan reduce the incidence of
body (IFAT) and ELISA tests can detect serological
abortionsbutnotprevent them(Choromansli&Blocle
responses against N.caninum.IFAT titres ofmore
2000,Romeroelal2004).Moreover,iheeffectiveness
than1:200areoftenregardedasbeingindicative of
ofvaccinationvariessignificantlyfromfarntofarm.
previousinfection,whileatitreofmorethan1:2000
Oneofthemainproblemswithvaccinationisthatcows
isindicative thata recent abortionwasdueto
that are apparently immune to the disease (i.e are sero-
N.caninum.However,because of the widespread
positive) can still undergorepeat abortions.Vaccination
prevalence of seropositive cows, a positive result
appears to be more effective at preventing abortion due
doesnotnecessarilyindicateinfection atthetime of
tonew infection aftertheingestion ofNeospora oocysts
lesting,onlythatthecowhadbeenexposedtothe
than it is at preventing abortion in animals with congen-
disease atsomeprevioustime.Moreover,non-abort-
ital infection（Trees&Williams2003,Dubey2005).
ing cowshavebeen reportedwith titres ofmore
than 1:400o,while titres can have dropped signifi-
Sarcocystis spp.
cantlyincowsin theintervalbetweeninfectionand
abortion.
Sarcocystis is a veryrare cause ofbovine abortion
Fetal serology can definitively demonstrate the
(Abbitt & Rae 2007）.Protozoa of the Sarcocystis
presence of infection with N.caninm, although the
genus have a two-host life cycle.The definitive host,
absence of a positiveresponseis notindicative that
which is a carnivore,sheds infectious sporocysts in
infection did not occur,especially in early-gestation
its faeces.The intermediate host ingests the sporo-
fetuses,which have notbecome immunologically
cysts,which develop into sarcocysts in the muscle of
competent.
the host(Markus et al 2004). Of the three species of
Sarcocystis that occur in cattle (Markus et al 2004),
Sarcocystis cruzi appears to be able to cause abortion.
Prevention and control
Clinically, abortions are indistinguishable from
Theverticaltransmission ofN.caninmandlimited
those caused by Neospora; differentiation depends
understandingofthemeanswherebyhorizontal
uponimmunohistochemistryorPCR.
502
Chapter
23
Specificinfectious diseasescausinginfertilityand subfertilityincattle
congenital defects,birth of live calves with a persis.
Viral agents
tent BVDV infection orbirth of seropositive calves
that areimmune to thevirus.Pl animals are the
Bovine viraldiarrhoea
mainmeans of spread of thevirus and are consid-
ered tobethemainmeansbywhichBVDVinfec-
Bovineviral diarrhoea(BVD)viruswas initiallyrec
tion is maintained in populations of cattle (Bolin
ognized as a cause of diarrhoea during the 1940s.
1990n).
Althoughitwasoriginallyconsideredtobe asimple
Mutation of the non-cytopathicbiotype in PI ani-
virus-induced diarrhoea,morerecent understanding
mals results in the development of mucosal dis-
of theinfection has shown that it also causes infer-
ease.Mucosal disease is generally considered to be
tility andabortion.Worldwide,BVDvirus is amajor
a sporadic condition, affecting single animals or
cause of abortions,resultingin both sporadic abor-
smallnumbersofanimals ina sequential manner.
tions and abortion storms.
However,f thereare a large number of PI animals in
a herd(asmight occur ifinfection was introduced to
Aetiology and pathogenesis
a herd at the susceptible stage of pregnancy),an out-
Bovine viral diarrhoea virus is a pestivirus of the
break ofdisease can occur ifanimalswithmucosal
Flaviviridaefamily,which alsocontainsclassicalswine
disease excrete cytopathic biotype virus that infects
fever and border disease of sheep.There are two geno-
the other PI animals.In this circumstance,mucosal
types of BVDvirus:BVDV-1,which has a worldwide
disease appears to behave as a simple infectious dis-
distribution,andBVDV-2,whichislargelyrestricted
ease.Itis generally considered thatcytopathicbio-
to the UISA. Disease associated with BVDV-2 is gener-
type cannot cause transplacental infection,nor canit
allymuchmoreseverethanthatresultingfromBvDV
cause Pl animals.
1.BVDV is also divided into non-cytopathic strains
and cytopathic strains,based upon their effects upon
Clinical signs
cells in tissue culture.Both the non-cytopathicand
cytopathic isolate exist within each of the Lwo BVDV
BVDVinfectioncausesreproductivefailureinnaive
genotypes. There is strong evidence that the non-cyto-
andPI females butrarelyin seropositive animals.
pathicbiotype mutates to the cytopathicbiotype in
The introduction of BVD to susceptible breeding
persistently infected (Pl) animals.
femalesaroundthetine ofinsemination anddur
Themainrouteofinfectionofnaive animalsisvia
ing theembryonicandearly-tomid-fetalperiod
respiratory secretionsbut itcan also spread in uter-
can result in a range of reproductive disorders and
inesecretionsandabortuses,urine,milk,semen,
neonatal diseases (Fig. 23.7)
cesand saliva.BVDcanalsobetransmitted through
virus-contaminated embryos (Avery et al 1993).
Itappears thatrelatively closecontacibetween ani-
mals is requiredforinfection to occur.Infection
Normalorabr
ofnaive animals results in a transient viraemia,
which may be accompanied by pyrexia,mild inap-
Corgenital detects
petence and diarrhoea,depression anda period of
immunosuppression,from which animalsrecover
Immunololerance
in a few days. Some affected animals may develop
oculonasal discharges, salvation and oral erosions
Abortion
and occasionally there may be more severe disease.
Infertiliy/EED
Most animals,however, show little or no clini-
cal evidence ofinfection(Barr &Anderson 1993,
Radostits et al 2007). In pregnant females, trans-
Month cf gestation
placental infection of the fetus occurs during the
period ofviraemia.
Fig.23.7Potential clinical effecis upon reproduction in cattle
Depending upon the time of its occurrence,
following infectionwithbovineviraldiarrhoeavirusatdifferent
infection ofthefetuscanresultinearly embryonic
stages of gestation.EED,early embryonic death.(Redrawn
fromGrooms&Bolin2005)
death,abortion,birthofliveorstillborncalveswith
503
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
Infectionfrombeforemating today45
Table23.4Congenitalabnormalitiesassociatedwithbovine
ofgestation
viral diarrhoeavirus jnfection durirg midgestation
Infection can occur at mating, when cows are bred by
Nervous
Eye
Other systems
aPI bullorananimal thatistransientlyinfectedwith
system
BVDV(Barlowetal1986,Revelletal198S,Kirkland
Cerebellar hypo-
Cataracts
Long bone deformities
etal1991)orifinseminatedwith semen thatiscon-
plasia
taminatedwith thevirus(Virakula et al1993).Field
Hypomyelino-
Microphthalmia
Stuntedgrowth
studies suggest that BVD infection can have a sig
genesis
nificant impact on early reproductive performance.
Hydrocephalus
Retinal atrophy
Bracnygnathias
Animals that seroconvert to BVDV at breeding or
Microcephalus
Opticneuritis
Hair abnormalities,
soon after are less likely to become pregnant than
alopecia
those that seroconvert before breeding commences
(Houe et al 1993,Gr0oms 2004).Pregnancy fail-
ure appears to result from conception failure and
and eyes (Table23.4）.Typically,thereisa time interval
impairedearlyembryonicdevelopment(McGowan
ofbetween several daysand 2monthsbetweeninfec-
etal1993)duetoeffectsupon00cytefunction
tion with BVD virus and abortion (Bolin 1990a).
(Ssentongoet al 1980,Grooms etal1998)and uter-
ine environment.Pregnancyfailuremaybemanifest
Abortion
asa low non-return rate or as irregular prolonged
returnstooestrus.Thebirth ofPl calves afterinsemi-
Abortions can occur at any stage of gestation.Most
nation of cows with semen infected with BVDvirus
losses occur before thethird trimester,as thefetus
has also been reported (Meyling& Jenson 1988)
isincreasinglyabletomount an effectiveimmune
response against the virus as gestation advances;
Infectionbetweendays45and175
abortionsinthethirdtrimester ofpregnancyhave
ofgestation
alsobeenattributedtoBVDvirusWardetal1969,
Infection of thefetusin this periodof gestation can
Moennig&Leiss1995,Gr0oms&Bolin2005).
Irrespective of thebiotype,nfections of thefetus
leadto:
in the later stages of pregnancy that donor cause
fetalresorption,mummification or abortion
abortionwill lead tothebirthofan immunecalf,
·immunotoleranceand thebirthofPlcalves
since the fetus can develop a measurable antibody
response to the organism by 5-6 months of gesta-
congenital defects,mainly of the central nervous
and ocular systems.
tion (Bolin 1990b).
Fetuses aborting from BVDV infection may be
Fetal deathsfollowingBVDVinfectionof susceptible
dams can occur at any point of gestation, although
expelledautolysed,mummifiedorinfreshcondition
al various stages of pregnancy. However,because of
theyaremostcommon duringthefirst trimester.
therelativelylongintervalbetween infection andabor-
Dependingonthetimeofinfection,etalresorptin,
tion,thefetusisoften severelyautolysed.Thereareno
mummification orexpulsioncan occur.Expulsionof
pathognomonicfetallesionsassociatedwithBVDV
thefetusmayoccurfrom daysuptoseveralmonths
infection but,if thefetus is reasonably fresh,there
after fetal infection (Bolin 1990a).
maybehistologicalevidenceofdermatitismeningitis,
Fetuses that survive infection with non-cytopathic
destruction ofthecerebellar cortex andbronchiolitis.
BVDVbetweendays18and125ofgestation(McClurkin
etal 1984)areimmunotolerant tothevirus andsub
sequently becomepersistentlyinfectedwithBVDvirus.
Diagnosis
Most infections thatresult inthedevelopment ofPl
Abortedfetus
calvesoccurbefore day75（Roederet al1986)but,
whileimmunotoleranceisuncommonafterday100,
Achieving a definitive diagnosis thatBVDV hasbeen
it canoccuruntil day125(Grooms2004)
the causal agent of an abortion is difficult, since the
Infectionbetweendays100and 150ofgestation
presence ofneithervirusnorviral antigennor anti-
canresult in thebirth ofcalves withcongenitalabnor-
BVDantibodyisconclusiveevidencethatBVD has
malities,predominantlyofthecentralnervoussystem
actually been the cause of the abortion. However,
504
Chapter
231
Specificinfectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
the presence of virus plus lesion is indicative of BVD
·PCR (blood, serum, skin biopsies).High sen-
infection，which,togeiher with evidence of active
sitivity,but specificity can be affected by non-
infection at a herd level,is generally considered to
specificreactions
be diagnostic(Kelling 2007).
·ELISA for viral antigen (blood). Hligh specificity
The interval between infectionand theexpulsion of
and sensitivity(Hlill et al 2007);also needs to differ-
thefetus canresult inthevirus no longer being present
entiate berween persistent and transient infections.
in the aborlus. However, virus can be recovered from
fetal lymphoid tissues(spleen, thymus and ileum),
lung or liver byvirus isolation,PCR or immunohis-
Control
tochemistry.ltis preferable to submitmultiple feruses
Control should be aimed at preventing entry of BVD
until the virus is isolated(Grooms& Bolin 2005).
virus tonaive herds and preventing the spread of the
virus in infected herds.
Herdinfection
Biosecurity measures to prevent the entry of infec-
tion include maintaining a closed herd, testing all
The presence of active BVD infection in a herd can
incoming animals for the presence of BVD virus/
be inferred from clinical signs,the presence of Pl
viral antigen (i.e. identifying persistently or tran-
animals and monitoring programmes. Bulk milk
siently infected animals) and ensuring no pregnant
testingbased on ELISA(Pritchard 2001,Thobolwe
animal thatmight becarryinga Pl calf is brought on
etal2004)orPCR(Radwan etal1995,Renshawetal
to the farm. Bulls that are purchased and brought
2000) is a useful means of monitoring the presence
on to the farm from outside sources pose a signif
of BVD infection in a herd and gives an indication
icant risk ofinfection to herds that are otherwise
of itsprevalence and whether the rate of infection is
closed. It is possible that the disease may be trans-
increasing(Pritchard 2006).
mitted from other runinants, so maintaining sepa-
Serology is relatively difficult to interpret,as the
rationbetween such animals and susceptiblecattle
virus iswidespread and antibody titres arelong-last-
is recommended. It is possible that semen could be
ing, with the result that high titres can be indicative of
infectedwithBVDvirusbutdiseasecontrolatbull
historical,rather thancurrentnctiontsalso
studsshouldprecludethis.
ficult todifferentiatebetween natural infection and
Various strategies exist for controlling infection
vaccination titres(Grooms &Bolin 2005).However,
in affected herds,depending upon the level of dis-
serology of young (6-12 months old),unvaccinated
ease that is present in the herd （Table 23.5）.The use
animals that are used as'sentinel’animals is a useful
of a Pi animal as an endogenous‘vaccinator' has
means of monitoring the presence of active infection,
beenrecommended in the past but this is no longer
The presence of antibody titres in these unvaccinated
considered to be either beneficial or safe(Brownlie
cattle indicates recent virus exposure and is a strong
2005）.Itis now consideredpreferable to identify
indicator that BVDV is present on the farm (Houe
and remove PI animals, since these are the main
1992,Pillars&Grooms2002).Likewise,antibodies
source ofinfection.This will not prevent spread by
in the serum ofcalves thathave not suckedcolostrum
continued transient infections, so vaccination may
(i.e.have no maternal antibody) is also indicative that
also be required.
active infection occurred during their gestation.
Modified live and killedvaccineshavebeen devel
Demonstrating the presence of Pl animals can be
opedforBVD,althoughonlykilledvaccinesareavail
usedto confirmthatactiveinfectionwithBVDis
ableintheIlKatthetimeofwriting.Advantagesof
occurring. Samples for the diagnosis of PI animals
modified live vaccines are a long duration of action
include(Kelling2007):
and interstrain cross reactivity. Conversely, they
Virus isolation (blood:buffy coat）.Samples
cause immunosuppression and have been associ-
should not be collected from calves that have
ated with fetal abnormalities (Kelling 2007).Killed
maternal antibody.It may be necessary to differ-
vaccines neither haveimmunosuppressive effect nor
entiate Pl animals from those with acute, tran-
have they been associatedwithfetal abnormalities
sient,infections.High sensitivity and specificity
but they may not protect against abortion when ani-
·Immunocytochemistry ('ear notch' biopsies).
mals are exposed to high levels of infection(Laven
Canbe used on any animals.High sensitivity and
et al 2003）.The whole herd may be vaccinaied, or
just the heifers (maiden and primiparous animals),
specificity
505
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Table23.5Bulkmilk BVD antibodies:likely significanceand suggested actions(basedonBrownlie2005)
Antibody
Indicative
Herd status
-pbssible further action
level
proportion
of seropositive
cows(%)
Low
5
Naive
Test young stock toensure continued lack
ofexposure
Intermediate
5-25
Low exposure
May indicate
historical or
lactation heifers.lf antibody -ve,continue
acute infection
monitoring.lf+ve,considerimplementing
control measures
25-65
Moderate exposure
High
>65
High-level of exposure:recent exposure
Implement eradicationpoliciestoremovePi
toinfection,withahighprobabilityof
animals.Vaccinationshould be considered
persistently infected (Pl) animals
depending upon circumstances (Brownlie 2005).
contaminated semen.Abortus material is also a sig-
Ithasbeen suggested that,iflivevaccineis available,
nificant source ofinfection.
cattleshouldbevaccinatedwithkilledvaccinebefore
Infectioncanresult inclinicalpresentationsofdis
being given the live vaccine.
easeofvaryingdegreesofseverity.Animalsmaybecome
asymptomaticlatentcarriers directly afterinfectionor
Bovine herpesvirus 1
afterrecoveryfrom clinicalillness.Latent infections are
maintainedinthetrigeminal andsacralganglia.
Bovine herpesvirus (BHV)-1 has a worldwide distri
Acute signs of respiratory or genital disease appear
butionandis associatedwithinfectiousbovinerhi-
after alatent period of10-20 days,withrespiratory
notracheitis,infectiouspustularvulvovaginitis(iPV)/
symptoms generally being of short duration.Lesions
balanoposthitis andabortion.Itisalsoassociatedwith
associated with IPV may be present for a longer
infertility. Itis divided into three subtypes (Babuik
period:sometimesup to severalweeks.Excretion of
s
virus in respiratory or genital secretions continues
eases(Table 23.6).Within subtypes, there are strains
for=14 days.Howeveranimalsthatbecomelatent
thiat causedifferent levels of severity of disease.
carriers may resume shedding of the virus periodi-
cally during times of stress (e.g. calving, transport)
Aetiology and pathogenesis
oraftercorticosteroid administration atanytimefor
theremainderofthie animal'slife
Infection occurs by the respiratory route and,in
The interval between infection with an abortifa-
thecaseof IPV,by thevenereal route.ltmay also
cient strain and expulsionof the fetus is much more
betransmittedthroughinfectedbedding.sniffingof
variable,rangingfromafewdays tofull-term deliv-
thevulvaandperineumofinfected animalsandvia
ery ofastillborn oraffectedcalf(Milleret al1991).
It has been suggested that the duration andvariabil-
Table 23.6Disease 5yndromes associated with different
ityoftheinterval betweeninfectionof the damand
subtypes of bovine herpesvirus (BHV)-1
abortion of the fetusrepresents aperiod in which
the virus resides in the placenta without infecting
Type
Syndrome
the fetus itself (Kendrick 1971).
IBR
IPV
Abortion
BHV-1.1
Clinical signs
一
十
BHV-1.2a
+
+
一
The genital form of the disease may present without
BHV-1.2b
+
+
other symptoms or accompanied by respiratory dis-
IBR= infectiousrhinotracheitis;IPV= infecticus pustularvulvovaginitis/
ease.Itisunusual forIPVand abortions topresent
balanoposthitis.
together.
506
Chapter
231
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
Infectiouspustularvulvovaginitis
ovulation.This damage to the developing corpus lut-
eum may directly affect its function,perhapsresulting
The onsei ofvulvovaginitis is sudden and acute.
in lower thannormalprogesteroneproduction.Incon-
Signs appear 24-48 hours after venereal transmis-
sequence,he survival of the embryo is compromised.
sion;heiferstend tobemoreseverelyaffected than
cows.Thevulvar labiabecome swollen and tender
and,inlight-skinnedanimalsdeeplycongested.his
Abortion
is quicklyfollowedby the development ofnumer-
Worldwide,BHV-1 isa significant causeof bovine
ousredvesicles on themucosa.Thesemay rapidly
abortion.Kirkbride (1992) reported that,among
rupture or develop into pustules,which give rise to
nearly9000 abortionsthatoccurredbetween1980
haemorrhagiculcers: 3mm or so in diameter.
and 1990, BHV-1 was responsible for 5.4% of inci
The quantity ofvulvar discharge isvariable,rang
dents.Murray(1990) foundIBRtobethe causative
ingfromsmallquantitiesofexudatethat adheresto
agent in13%of149calves thatwereabortedover
thevulvaland tail hairstoacopiousmucopurulent
2years in northwest England. Most abortions are
discharge.A speculum is usefil to examine thevagi-
sporadic but abortion‘storms'can occur (e.g.Tanyi
nal mucosa but,because of the pain and discom
et al 1983).However,abortion is considered to be
fort,caudal epidural anaesthesia isworthwhile.The
alesssignificantconsequence ofBHv-1infection
lesions are obviously painful,since affected animals
in theUK and Europe thanitis in North America
arerestlcss,with swishing ofthe tail,frequenturina
(Caldow&Gray2004）.Only subtype1.2b,which
tion and straining.There maybe uransientpyrexia
does not cause abortion,ispresent inAustralia and
and reducedmilkyieldbut the systemic effects are
NewZealand.Respiratory disease isnotalways evi
variable depending upon the presence of respiratory
dentbefore abortions occur(Anon 1979),while
problems.The acute phase of the disease will sub-
thelengthof timebetweeninfectionandexpulsion
sideinabout10-14daysbutafewanimalswill dis-
ofthe fetuscanmean thatearlierrespiratory dis-
play a persistent vulval discharge for several weeks.
easemaybe overlooked（Barr&Anderson 1993).
Whenfemales showsignsof IPV,thebull must be
Abortions canalso occur followingvaccinationwith
examined for the presence of lesions,since,unlike
a modified live vaccine (Kelling et al 1973).
the situation with most venereal diseases of cattle,
Abortions occur from4monthsofgestation toterm;
thesigns in thebull are dramatic(see Ch.30)
mostcommonlybetween4andSmonthsofgesta-
tion.Somecalves arestillbornandafewmaybeborn
Infertility
alive but succumb subsequently.The effects of virus
infectionmaybeduetothestrainofthevirus:Miller
Infectionwith BHV-1aroundor afier thetime of
et al(1991) reported that infection of heifers at 25-27
breeding is associatedwithpoorfertility.Insemina-
weeks of gestation with subtype 1.1 resulted in abor-
tion with infected semen results in poor pregnancy
tions 17-85days later but thosegiven subtype1.2a
rates （Kendrick & McEntee 1967,Parsonson&
deliveredfull-termcalves,some ofwhichhadBHV-1
Snowdon1975). I1appears that this is a result ofa
neutralizing antibodies in precolostral serum.On the
localizedbutseverenecrotizingendometritisthatis
otherhand,theintervalbetweenthetimewhen the
present at the site of insemination and persists for
fetusitselfbecomesinferted (ie.ratherthanthedam)
1-2weeks(Miller&van derMaaten1984,Khars
and its expulsion isrelatively short:Kelling(2007）
1986).Itisnotclearlyestablished whether service
suggested that it is no more than 7 days.Regardless,
by an infected bull has the sameresult.
the interval between fetal infection and expulsion it
The virus can also directly cause embryonic death,
is sufficient for the fetus to become highly autolysed
by direct invasion of cells(Bowen et al1985,Miller
or,lesscommonly,mummified.Retentionof the fetal
&van derMaaten1986).Theconsequenceisearly
membranesisacommonsequel to abortion
embryonicdeath,withthecowreturningtooestrus
atanormalintervalafterinsemination(such as was
reported byMiller&van der Maaten（1987)afier
Diagnosis
infection of heifers at the time of breeding).
Genitaltractlesions
BHV-1 can also cause a bilateral necrotizing oophor-
itisto which the corpus luteum appears paricularly
The genital tract lesions of IPV are fairlycharacter-
susceptible,especially duringthefirst few days afler
isticofthediseasebut must be differentiatedfrom
507
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
granular vulvovaginitis due to Ureaplasma spp.and
(see Ch.30).Infected animals should be isolated
catarrhalvaginocervicitis.Following the presence
andnatural servige suspended.
of genital lesions,vaginal swabs, preputial wash-
Vaccination,togetherwithsoundbiosecuritymea-
ings and semen should be placed in virus transport
sures,is themost effectiveway ofcontrolling thedis
medium.Paired serum samples should be iaken
ease. A number ofvaccines are available,including
from theaffected cows.
live attenuated and killed vaccines.Heifers should
be vaccinated after 6 months of age and before their
Abortion
first service;thereafter,annualvaccination is prefer-
able.Pregnant animals should onlybevaccinated
A severely autolysed fetus is highly suggestive of
with a killed vaccine, as live vaccines can produce all
BHV-1 infection.There is frequently a liquefactive
of the effecis of natural BHIV-1 infections upon the
necrosis of thewhole of thekidney cortex with peri-
reproductive system (Miller 1991). Kelling (2007)
renal haemorrhagic oedema.Hlistologically,there
recommended:
is always focal necrosis of the liver and in many
Beefheifersshouldbevaccinatedprior tothestart
cases there are necrotic lesions in the brain,lungs,
of the breeding season
spleen,adrenal cortexand lymph nodes.There are
characteristicvirus inclusion bodiesat the periph-
·Dairyheifersshould bevaccinatedat 4-6months
and S-12 months
eryof thesenecroticlesionsinfreshexperimental
casesbut,because ofautolysis,hey are not always
·Thereaftercatleshouldbevaccinatedatroutine
demonstrable in field cases of abortion.Virus may
post-calving examinations.
bepresent in anyfetal tissues and in thecotyledons
Vaccination of bulls is of questionable value since
(Kirkbride 1992). Samples of fetal tissue,parlicu-
they will be seropositive onblood testingand may
larly lidney and adrenal gland, should be taken
berejectedfor saleasbeinginfected.Routineexami-
togetherwithapieceofplacentaforfluorescent
nation of semen for thepresenceof thevirus is pref
antibody test orvirus isolation.Thelatter is not par-
erable asa method ofcontrol.
ticularlyreliablebutmaybeworthwhileifplacental
tissueis available(Kirkbride 1990a).
Blue tongue
Thepresence of BVD-1 infection
maybe
demonstrated through serologybutinterpretation
Blue tongue is mainly a disease of sheep and deer
ofresults can bedifficultbecauseofthevariable
but cattle andwild runinants are important reser-
period between infection and abortion.Nettleton
voir hosts for thevirus.Blue tongueisfound mainly
(1986)recommended thatpaired serum samples
in countries between 40°N and 35°S （Radostits
shouldbetakenfrom thedam at thetimeofabor-
etal2007)and isendemicinthewestern statesof
lion andasecondsetofsamples2-4weekslater.
theUSA.Since1999,therehavebeen significantout-
However,since cowsmayhavebeen infectedup to
breaks of the disease inEurope;initially they werein
4months before abortion occurs,a significant rise
southern European countries (Greece, Italy, Corsica
in antibody titres is unlikely tobe demonstrated.
and the Balkans) but since 2007 also in Germany,
Serological examinationofpaired serum samples
France,the Low Countries and the UK （DEFRA
from atleast10cows in theherd shouldreveal
2007). Blue tongue is not present in Canada and
seroconversion or a four-fold increase in titres if
New Zealand.In Australia,although there is sero
BHV-1 infection is active in the herd (Kirkbride
logical evidence ofitspresence,there is no clinical
1990a).
evidence of disease.
Thevirus requiresinsect vectorsfor its transmis-
sionandisnotnormallytransmissiblefromanimal
toanimal.Culicoides midges are themainvectors;in
Spontaneous recovery ofthe genital lesionswill
the LISA,the main transmitting agent is Culicoides
occur and thereforetreatmentisnotreallyneces-
sonorensis and in Africa and southern Europe
sary;however,the administration of emollient
C.inicola. The recent spread into areas of central
creams tothevulva,vagina andpenismaybeuse-
andnorthernEuropethat arebeyondthenorth-
ful.Vulvar stenosis andpenile/preputial adhesions
ern limit of occurrenceof C.imicola suggests that
andphimosiscanoccur duringthehealingphase
newinsectvectors areinvolved:C.obsoletus and/or
508
Chapter
123
 Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
C.pulicaris,which are widely distributed through-
if vaccination is used, it should be confined to the
out northern Europe, appear to be the most likely
vector season.Vaccines are currently under develop-
candidates(Mertens&Mellor2003).There mayalso
inent that utilizepurifiedviralproteinsrather than
be some transmission by ticks,keds and mosquitoes
attenuated live strains. Conurol of the vector may
(Radostits et al 2007).Bulls that are inferted by blue
also be feasible under some circumstances.
tongue virus can transmit the virus in their semen
(Bowen &Howard 1984) and it is possible forthe
Otherviral causes
virus to be transmitted by direct transfer ofblood
from an infected animal.
Epivag
Outbreaks of blue tongue have generally been
described asbeing worse in the summer than in the
Epivag is a specific bovine venereal disease causing
winter, according to the number of vertors in the
epididymitis and vaginitis in carile in east, south
environment. It appears that the outbreak in north-
and central Africa (Hudson 1949, Roberts 1986).
In cows, it causes diffuse infection of the vagina.
infectivity of the virus, such that it can persistently
A severe mucopurulent vaginal discharge may be
infect ovine T cells,thereby having a more effective
present during ihe earlier stages of the disease.
mechanism for'overwintering'between onevector
Mostinfectedcowsfail to conceive toservice.Many
season and the next (Mertens & Mellor 2003).
eventually recover, but about 15-25% of animals
In cattle, clinical disease is rarely caused by blue
become sterile because of the presence of lesions of
tongue virus (Radostits et al 2007) but it does
the uterine tubes such as adhesions,hydrosalpinx,
have a number of effects upon bovine reproduc-
and ovarian and bursal adhesions. Likewise, some
tion. Infection of susceptible catle causes a virae-
cows develop parametritis as a result of epivag infer-
mia, during which the virus can cross the placenta.
tion(McEntee 1990) and adhesions may be wide-
Infection ofthe posthatching embryo canresult
spread throughout the pelvis and even extend into
in its death and,if susceptible herds are bred dur-
the abdomen.
ing the season of maximal infecrion with thevirus,
Most bulls have a mild balanoposthitis after infec
seasonal infertility can result.
tion, although, since this is far less severe than IPV
Infection before day 100 of gestation can lead to
infection,it maynotbeobserved.Subsequently,most
abortion,mummification of the fetuis or stillbirths.
bulls develop an induration of the epididymis, par-
Calvesmaybeborn alive thatareweakand ataxic
ticularly of its tail.Testicular legeneration,atroply
or are persistent carriers of the infection (Roberts
and fibrosis is a common sequent of the infection,
1986). However, teratogenic effects are more likely
and orchitis may also occur (Rocha et al 1986)
than abortion (Kelling 2007). The neuropathoge-
The causal organism has noi been definitively
nicity of the virus produces hydrencephaly (Howard
characterized.Theodoridis (1978)partially charac-
1986)and cerebral cysts, sometimes with conse-
terized a series of viruses from cattle with the epivag
quential abnormal contractures of extremities.
syndrome, including some that were related to
In the aborted fetus, diagnosis of blue tongue
bovine herpesviruses. However, although the vagini-
can be made by denonstration of central ner-
tis component of the syndrome could be induced by
vous lesions(Barr&Anderson 1993）orbyvirus
various strains of these herpesviruses,theepididymi-
isolation from feial blood, spleen, lung or brain.
tis could not.Hence,it remains unclear whether the
Serology (serum neutralizing assay or ELISA) can
syndrome is caused by a bovine herpesvirus and,
be used to diagnose maternal infection, although
indeed,whether herpesviruses are the sole causal
the presence of antibody-negative, viraemie ani-
agent.
mals during an epizootic outbreak can confuse
diagnosis (Osburn et al 1981). PCRis also available
Catarrhalbovinevaginitis
[Maan et al2005).
Live attenuaied vaccines are available for.blue
This contagious, mainly venereally transmitted
tonguebut thesecancause diseasein their own right
disease was first described in South Africa (Van
and thereisevidence of transmissionin thefield and
Rensburg 1953);since then it has been reported
exchange ofgenome segments between vaccine and
in many countries. It is believed to be caused by
natural strains.Osburn （1994)recommended that,
an enterovirusfrom the entericcytopathicbovine
509
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
orphan (ECBO) group (Straub and Bohm 1964)
(whichmayberemoved surgically)mighiinterfere
although this remains to be proven.Transmission
mechanically wjth coitus,they do not cause infer-
ofthediseaseisprimarilybythevenereal routebut
tility in female animals.
itcan alsobespreadbyfaecalcontaminationofthe
vulvaorby animalslickingtheperineum ofinfected
Fungalagents(mycoticabortion)
and non-infected individuals.Therefore the disease
Fungal invasion of theplacenta and fetus is afrequent
occurs in virgin heifers.
and consistent cause ofabortion in cattle（Table
Affectedcowshaveaprofusepostcoital,non-odr
23.1).Abortions are normally sporadic, although in
ous,yellow,mucoidvulval discharge.Thecervix and
someherdstheincidencemaybe ashigh as5-10%.
vagina are inflamed but there are no pustules such
The frequency of diagnosis is high;in the north-east-
as occur in IPV infection and no fever.The typical
ernstatesoftheLIsAmycoticabortions accountedfor
yellowgelatinousexudatefrequentlyaccumulatesin
22%ofall infectious abortions and5.1%ofall abor-
thevagina,varyinginquantityfroma fewto several
tions investigated (Hubbert et al 1973).Similarly,
hundred millilitres.The disease persists fora few
in SouthDakota,A,a surveyovera-yeareriod
daystoa fewweeks.Onlya fewanimals showclini
foundthat14.6%ofallinfectiousaboriions were
cal signs of the disease at any one time.As a conse
duetofungi;thiswas4.8% of the totalnumber of
quence, pregnancy rates are reduced and there are
abortions (Kirkbride et al 1973).
prolonged,irregular returns to oestrus,presumably
duetolate embryonicdeath.In someherds,fetal
Aetiologyandpathogenesis
mummification,abortion and stillbirth have been
reported as being a problem.
Thefungi thataremosufrequentlyisolatedfollowing
Bulls may or maynot become clinically infected
abortion areAbsidia spp.,Rizopus spp.,Mucor p.
but ECBO serotypeshave been associatedwith sem-
and Aspergillus spp. Other fungi such as Mortierella
inalvesiculitis and inferility lastingupto90 days
wolfii andPerriellidiumboydii,togetherwithyeasts
(Boutersetal 1964)
such as Candida spp. have also been implicated.
Diagnosis can be made on serological examina-
Worldwide,Aspergillusfumigatusisthemostcommon
tion ofpaired blood samples,collected ai least 15
cause ofabortion （Pepin 1983),beingthe cause of
days apart, for evidence of rising antibody titres;
60-So%ofmycoticabortions(Knudtson&Kirkbride
the first sample should be collected as soon as pos-
1992),but other species canbelocally important.In
sible after the disease is suspected.Thevirus can be
the North Island of New Zealand,for example,M.
isolatedfromvaginalmucusbuttherecoveryrateis
wolfii isthemostimportantcausalorganism.
frequentlylow（Huck&Lamont1979)
IntheUKmycoticabortion ismuchmorepreva-
There is no specific treatment or vaccine. Infected
lentduringthemonthsofDecembertoMarchthan
bulls should not be used for service for several
during therest of the year.Abortions are associated
monthis,even afterclinical signsof disease have dis-
withthefeedingofpoor-qualityhayandsilage,par-
appeared. Potentially infected animals should be
ticularly where cows are also in confined housing
isolated after purchaseand,inclosed herds serolog
(Williams et al 1977).It isassumed that infection
icalexaminationofpotentialadditionsto theherd
of theplacenia and fetusoccurs as a result of hae-
mightbecontemplated.
matogenous spread of the organism from the ali-
mentary or respiratory tract. Infection progressively
Transmissiblegenital fibropapillomas
spreads through the placentomes,causing abortion
oncetoomuchof theplacenta hasbeenaffected
Wart-like tumours commonly occur onthepenis of
for thefetus toremain viable.Evidence of infection
young bulls (see Ch.30)and occasionally similar
the fetus is frequently also present,particularly the
growths occur on the vulva,perineum andvestibu-
skin and lungs (Walker 2007). Mycotic infection
lovaginal epithelium of heifers.They arecaused bya
does not invariably cause fetal death and abortion:
virus of the papovavirus group and are transmitted
sometimes,infected calves areborn alive.
bycontactwithinfected animals.
These fibropapillomata regress spontaneously
Clinical signs
in 2-6 months;the speed of regression may be
expedited by theuseofa wart vaccine(formal-
Abortions usually occur between 4 and 9months of
ized tissue).Except in sofar as thelarger tumours
gestation,most occurring between7and 8months.
510
Chapter
231
Specificinfectiousdiseasescausinginfertilityandsubfertilityincattle
When present, the appearance of lesions on the
·thereisafetalbronchopneumoniaassociatedwith
fetus andplacenta arecharacteristicof mycoticinfec-
mycoticelements.
tions. The whole or part of the placenta appears
Serological tests are,at present,unreliable and can-
discoloured; grey,yellow or reddish-brown,with
notbeusedforroutine diagnosis.
the intercotyledonary areas of the allantochorion
appearing thickened,wrinlled or leathery.Those
Control
cotyledons thathave attachedportions of thecorre-
sponding caruncle after the placenta has been shed
Thereisnopractical treatment formycotic abortion.
appear hickened and have a cup-like or coffee-bean
The feedingofmouldyforageor theuseofmouldy
appearance (Pepin 1983).Between 25% and 33%
bedding should be avoided. There is no point in
offetuses have characteristicskinlesions(Austwick
examining the suspect feed,since Aspergillus and
1968,Kendrick 1975),which are circumscribed,
other fungi are normal inhabitants of such forages
greyish-white thickened patches similar in appear-
andwill almost invariablybepresent.
ance to skinringworm in calvesandyoungcatule.
These appear dry where A.fumigaus has caused
Diseases ofunknown aetiology
the abortion,moist where it is due to Zygomycetes
(Waller 2007).Skin lesions are not normally present
in M. uolfi abortions.
Foothillabortion(syn.bovine
There arenootherclinical signsofdiseasein the
epizootic abortion)
dam associated with abortion due to A.fiumigatus.
This diseasewasfirstidentifiedin themid-1950s in
Asignificantproportionofcowsthatabortbecause
California. It is characterized by a high abortion rate
ofM.wolfiinfection developmycoticpneumonia
of30-40%during the last trimester of gestation in
afewdays afterabortion thatisinvariablyfatal.
cows and heifersnewly introduced tobeef herds in
particularareasofthe stateofCalifornia,Oregonand
Diagnosis
Nevada (Barr&Anderson1993).Abortions are con-
finedtothehabitatoftheargasid tickOrnithodoros
The presence of typical lesions of the placenta and
coriaceus,which appears tobe an essentialvector for
feus is highly suggestive of mycotic abortion. The
the disease.
main differential diagnosisisBacilluslicheniformis.
Thecausalorganism hasnotbeendefinitivelyiden-
Laboratoryconfirmation requires submission of pla-
tified,Early studies suggested that the diseasewas
cental tissuepreferably thewholeorgan(Pepin1983).
duetoCllamydiaspp.;however,itisnowconsidered
Culturefromplacental tissueisofnovaluesincethe
that this is not the case, and that foothill abortion
placenta isusuallycontaminatedafterit has been
isaseparate diseaseenlityfrom bovinechlamyd-
expelled. Culture from fetal lungs and abomasum is
ial abortion(Barr&Anderson 1993),although the
morereliablebutcontaminationcanoccur.
Mycotic abortion can be diagnosed by demon-
early literatureremainsconfusingasa result.Recent
studiesusingPCRon aborted fetusesandthe tick
strating fungal hyphae in the placenta,either histo-
vector（Kingetal2005,Chenetal2007)haveiden-
logicallyorinscrapings afterdigestion in 10%KOH
tifiedanoveldeltaproteobacterium,whichisclosely
solution (Pepin 1983).Fixed placenta is the best
related to members of the order Myxococcales,as
sample to subimit. A range of other tissues (including
the aetiological agent.
lung,liverand brain) should beexaminedhistologi-
Abortions are seasonal,occurring3-4 months of
callyif placenta is not available.Fetal bronchopneu-
more after exposure to ticks.Most abortions occur in
monia iscommonwith alltypesofmycoticabor-
the third trimester, usually as sporadic orcurrences
tion and,if present,is considered diagnostic.
but occasionallyas‘stormsAnimalshave tobeless
Conclusive diagnosisofmycoticplacentitiscanbe
than 6 months pregnant at the time of exposure for
madeif(Kirkbride1990c):
abortiontooccur.Cattlethatabortshownoother
characteristic lesions of placentitis are present in
clinical signs,eitherat thetimeofabortionorsubse
association with thepresence ofmycotic elements
quently. Once abortions have occurred, animals are
·characteristiclesionsoffetal dermatomycosisare
immune,s thecattlethatareatgreatestriskarethose
presentin associationwiththepresence ofmycotic
calvingfor the first timeand animals that havebeen
elements
moved intoa tick-infestedregion(BonDurantetal
511
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
2007). Infection late in pregnancy can give rise to the
Anon 2007The genus ChlamydoplilitAvailable online al:
birth of live, weal calves (Barr & Anderson 1993)
www.chlamydiae.com/does/Chlamydiales/genis_
Lesions in aborled feuses are chararteristic and
chlamydophilaasp.Accessed 15 October 2007
Antony A.Williamson NB2003NZVet J51:232
are used in its diagnosis.Abortuses are typically not
Arthur GH 1975Veterinary reproductionand ohstetrirs,5ih
autolysed but have enlarged lymph nodes, spleen
edn. Bailliere Tindall, London
and liver and a reduction in the size of the thy-
Ausiwick PKC1968Vet Rec 82:236
mus (Jubb et al 1993).Theremaybepetechial hiae-
Avery B,GreveT,onsholt ,oerA993VetRe132:60
morrhages of the mouth, tongue, ihymus, lymph
Ayling RD,Bashiruddin SE,Nicholas RA 2004 Vet Rec
nodes and elsewhere (Storz 1971). Histology is
155:413
required to confirm the diagnosis: there is initial
BabuikTA,Van Drunen Litel van den Hurk S,Tikoo SK2004
In:Coetzer IAW,Tustin RC(eds) Infectious diseases of
lymplioid lhyperplasia, which may be followed by
livestock.Oxford LIniversity Press,Oxford,p 875-886
acute necrosis of lymphoid organs (BonDurant
HallHNeillSD,lisA,Orien JFergunHW978
et al 2007).
BrVet J134:584
Control is attempted by ensuring that suscep-
Barber JA,Momont H,Tibary A,Sedgwick GP 1994
tible animals are exposed to ticks before they
Theriogenology 41:353
become pregnant. While simple in theory, it is
Barlow RH,Netileton PF Gardiner ACet al 1986Vet Rec 118:
difficult in practice to find a ‘window' of time
321
BarrBC,AndersonML 1993Vet Clin NorthAmFoodAnim
between the periods of risk from ticks and the
Pract9:343-3681993
catfle being in sufficiently advanced gestation to
Barr BC, Conrad PA,Breitmeyer Ret al1993 1AmVet Med
avnid abortions.
Assor 202: 113
Bartels CIM,Wouda W,Schukken YH 19og Theriogenology
52:247
References
Bartlett DE 1948 Am IVet Res 9:33
Benquet N,Parkinson T), West DM, Heuer C 2005 Proc Soc
Sheep Beef CattleVet NZVA 35:43
Abbitt B, Rae DO 2007 In: Youngquist RS,Tlrelfall WR(eds)
Berry SL,Kirk IH,Thurnond M2000Available on line at
Current therapy in large animal theriogenology, 2nd edn.
www.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/vetexi/INF-DA_Neospura.htul.
Saunders-Elsevier St Louis.MO,p 409-413
Accessed 25 June 2000
Adler H1956 In: Proceedings of the 31d Intermational
Bier Pi, Hall CE,Duncan IR,WinterAI 1977Vet Microbiol
Congress on Animal Reproduction and Artificial
2:13
Insemination,Camhridge,vol 2,p5-7
BispigW,Kirpal Gonnenschein B1981Tierarzmsh36:
Afshar A, Stuart P, Huck RA 1966 Vet Rec 78: 512
G67-674
Aitken ID 1983 In:Martin WB (ed)Diseases of sheep.
BlackmoreDK 1979ACC Rep:4:34
Blaclvell ScientificPublications,Oxford,p 119-123
Bolin SR1990aVetMed 85:1124
Aitken ID,Longbottom D 2004In:World Organisation
Bolin SR 1y9ob In:Kirkbride CA (ed) Laboratory diagnosis
for Animal Health(OlE) Manual of diagnostic tests and
of livestock abortion,3rd edn.lowa State University Press,
vaccines for terrestrial animals.OIE,Paris,p 635-641
Ames,IA
Alves D,McEwen B,Hazlett M et al 1996Can Vet |37:287
BonDurant RH 1997Vei Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
Andersen AA 2004 In: Coetzer JAw,Tustin RC(eds)
13:345
Infectious diseases of livestock. Oxford Lniversity Press
BonDurant RH,Anderson ML,Blanchard P et al 1990 I Am
Oxford,p550-564
Vet Med As5oc196:1590
Anderson Ml,Palmer CW,ThurmondMCet al 1995 JAm
BonDurant RH,Anderson ML,Stot II,Kennedy PC2007 In:
Vet Med Assoc 207: 1206
Youngquist RS, Threlfall WR (eds) Current therapy in large
Anderson ML,Reynolds JPRowe JD etal 1997Am Vet Med
animal theriogenology, 2nd edn. Saunders-Elsevier,
Assoc210:1169
StLouis,MO,p 413-416
Anderson ML,Andrianarivo AG,ConradPA 2000Anim
Borchardt KA,Norman BB,Thomas MW,1larmonWM 1992
Reprod Sci 417:60-61
VetMed87:104
Anon 1979(Epidemiology Unit,Central Veterinary
Borel N,Thoma R,Spaeni Peial2006Vet Pathol 43:702
Laboratory,Weybridge, Surrey.)Vet Rec 105:3
Boughton E, Hopper SA,Gayford PI 1983Vet Rec 112: 87
Anon 1992 Guideline for the diagnosis and control of
BowenRA,Howard TH 1984 AmI Vet Res 45: 1386
Leptospi rdjn infection in cattle.British Cattle Veterinary
Boners R,VandeplasscheM,IlorenA 1964Vlaams
Association,Frampton-on-Sevem,Gloucestershire
Diergeneesk Tijdschr 33: 405
Anon 1997 National Center for Infectious Diseases Centers
Bowen RA,Spears P, Stotz IDeidel GE 1978 |Infect Dis
for Disease Control and Prevention,Atlanta.Available
135:95
onlineat: www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EiD/vol3no2/corbel.html.
Buwen RA,Elsden RP,Seidel GE 1985Am J VetRes 46:7S3
Accessed 21 May 1997
Brinley Morgan WI, Richards RA 1974Vet Rec 94:510
512
Chapter
231
Specific infectious diseases causing infertility and subfertility in cattle
Brinley Morgan WI,MacKinnon Dj 1979 In:Laing IA (ed)
EllisWA 1984-1985In:Proceedings ofthe BritishCatle
Fertility andinfertility in domestic animals,3rd edn.
VeterinaryAssociation,p267-268
BailliereTindall,London,p 171-198
EllisWA,MichnaSW1976VetRec99:430
Brownlie|2005In:ProceedingsoftheBVDVSymposium.
EllisWA,OBrien JI.NeilI SD,Hanna 」1982VetRec110:178
VetLean,PalmerstonNorth,NewZealand,p1-19
EllisWA,ongerJG,Montgomery],CassellsJA 1986VeRec
Bulgin MS 1983JAm Vet MedAssoc182:116
118:11
CaldowG,Gray D 2004 In:Andrews AH （ed)Bovinemedi-
Estes PC,BrynerIHI,O'Berry PA1966CornellVet55:610
cine,2ndedn.Blackwell Science Oxford，p577-593
FarstadW,Krogenaes A.FriisNF1996Norsk
Campero CM,Anderson ML,Conosciuto Get al 1998VetRec
Veterinaertidsskr 108:159
143:228
Felleisen RSI.Lambelet N,Bachmann Petal 1998 I Clin
Chen Cl,King DPBlanchard MT'et al 2007Vet Microbiol
Microbiol36:513-519
120:320
Fish NA,Rosendahl S,Miller RB 1985 CanVet I 26:13
Choromanski LBlock W 2000 Parasitol Res 86:851-853
Fox EWHobbsD,StinsonI,Rogers GM 1995 Bovine Pract
Christensen HR,Clark BLPaisousun IM 1977Aust Vet
29:153-155
53:132-134
FrankAH,Bryner JH 1953ProcUSLivestock SanitaryAssoc
ClarkRG.FenwickSG,Nicol CMetal2004 NZVet]52:26
57:165
Clarke BL1971Aust Ve1J47:103
FrankAH,Bryner JH,O'BerryPA 1964Am IVet Res 25:988
Clarke BL.Parsonson IM,Dufty IH 1974 AustVet150:189
Gall D,NielsenK2004RevSci Tec Off Int Epizoot23:989
ClarkeBL,Dufty JH,Parsonson IM 1983a Aust Vet| 60:178
Garcia MM,Lutze-Wallace CL,Denes AS 1995)Bacleriol
Clarke BL,Dufty H,Parsonson IM 1983b Aust Vet60:
177:1976
71-74
Garcia-Yoldi D,MarinCM,deMiguelM] etal 2006Clin
CopelandS,Clarke S,Krohn Getal1994 CanVet]35:388
Chem 52:779
Corbel Ml,BrewerRA,SmithRA1986VetRec118:695
Gilbert RO,OettleEE 1990JSAfrVetAssoc61:41
CorteseVS 1999aProcAmAss0cBovinePraci32:167
Grahn RA.BonDurant RH,vanHoosear KA et al2005Vet
CorteseVS1999b BovineProc32:167
Parasitol 127:33
Counter DE 1984-1985In:Proceedingsof theBritish Catle
Grooms DL2004 VetClin NorthAmFood Anim Pract20:5
Veterinary Association,p269
GroomsDL,Bolin CA2005Vet ClinNorthAm FoodAnim
DEFRA2007About bluetongue.Availableonline at:www.
Pract21:463
defra.gov.uk/animalh/diseases/notifiable/bluetongue/
Grooms DL,Brock KV,PateJL.DayML1998Theriogenology
about/index.htm.Accessed21 October 2007
49:595
DeGraves FI.Gao D,Hehnen H-Retal 2003 ClinMicrobiol
Grotelueschen DM,Cheney JHudson DB1994
41:1726
Theriogenology 42:165
DeGravesFl,KimT,Jee]et al 2004Infect Immun72:2538
Hall GA,JonesPW1977|CompPatholS7:53
Dekeyser」1984In:Butzler]-P(ed)Campylobacterinfection
Hall MR,Kvasnicka WG,Hanks Det al 1993Agri-Practice
in man and animals.CRC Press Boca Raton,Lp 181-192
14:29
Deleyser PI 1986 In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapyin
HassanNl,Dokhan KZ2004AssiutVetMed J50:148
theriogenology.2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,
Hellstrom JS 1978Thesis,Massey LIniversity
p263-266
HendersonJPBall HJ1999VetRec145:374
Dennett DP,ReeceRLBarasa JO,Johnson RH 1974 Aust
HigginsRj.HarbourneJFLittleTWA et al 19soVet Rec
VeL|50:427
107:307
De Vargas AC,Costa MM,Vainstein MHet al 2002Curr
Hill FI,Reichel MP,McCoyRJ,Tisdall D2007NZVet]
Microbiol45:111
55:45
Diamond LS1983In:Jensen IB(ed)ln vitro cultivation of
Hinton MH1973Vet Rec93:162
protozoan parasiies.CRCPress,Boca Raton,FLp 65-109
Ho MSY,Conrad PA,Conrad PIetal 1994 1 ClinMicrobiol
Doig PA,Ruhnke HL,PalmerNCet al 1979 Can I Comp Med
32:98
44:252
HoerleinAB1980 In:MorrowDA（ed)Currenttherapy in
Dubey JP 2005 Vet Clin North Am 21:473
theriogenology.2nd edn.WB SaundersPhiladelphia,
DubeyJPLindsay DS1996JVet Parasitol10:99
Dubey JP,Carpenter JL,Speer CA et al 1988] AmVet Med
Houe H 1992 ResVet Sci53:320-323
As5oc192:1269-1285
Houe Hl,Pedersen KM,MeylingA1993PrevVet Med 15:117
Dufernez Walker RL,Noel Cet al 2007] Eukaryot
Howard TH 1986 In:Morruw DA (ed) Current therapy in
Microbiol54:161
theriogenology.2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,
Dufty JH1 1967AustVet|43:433
p258
Dufty IHl,Clarke BL,Monsborough M] 1975Aust VetI51:
HubbertWI,Booth GD,BoltonWD elal1973 Cornell Vet
294-297
63:291
EaglesomeMD,GarciaMM1992VetBull62:743
Huck RA,Lamont PH1979In:Fertility and infertility in
Eaglesome MD,GarciaMM,Hawkins CE,Alexander FCM
domestic animals.BailliereTindall London,p 160
1986Vet Rec119:299
HudsonDB,Ball Lel al 1993aTheriogenology39:929
EllisWA 1984 Prev Vet Med 2:411
HudsonDB,Balletal1993bTheriogenology39:937
513
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Hudson JR1949Proc14thIntVe1Cong2(3):487
Kirschner L,McGuireT1957Cited in Oertey1999
Hum S1996 In:Newell DG,KetleyJM,Feldman RA(eds)
Kiupel HL,Prehn1 198GArch ExpVetMed 40:164
Campylobacters,helicobacters and related organisms.
KnudisonWu,Kibride CA 1992[Vet Diagn Inves14:18]
Plenum Press,New York,p 355-358
Kvasnicka WG,Taylor REL,Huang J-Cet al 1989
HumS,Stephens LR,QuinnA 1991 Aust Vet68:272
Theriogenology 3l:936
Hum S,Brunner J. Gardiner B1993Aust Vet]70:386
Lander KP 1990 BrVet J146:334
Hum S,Quinn A,Kennedy D 1994 Aust Vet ]71:140
Langford EV 1975CanJ CompMed 39:133
Ium S,QuinnK,Brunner],OnSLW1997AustVet]75:827
Laven RA,Fountain D,Chianini F2003 CattlePract 1l:401
Hum S,KessellA,DjordjevicS etal2000AustVet]78:744
LevettPN2001 Clin Microbiol Rev14:296
IronsPC,Trichard CJV,SchuleAP2004In:Coetzer JAW,
l.ivingstonM,LongbottomD2006Vet |172:3
Tustin RC(eds） Infectious diseases of livestock.Oxford
MaanAR,Samuel NS,ManHetal2005VetItalia40:489
University Press,Oxford,p2076-2082
McAllister MM,Dubey IPLindsay DS et al 1998Int]
Janzen ED,CatesWE,BarthA etal 1981 Can Vet]22:361
Parasitol28:1473
Jardine IE,Last RD 1995 OnderstepoortVet Res 62207
McAllister MM,Bjorkman C.Anderson-Sprccher Retal 2000
JesusVLT;Pereira MIS,Alves PAM,Fonseca AH 20D3 Rev Bras
IAmVet MedAssoc217:881
Reprod Anim27:547-548
McClurkinAW,LitledikeET,Cudlip RCetal 1984 Can
Jones GEDonn AMachell etal 199s In:Proceedings of the
J CompMedVet Sci 48:156
Ninth Intemational Symposium on HumanChlamydial
McEnteeK1990 Reproductive pathology of domestic
Infection,p446-449
mammals.Academic Press,San Diego,CA
JubbKVF, Kennedy PC,Palmer N 1993Pathology of domies-
McFadden A,Heuer C,lackson Retal 2004NZVet J53:45
licanimals,4th edn.Acadenic Press,San Diego,CA,vol 3
McGowan MR,Kirkland PD,Richards SG,Lituejohns IR
KaneeneIB.CoePH,Cibson CDetal1987Theriogenology
1993VetRec133:39
27:737
Mclnnes LMRyan LM,O'Handley Retal2006Vet Parasitol
Kapoor PK,Garg DN,Mahajan SK 1989Theriogenology32:
142:207
683-691
MacLaren APC,Agumbah GIP1988 BrVetJ 144:29
Kelling CL 2007 In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR (eds)
MacLaren APC,Wright CL1977Vet Rec 101:463
Current therapy in large animal theriogenology,2nd edn.
McMillen L,LewAE2006VetParasitol 141204
Sannders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO,p399-408
McMillenL,FordyceG,DooganVI,LewAE2006Clin
Kelling Cl,Schipper IA,Strum GEet al 1973 Cornell Vet
Microbiol 44:938
63:383
Makaya PV,MunjeriN,Pfukenyi D 2002ZimbabweVet|33:1
Kendrick IW1971JAmVetMed Assoc163:852
MarkusMB,van derLugtI,Dubey IP2004In:Coetzer JAW
KendrickIW1975In:ProceedingsoftheAmerican
Tustin RC(ed) Infectious diseases of livestock.Oxford
Association ofVeterinary LaboratoryDiagnosticians,p331
Lniversity Press,Oxford,p360-375
KendrickIW,McEnteeK1967ConellVet57:3
Marshall RB,Chereshsky A 1996Surveillance(Wellington)
Kennedy PC,MillerRB 1993 In:Jubb IVE,Kennedy PC.
23:27
Palmer N(eds)Pathology of domestic animals,4th edn.
MenardA,ClercM,Subtil Aetal 2006IMedMicrobiol55:
Academic Press,San Diego,p 349-444
471
Khars RF 1986In:Morrow DA(ed) Current therapy in the-
MertensPPC,Mellor PS2003 StateVet13:18
riogenology.2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia.p250
Meyling AJensenAM 1988VetMicrobiol17:97
KingS1991 Aust Vet I:68:307
MilerJM1991VetMed86:95
KingDP,ChenCI,BlanchardMTetal2005J ClinMicrobiol
Miller JM,van derMaatenMI 1984AmVetRes45:790
43:604
MillerJM,van der Maaten MI1986AmVetRes47:223
Kirl jH,Glenn K,Ruiz L,Smith E 1997AmVetMed Assuc
Miller JM,van derMaatenMI1987AmVet Res 48:1555
211:1036
Miller IM,Whetstone CA,van derMaaten MJ1991AmJ Vet
KirkbrideCA 1987VetClinNorthAm FoodAnim Praci 3:575
Res52:458
Kirkbride CA 1990a In:Kirkbride CA(ed)Laboratory diag-
Ministry ofAgriculture,Fisheries andFood1986Manualof
nosisof livestock abortion,3rd edn.lowa State University
veterinaryparasitologicaltechniques,ReferenceBook418.
Press, Ames, IA, p 91
HMSO.London
Kirkbride CA 1990b In:Kirkbride CA (ed) Laboratory diag-
MoennigV,LeissB 1995Vet Clin NorthAm Food AnimPract
nosisoflivestocl abortion,3rd edn.lowa StateLniversity
11:477
Press,Ames, IA.p 17
MoorthyARS1985VetRec116:159
Kirlbride CA 1990c In: Kirlbride CA (ed) Laboratory diag
Moslwa B,PastusiakK,Bien ],Cabaj W2007Parasitol Res
nosis olivestock abortion,3rdedn.owa StateUniversity
100:633
Press,Ames,IA,p 136
Mukufhi N,onsPC,Michel A,PetaF2003Theriogenology
KirkbrideCA1992JVetDiagnInvest:175
60:1269
KirkbrideCA,Bicknell ElReed DEetal 1973|AmVetMed
Murray RD1990VetRec127:543
Ass0c162:556
Murray RD1992VetAnnu32:259
Kirkland PD,Richards SG,Rothwell IT,Stanley DF I991 Vet
NakamuraRM,Walt MLBennett RH 1977 Theriogenology
ReC128:587
7:351
514
Chapter
231
Specificinfectious diseases causing infertility and subfertilityin cattle
NetletonPF1986VetAnn26:90
Revell SG,ChaseyD,DrewTW,EdwardsS1988VetR
Newell DG,Duim B,van Bergen MAP etal 2000 Caule Pract
123:122
8:411
RiedmullerL 1928Zentralbl Bakteriol (OrigA) 108:103
Nicholas RA,AylingRD 2003Res Vet Sci 74:105
Roberts SI1971 Bovine obstetrics andgenital diseases,2nd
NicolettiP1986In:MorrowDA(ed)Current therapy in
edn.Published by te author,Woodstock,VT
theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,
Roberis SI 1986Bovineobstetricsandgenital diseases,3rd
p271-274
edn.Published by the authorIthaca,NY
Nielsen K,CherwonogrodzkyIW,Duncan JR,Bundle DR
RobinsonA2003Guidelinesforcoordinatedhuman
1989AmJVetRes50:5
andanimal brucellosis surveillance.FAOAgriculture
NielsenK, Kelly L, Gall D et al 1996PrevVet Med26: 17-32
Department,Rome
Obendorf DL,Murray N,Veldhuis Get al 1995 AustVet ]72:
RochaA,Mackinnon D,MandlhateF1986Theriogenology
117
25:305
Ocampo-Sosa AA,Aguero-Balbin J. Garcia-Lobo IM 2005Vet
Roeder PL,Jeffrey M,Cranwell MP 1986Vet Rec118:24
Microbiol110:41
Romero 11,Perez E,Frankena K 2004 Vet Parasitol 123:149
Oertley D 1999Newsl SocDairy CatileVet(NZVA)16:3,17:5
RoweRE SmithiesLK197S BovinePract 10:102
OIE2004Manual of diagnostictests andvaccinesforterres-
RueggPl,MarteniukIV,Kaneene B1988]AmVeMed
trial animals 2004.OIE,Paris,Ch 2.3.6
As50c193:941
OLeary S.Sheahan M,Sweeney T2006ResVet Sci 81:170
SaedOM,Al-Aubaidi JM1983Cornell Vet73:125
OosthuizenR1999ProcSocSheepBeefVetNZVA30:
SamuelsonID,WinterA]1977]1nfectDis116:581
167-170
Srhnackel JA,Wallare BI.et al 1990Agri-Practice 10:1I
Osburn BI 1994 Vet ClinNorth AmFood Anim Pract 10:547
SchonmannMl,BonDurant RHI et al 1994Vet Rec134:620
Osburn BI,McGowanB, Heron Bet al 1981 AmJVetRes
Schulze BagonAullerWHozel  2006 Clin
42:884
Microbiol442019
OtoguroK,Oiwa R,wai Yet al 1988Antibiot:41:461
Sthurig CG,Duncan JR,Winter A]1978]1nfect Dis 138:463
Parker S,LunZ-R,GajadharA2001JVet Diagn lnvest
SchutteAP1969Thesisniversity of Chent.Citedin
13:508
Dekeyser 1986
ParsonsonIM,SnowdonWA 1975AustVet 151:365
Schweighardt H,Kaltenbock B,Lauermann E,Pechan P1985
Parsonson IM,Clark Bl,Dufty 11 1976I Comp Pathol 86:
WienTierarztlMonatsschr72:209-214
59-66
Shewen PG 1986 In:MorrowDA (ed) Current therapy in
PatersonRM,Hill JF Shiel MI,Humphrey ID 1984 Aust Vet
theriogenology.2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,p279
161:301
Shin SL LeinDH,PattenVH,Ruhnke HL 19S8
Pepin GA 1983 VelAnnu23:79
Theriogenology29:577
Peter D 1997 In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR (eds) Current
SkirrowSZ1987)AmVetMedAss0c191:553
therapy in large aninal theriogenology,2ndedn.
SkirrowSZ.BonDurant RH 1988Vet Bull58:591
Saunders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO,p355-363
Skirrow SZ.BonDurant RH 1990JAmVet MedAssoc
PfeifferDu,Wichtel IWReichel MPetal1998ProcSoc
196:885
Dairy CattleVetNZVA 15:279
SkirrowSZ,BonDurantRH,Farleyetal1985]AmVetMed
Philpot M1968aVet Rec 82:458
Ass0c187:405
Philpott M1 1968bVe1 Rec 82:424
Slee KI, Stephens LR1985Vet Rec 116:215
Pillars RB,Gr0oms DL2002AmJVetRes 63:499-505
Smith RE 1990 In:Kirkbride CA(ed) Laboratory diagnosis
PlastridgeWN,Stula EFWilliamsLF 1964AmIVet Res
oflivestock abortion,3rd edn.lowa State University Press,
25:710
Ames,1A,p66-69
PrescottJENicholsonVM 1988CanVetRes52:286
Ssentongo YK,JohnsonRH,SmithJR1980AustVet56:272
Priichard GC2001InPract23:542-549
Stalheim OH,HubbertWI,FoleyIW1974Am/VetRes
Priichard GC2006CatulePract14:175-179
37:879
Radostits OM,Gay CC.Ilinchcliff KW,ConstablePD2007
Stephens LR,Slee K],Poulon Petal 1986Aust Vet63:182
Veterinary medicine1oth edn.WB Saunders,Oxford
Stoessel FR,1aberkornSEM 1978 GacVet40:330
RadwanGS,BrockKV.HoganJSet al 1995 VetMicrobiol44:
Storz J 1971 In:Chlamydia and chlamydia-induced diseases.
77-91
Charles CThomas.Springfield,IL,p 146-154
RaeDO,Crews]2006Vet ClinNorth AmFood AnimPract
StorzJ,MckercherDG1962ZblVetMed9:411,520
22:595
Storz] Caroll El.Ball L,Faulkner LC1968AmIVetRes
RaeDO,Chenoweth PI,Brown MBet al 1993
29:549
Theriogenology 40:497
Storzl,Carroll El.StephensonEH-etal1976Am]VetRes37:
Rae DO,Crews IE,Greiner EC,Donovan GA2004
Theriogenology Gl;605
Staub OC,Bohm HO1964Arch GesVirusforsch 14:
ReichelMP,Ellis JT2002 NZVeL]50:86
272-275
Reitt K,HilbeM,VoegtinAelal2007 JVet Med A54:15
Stuart FA,Corbel MIRichardson Cefal 1990 BrVet J146:57
Renshaw RW,Ray R,Dubovi EI 2000 | Vei Diagn Invest
Szalay D,Hajos I,Glavis R,Takacs 1994Magy Allatorv
12:184
Lapja49:149
515
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Tanyi 1,Bajmocy E,Fazekas B,Kaszanyizky E] 1983AciaVet
Virakula P,FagbubgmML,Joo HS,MeylingA1993
Hlung 31:135
Theriogenology29;441
TaylorMA,MarshalI RN,StackM1994BrVet150:73
WagnerWC,DuunO.VanVleckLD1965CornellVe155209
TenterAM.ShirleyMW1999IntIParasitol29:1189
WalkerRL2007In:Youngquist RS,ThrelfallWR(ed)
TheodoridisA1978 OnderstepoortIVetRes 45:187
ThiermannAB1982AmIVetRes43:780
Saunders-Elsevier,St Louis,MO,p417-419
ThobokweG,Heuer C,Hayes DP2004 NZVet J52:394
WapenaarW，enkinsMC,OHlandleyRM et al 2006
ThompsonSA,Blaser MI 2000 In:Nachamkin I,Blaser M]
Parasitol 92:1270
(eds) Campylobacter,2ndedn.American Society for
Ward GM,Roberts S,McEnteeK,GillespieH1969 Cornell
Microbiology,Washington,DC,p321-347
Vet59:525-538
Thornton R1992 Surveillance(Wellington)19:24
WardACS,Jaworsli MD,EddowM,Corbeil LB1995Can
Thornton R,Thompson El,Dubey IP 1991NZVet I39:129
JVet Res 59:173
TreesAl,WilliamsDIL2003]Parasitol89:S198-201
WellsB111996ZimbabweVetJ27:9
Trichard CI.JacobszEP1985Onderstepoort IVetRes52:105
Weston IF200s In:ParkinsonT),Vermuntll,MalmoJ （ed)
VanRensburgSW1953BrVetI109:226
Diseases of canleinAustralasiaVeLearn,Palmerston
VandeplasscheM,Florent A,Bouters Retal 1963 C R Rech
North,New Zealand
Inst EncourRech Sci IndustAgric29:1-90
Wilesmith IW1978Vet Rec103:149
VasquesLA,Ball L,Bennett BWetal 1983AmIVet Res
Williams BM,ShrceveBl,Herbert CN1977VetRec100:382
44:1553
WinterA,Samuelson JD,ElkanaMA1967IAmVetMed
VeterinaryDingnosis Information Service1977-2006
Assoc150:499
Annual report booklets (1977-1998).Available online at:
WienbrinkMM,SchoonHABispingW,BinderA1993a
www.defra.gov.ul/vla/reports/docs/rep_vida_cattle95_02.
ReprodDomest Anim28:129
pdfarndwww.defra.gov.ul/vla/reports/docs/rep_vida_
WittenbrinkMM,SchoonHA,Schuon D et al 1993b
catule99_06.pdf
Zentralbl Veterinarmed B40:437-450
VeterinaryLaboratoriesAgency2006VeterinarySurveillance
WoudaW,DijkstraTh,KramerAMH etal 1999Int]Parasitol
Report-VIDA.Available online at:www.defra.gov.uk/
29:1677
corporate/vla/science/documents/science-vida-cattle-2006.
WrightPF Nilsson E,Van Rooij EMA etal1993 RevSci Tec
pdf.Accessed24October2007
OffInt Epiz0ot12:435-450
VIDA2005VeterinaryInvestigationSurveillanceReport for
Yaeger MI.Holler LD 2007In:Youngquist RS Threlfall WR
2005.Veterinary LaboratoryAgency,Weybridge,Surrey
(eds) Current therapy in large animal theriogenology,
Villar JA.SpinaEM 1982GacVet44:647
2nd edn.Sainders-Elsevier StLouis,MO,p389-399
516
24
Chapter
TimParkinson and
DavidBarrett
Veterinary control of herd fertility
Inthedairy herd,themain sourceofincome is
theworldthatareheavilyurbanized,such asmuch
fromthe sale ofmilk,although cross-bred beef
ofEuropeandNorthAmericaandelsewherearound
calves,male dairy calves and surplus dairy heifers
the major conurbations,thereis areadymarketfor
may also provide an additional source of income. In
the supply and sale ofliquid milk.Such systems
beef sucklerherds,thecalfis theprincipal sourceof
traditionallyrelyon thefeedingoflargeamounts
income. In both types of farming enterprise, some
of cerealsby-products of thehuman food industry
income will alsobe generated from the sale of cull
(e.g.sugar beet pulp) and other concentrate feeds,
cows;however, this is likely to result in a net loss
resulting in high-input-high-output dairying sys-
since the cost of a replacement,either purchased
tems.Nevertheless,even in these semi-intensive
or reared on the farm,will be greater. Poor fertility
dairy areas,high cereal prices are now forcing pro-
costs the farming enterprise money.For example, a
ducerstoworkhard tomaximizetheutilization of
cowwith avulvardischarge,whichisinvariablydue
home-grown forages.In otherregions of theworld,
to endometritis,costs137.37;acowwithretained
such as New Zealand and parts ofAustralia,South
fetal membranes costs 265.41;orthe directcost
America and East Asia,the majority of milk pro-
ofveterinary ireatment for acowin whichoestrus
duced is used for processing and the manufacture of
hasnotbeenobservedisup to19.04(Esslemont
milkproducts.Sincecereal prices arehigh in com-
2003).In theUK36.5%ofcows areculled for sub-
parison to grass-based nutrients in these areas,and
fertility/infertility（Esslemont&Kossaibati 1997)
theclimatefavoursrapidpasturegrowth,therehas
The prevalence and cost of infertility are discussed
been the development ofrelatively low-input pasto-
inChapter22.
ral dairying systems.
In dealingwith fertilityand infertilityofcattle,
In this chapter,veterinary involvement in the con-
the veterinarian has two tasks to perform.Firstly,
trol of herdfertility will be described and discussed.
s/hemaybeaskedtoinvestigateanddetermine
This will depend upon a numberof factors:first,the
the cause ofinfertility in individual animals or in
production system used; second,the management
the herd;secondly,s/he may berequired to assist
policy of thelivestock unit;third,the expectations
inthemaintenanceofoptimumfertilitysothatthe
of the management of the livestock unit, and
livestockenterprisefunctionsasefficientlyandprof-
itablyaspossible.Thelatterwillbedependent on
value to the enterprise. In addition to the control
thebreeding strategy of the enterprise,whichinturn
offertilityindairyherdsbothpastoral-basedand
will be influenced significantly by the part of the
high-input-high-output and combinations of both,
worldwhere theenterpriseexists and thedemands
thefertilitycontrolofbeefsucklerherdswill alsobe
placed on theproduction system.In thoseparts of
considered.
517
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Normal expectations of fertility
Table24.2Relationshipbetweenmilkyieldandfertility in
American Holstein Eows (Nebel &McGilliard 1993)
Milkyieldper
Numberof
First Al pregnancy
Ithasbeenlongrecognized that,although acowthat
lactation (kg)
herds
rate (%)
appears to have an apparently structurally and func-
tionallynormalreproductivesystem isinseminated
6364-6818
452
52
or served athecorrect time,withertileemenhe
7727-8181
678
44
may fail to become pregnant.The herd manager
8638-9090
479
43
should identify thisin thefirst instance when the
cow reurns io oestrus. The reason for a cow failing
9545-10000
202
40
>10454
53
tocalve toaparticular insemination iseither that
38
therehasbeenfailureoffertilizationorthatfertiliza-
tionhasoccurredbuttheembryoorfetushasdiedat
some stage during gestation.
Withtheintensiveselectionofdairycowsfor
Table 24.3Trends in thecalving rate tofirst service in lrish
higher and higher mill production, there is clear
dairyherdson theDairyManagement Informationsystem
evidencefrom manypartsof theworld thatfertil-
(Dairy MIS)from 1991-96(fromO'Farrell&Crilly 1999)
ity is in decline. As can be seen in Table 24.1,in
Year
Calving rate(%)
No.ofcows
theUSAovera40-yearperiod from1955-1995
the pregnancy rate to each artificial insemination
1991
53.0
2305
(Al) in cows has declined from 60% to 40% as
1992
51.3
2998
yieldshave quadrupled,whereasheiferfertility has
1993
51.6
3284
improvedoverthesametimecourse,suggestingthat
1994
48.9
3301
thedeclineisrelatedtothedemandsoflactation
1995
49.7
3299
rather than to sone inherent predisposing genetic
1996
48.8
3164
factor.A similarcorrelationbetween milkyield and
pregnancy rates is shown in the study of Nebel&
McGilliard (1993)alsofromtheUSA(Table24.2)
In a study over a 6-year period involving34 dairy
from55.6%to39.7%.When those that were not
herdsinIreland,theuse oflogisticregressionanaly-
treated for reproductive disorders were compared,
sis showed that there was a consistent and signif-
the comparable values had declined from 65.4%t0
icant (p<0.01) change in calving rates over time,
42.9% (Royal et al 2000). During this same time,
amounting to an estimated decline of 0.54% per
the average annual milk yield in the UK increased
annum (Table 24.3).Similarly in the UK,a study
from 4270kg to5515kg, which has been associated
comparing the fertility of commercial dairy herds
withtheintroductionofhighgeneticmerit North
from1975-1982and1995-1998showed thatthe
AmericanHolsteins.Significantly,in1975Holsteins
calving rate to first service for all cows declined
comprised 0%of thecowsin dairy herds,compared
with80%in1995.Althoughthereislinledoubt
that there is a negativecorrelationbetweencalving
rate andmilkyield,heproportionof thiseffectdue
Table24.1Fertilityof dairycows in theUSAovera
to genetics and that due to environmental factors
40-year period as measured bypregnancyrates toAl
such as nutrition, and other aspecis of cattle man-
(Wiltbank1998)
agement is disputed (McGuirk 2004).Nevertheless
Year
Pregnancy rate
Milkyieldper
the major Holstein-Friesian breeding companies
per insemination(%)
lactation (kg)
are now increasingly concentratingon health traits
focusedoncowlongevity,aswellasfertilityintheir
Lactatingcows
Heifers
bull selection.Many dairy farmers recognize that
1955
60
66
2300
theyno longer need tobreed cows with the genetic
capacity to produce higher yields and are looking
1975
50
65
5000
for cowsbetter suited totieirindividual production
1995
40
70
9100
systems.
518
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
chromosome abnormalities.Chromosomeabnor-
Fertilization failureand
malitiescan occurbecauseofpolyspermicfertiliza-
embryonic loss
tion,failure to extrude one orboth polarbodies,
ferilizationof the oocyteand thepolarbody at the
Since Corner's(1923) discovery ofthephenome-
firstcleavagedivision orfailureatmeiosis.Whileit
non of death of conceptuses in sows,it has been
hasbeen clearlydemonstrated that superovulated
establishedthatthereis an incidenceof20-50%
oocytes quite frequently have cytogenetic abnor-
embryonic and fetal death in apparenily normal
malities(up to one-third)due topolyspermic fer-
healthy animals of all domestic species,including
tilization and/ormitoticactivityof thepolarbody
cattle.Extensive studies have shown that there area
(King 1985), those derived from a single ovulation
numberof factorsthatmaycause embryonicdeath
donot.Work onvirgin and‘repeat breeder'heifers
buttheaetiologyofalargepartoftheproblem
identifiedtwoanimalsoutofatotalof42fromthe
remains unexplained.The existence of this unex-
latter group that had 1/29 gene translocations,but
plainedmoietyinratherconstant degreeinall spe-
the remainder had normal karyotypes (Gustafsson
ciesled Hanly(1961)to suggest thatitwas dueto
et al 1985).Gayerie deAbreu et al(1984) reported
amoreuniversallyactivefactorthananyofthose
that 9% of cow embryos had abnormal karyotypes
so far investigated.Bishop（1964)proposed that,
comparedwith6%inheifers.
because embryonic loss appeared to be a general
Thereislittleevidencethatinherentgeneticabnor
featureofmammalian reproduction,itprobably
malitiesarethemain cause ofpregnancylossin cat
conferred some biological advantage that might
tle,sincetheworkinhumans,fromwhichthetheory
allow ihe elimination of undesirable geneticmate-
has been extrapolated,has been done on aborted
rial at a low biological cost.If this were so, then
human fetuses,not embryos (Landetal 1983)
a considerable part of embryonic death should be
Furthermore,thereisnowgood evidence that it is
regarded as a normal occurrence and thus unavoid-
possible to select mice genetically for a high rate of
able. This concept of inevitable conceptual loss
embryo survival (Bradford 1969),and that mamma-
implies a limit to the chanceof a successful out-
lian gametogenesis and syngaimy do not necessar-
come to each mating orinsemination,which will
ily lead to a high incidence of mortal damage (Land
et al 1983). Perhaps the genetic selection of domes-
failure.
tic species for high embryonic survival rates,rather
Thisconceptoftheinevitabilityofembryonicloss,
than other genetic traits such asmilkyield andqual.
thus limiting the successful outcome of each ser-
ityin.dairycows orfoodconversion,mightindeed
viceor insemination,hasbeen generally accepted.
beaprofitableway toincreasetheoverall ferility
Chromosome abnormalitiesareknowntobeoneof
rate.As discussed above,fertility traits are increas-
themajor causesof fetal deathinhumans(Simpson
inglybeingincludedin thegeneticselection of the
1980).Theirinvolvementinembryonicdeath in
major cattle breeds.
cattle was shown some years ago by McFeely&
There is increasing evidence that the major rea-
Rajakoski (1968),who found tetraploid cells in
sonforembryoniclossis spontaneous asynchrony
one ofeight bovine blastocysts at 12-16 days of
between dam and embryo,which would appear
age.When they occur,it is likely that there will be
tobelargelymediated by endogenous ovarian ste-
early loss of the embryo with return to service; in
roids,aswas firstidentified byWilmut et al (1985).
polytocous speciestherewill beareduced litter size.
Adequate concentrations of progesterone have been
Chromosome abnormalities are either inherited
shown to be important in the normal temporal
or arise de novo during gametogenesis, fertiliza-
development of the embryo by regulating the provi-
tion and early cleavage of the embryo (Hamerton
sionofnutrientsandgrowth factorsintheuterus in
1971) (see Ch. 4).During gametogenesis, abnor-
early pregnancy (Starbuck et al 1999).
mal meiosis can produce gametes with unbalanced
Howcan theincidenceofembryoniclossbedeter
chromosomecomposition,suchasduplicationand
mined？If fertilization occurs,the developing con
deletionofsegmentsofchromosome,wholechro-
ceptuspreventsthereturn to oestrus byinhibiting
mosomesorthefailureofthereduction division.
the production or release of endogenous luteolysin
Although abnormal, these gametes are capable of
(see Ch.3）.Ifthe embryo dies before 13 days of age
participationinfertilizationsothattheembryohas
(thetimeof thematernal recognition of pregnancy;
519
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
see Ch. 3), then the cow will return to oesiris al
The development of embryo transfer techniques
the normal interoestrous interval.If the embryo
for the non-sygical flushing of embryos (see
dies after this age, then the interoestrous interval
Ch. 35) has enabled a large number of studies to
will be exiended beyond the generally accepted fig-
be performed (Sreenan & Diskin 1983, Roche et al
ure of 18-24 days.Therefore, it is impossible to dif
1985). Using these methods,it is possible to flush
ferentiate,by observing the occurrence of a return
cows and heifers repeatedly at varying time inter
to oestrus, between fertilization failure and embry-
vals after insemination to recover the embryos.
onic death before 13 days of age. This is particu-
These can be subjected to critical morphologi
larly important,since it has been postulated that
cal examination, thus allowing differentiation
most embryos die before 15 days of age (Boyd
between unfertilized oocytes, normal embryos and
et al 1969, Ayalon 1972). For many years, the only
abnormal and dead embryos.Furthermore, doubts
method available for the study of embryonic deau
about embryo viability can also be confirmed by
was slaughter at known time intervals after service or
in vitro culture.
insemination,followed hyflushing of uterine tubes
There are twomain causes ofembryonic death
and horns.Insuch studies,usingfirst-serviceheifers,
-genetic and environmental factors (Boyd 1965).
Bearden et al (1956) reported a fertilization fail-
These have beenreviewed indetail by Ayalon
ure of only 3.4% and an embryonic Ioss up to
(1978),who subdivided them furthier into genetic
35 days of 10.5%; in repeat breeder heifers, Tanabe
factors (both intrinsic and extrinsic), general
&Almquist (1953) reported a fertilization fail-
and local environmental factors(nutrition of the
ure of 40.8% and an embryonic loss of 28.7%. In
cow,age of the dam,ambient temperaiure,geni
normal fertile cows,Ayalon （1978)and Boyd et al
tal uract infection), and hormonal asynchrony and
(1969) found ferilization failure rates of 17% and
imbalance.
15% and embryonic loss rates up to 35 days of
Thus, even in apparently reproductively normal
14% and 15%,respectively.In repeat breeder cows
cows,there arebiological constraints on the number
similar figures for these two categories were 39.7%
of oocytes that become fertilized and the number of
and39.2%(Tanabe&Casida 1949) and29% and
embryos and fetuses that survive,resulting in the
36%[Ayalon 1978],respectively.Ina large survey
birth of a normal live calf at term.Thus,there are
of 4286 randomly selected cows the greatest inci
other reasons why the reproductive performance
dence ofembryonicloss (14.9%) occurred belween
ofan individual cow,and collectively the herd,
30 and 60 days; at 60-90 days it was 5.5% and at
are suboptimal and can be improved. Ii should be
90-120 days it was 2.8% (Barrett et al 1948).In a
one of the rolesofthe veterinarian to cnsure,as
study using milk progesterone determinations,it
far as possible,that an individual cow's reprodue
was found that the incidence of fertilization failure,
tive performance,and thal of the herd of which
together with conceptual loss up to 20 days after
itis a member,are maintained at their required
artificial insemination, was almost equal to fetal
optimum level.
loss between 20 and 80 days(Pupe&Hodgeson
Jones 1975).
There is good evidence that the critical period
Investigation of the individual
for embryonic demise is on day 7 after fertiliza-
subfertile cow
tion whien themorula develops into theblastocyst
(Ayalon 1973)and that embryonic loss at this time
is greater in repeat breeder cows (Ayalon 1978). In
Before discussing the investigation of the indi-
a review using composite data for heifers from nine
vidual subfertile cow, it is inportant to define the
publications,Sreenan & Diskin (19s6) calculated
meaning of the term.This has already been dis-
the mean fertilization rate to be 88%; for cows from
cussed in Chapter 22, but it is worthwhile repeat-
four sources themean fertilization ratewas 9o%.The
ing it here.A fertile cow is one that produces a calf
same authors calculated the mean embryonic death
at a regular preferred interval,which will be deter-
rate using data from nine sources involving 468 heif-
mined by the management policy for the herd. It
ers and cows; the percentage pregnant 2-5 days after
must be stressed that acow must calve at a reason-
artificial inseinination was85%,between 11and 13
abletime interval to ensure thatmilkyield does not
days it was73% and for 25-42 days it was 67%.
decline to an unacceptable and uneconomiclevel.
520
Chapter
124
Veterinary control of herd fertility
Other factorswill have an influence on therequired
Clinical examination
frequency of calving.Ihese include milk yield, vari
A good general clinical examination should be
ations in milkprices and therequirements to calve
undertaken with assessment ofbody condition score
al a specific season of the year (this is particularly
and possibly live weight (particularly important in
important inpastoral dairying and suckler calf pro-
young heifers). The genital system should then be
duction, see below).A cow that docs not salisfy ihe
management requirement for the herd is deemed
examined in detail and,whiere it is available, trans
rectal ultrasonography should be used.
subfertile and one thiat is incapable of ever produc-
ing a calf is sterile.
· Inspect the vulva, perineum and vestibule for evi-
dence of current or healed lesions and discharges.
History
Examine the base of the tail for signs of rub marks,
and back and flanks for hoof marks, which might
As with any clinical case, before performing a
indicate that the individual has been ridden by
clinical examination it is important to obtain a
other cows.
detailed and accurate history, particularly a breed-
Visualize the vagina using a speculum to examine
ing history of the cow. The following should be
the mucosa and to inspect the mucus.
obtained:
Palpate he cervix per rectum to determine its size
age
andpositioninrelation 1o thepelvic brim,and the
·parity (there are certain conditions that can be
nterine horns to determine ifinvolution is com-
excluded in nulliparous, as opposed to parous,
plete(see Ch.7).Assess the texture of theuterus, the
individuals)
degree of tone, the mobility of the horns and the
·date of last calving. together with information on
absence of adhesions. Image the same structures
the occurrence of dystocia, retained fetal nem-
using transrectal ultrasonography. The absence of
branes or puerperal infection
any signs of pregnancy should be confirmed.
dates of observed oestrus since calving whien insem
·Palpate the uterine tubes for evidence of indura-
ination has not occurred (sometimes referred to as
tion or increased size.
oestrus-not-served)
·Palpate the ovarian bursa for evidence of adhesions.
·presence of any abnormal vulvar discharge
·Palpate the ovaries to note their position, mobility
·dates of services or inseminations, prefer
and size and to identify the presence of any struc-
ably with the identity of the bull and method
tures. Confirim the presence and nature of ovarian
used (i.e. natural service, Al and whether it was
structures using transrectal ultrasonography.
done by the farm staff (DIY Al) or a peripatetic
techinician)
Diagnostic tests
if uncontrolled natural service is used,then the date
when the bull wasfirstallowed access to thecows and
Single blood or milk progesterone assays may be use-
the date when the bull was removed from the cows
ful toidlentify the presence of functional luteal tissue
previous fertility Tecords, particularly calving-
if concentrations are high (4-6 ng/ml in plasma or
conception intervals and services per conception
12-18 ng/ml in milk); sequential assays over several
days arehowever far better in determining iherepro-
details of feeding,management and milkyield; in
suckler cows the number of calves suckled
ductive function of the animal. Specific serological
tests -for example, the mucus agglutination or fluo-
details ofhealth,i.e. signs of milk fever, mastitis
rescent antibody tesisfor Campylobacter fems,or the
ketosis,lameness
investigation of a wide range of infectious agents by
·details of the infectious disease status of the herd
taking single or paired blood samples (see Ch. 23)
(eg. bovine virus diarrhoea virus (BVDV), bovine
can be diagnostic for many diseases. Swabbing for
herpesvirus (BHIV)-1, leptospirosis) and the usc of
subsequent bacterial culture and endometrial biopsy
vaccines
are of limitedvalue.The PSP(phenolsulphonphtha-
details of fertility of other cows or heifers in the
lein) test for tubal patency can also be used to dem-
group or herd.
onstrate occluded uterine tubes (see Ch.22)
521
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Summary of the signs of infertility:
oestrus should occur several days after withdrawal of
the diagnosis, cause and treatment
the device. Alternatively, gonadotrophin-releasing
hormone (GaRHi) analogues suich as buserelin can be
The following summary describes a procedure for
used, witl oestrus occurring in 1-3 weeks.
investigating an infertile animal on the basis of the
clinical history, signs and examination, with an indi-
Presence ofone corpus luteum orrarely
cation of a possible diagnosis of the cause and its
severalcorporalutea
lreatment.These are covered in detail in Chapters
22 and 23.
There are a number of explanations:
pregnancy; if in doubt re-examine later and check
No observed oestrus
records
·non-detected oestrus;improve detection with
Rectal palpation or diagnostic ultrasonography
increased frequency of observation,heat mount
should first establish the presence or absence of
detectors, tail paint or other artificial aids (see
pregnancy， if the individual is pregnant it should
Ch. 22), or induce lueolysis with prostaglan-
be recorded.It is not uncommon in many herds for
din (PG)F or an analogue, followed by artificial
cows reported not to have been in oesurus to be preg-
insemination atobserved oestrus or at afixed time
nant.However,if there is any doubt,orif it might be
·suboestris or‘sileni heat';this is most likely al
pregnancy at a stage that is too early to be detected
first ovulation after calving - treat with PGF or
by the method used, then a re-examination at a later
date isrequired.If here isno pregnancy, then exam
an analogue as above
ination of the ovaries is the next step.In recent years
·persistent corpus luteum (CL); thoroughly pal
the examination of the ovaries and ovarian struc-
pate andultrasound scan theuterlis to confirm the
absence of pregnancy. It may be due to pyometra,.
tures has been revolutionized by the use of trans-
rectal ultrasonography. It is now widely accepted
chronic endometritis,mummified felus or,rarely, a
non-specific cause. Treat with PGF, or an analogue.
that even experienced clinicians cannot accurately
determine all strurtures present on the ovaries, and
Small active ovaries. The identification of follicular
for that reason the diagnostic method of choice is
activity, perhaps together wiih a regressing CL or evi-
undoubtedly ultrasonography.
dence of recent ovulation associated with good uter-
Absence of ovaries. This is uncommon. It is due to
ine tone,indicates that the animal is coming into
ovarian agenesisorfreemartinism and hencewill be
oestrus, is in oestrus or has been in oestrus (differen-
seen only in a nulliparous animal. There is no treat-
tiationbetween a developing and a regressing CL can
ment, and thus the animal should be culled.
be difficult even using ultrasound). Careful inspec-
Small inactive ovaries.If the ovaries are small,narrow
tion of the vulva at the time of palpation may reveal
and functionless ina heifer,then this is due todelayed
clear mucus and, if there is a small amount of fresh
puberty or ovarian hypoplasia. There is no treatment;
bright red blood, then the animal hasrecenuybeen
if delayed puberty is suspected,normal cyclical activ-
in oestrus (metoestral bleeding).Re-examination in
ity should eventually occur.Determining the heifer's
10 days should reveal the presence of a CLif the cow
bodyweight shouldgiveanindication of whether or
is undergoing cyclical activity.
not she should have reached puberty (see Ch. 22).
Ovarian cysts (luteal or follicular). The presence of
Iftheovaries are flaitened,smooth, small and inac
one or both enlarged ovaries, containing one or
tive and the hons are flaccid, then this is probably
more fluid-filled, thin- or thick-walled structures
true anoestrus;confirmation may require a repeat
more than 2.5cm in diameter,cai be confirimed
examination or a milkprogesterone determination
using ultrasonography(see Ch.22) and should con-
10 days later.This may be due tohigh yield,suckling.
firm the diagnosis.A repeat examination several
negative energy balance,intercurrent disease,severe
dayslater will confirm theirpersistence and a milk
postpartum weight loss or trace-element deficiency.
or bloodprogesterone determination will show the
Assess body condition,and calculate nurient intake.
presence of luteal fissue.Treat with PGF, or an ana-
Correct any deficiencies if present. Insert a progester-
logue if luieal or,in the case of follicular cysts,with
GnRH, human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) or
trolled internal drug release device (CIDR)for 12 days;
progesteronepreparations such as a PRiD or CIDR.
522
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
Prolonged interoestrous interval
it is important to ensure that the person is ade-
quately trained, that the procedure is being done
The ovaries and genital tract should be examined
correctly and that the on-farm storage and han-
per rectun both by palpation and ultrasonography.
dling of semen is appropriate. In some animals,
If the ovaries are normal, subfertility may be due to:
the cervix can bevery difficult to traverse,even by
·Non-detected cestrus:if the interval berween
experienced inseminators
successive heats is approximately twice
the
·Incorrect timing of service or artificial insemina-
interoestrous interval, i.e. 36-48 days, then this
tion:this isunlikely to occurrepeatedly,unlessthe
indicates that one oestrus hasnot been ohserved
time of ovulation is asynchronous.If a significant
or recorded. Irregular intervals that are not the
number of animals are involved, advice on the
product of the normal interval are likely to be due
correct timemaybeworthwhileorelsefixed-time
to incorrect identification of oestrus (see Ch. 22).
Al after the administrarion of PGF,u or progesto-
If large numbers of animals are reported then this
gens should be instiuted (see Ch. 1)
suggests that the oestrus detection rate is poor.
·Nutritional deficiency or excess: check diet
If a susceptible CL is present, PGF can be used
to cause luteolysis and oestrus in 2-5 days time.
Occluded uterine tubes:palpate carefully and use
Methods of improving oestrus detection should
the PSP test to confirm
be inplemented (see Ch.22)
·Anatomical defects:palpate and use transrectal
·Embryonic or fetal death: the interval between
ulrasonography. If the animal is nulliparous,
successive heats is unlikely to be an approximate
look for segmental aplasia; if it is a parous ani-
multiple of21 and thuswill besome other inter
mal,check for ovariobursal or uterine adhesions
val such as 35or56days.In an individual cow it
·Endometritis; if there are clinical signs, diagno-
is probably of no significance but if a number of
sis is simple but subclinical disease can be diag
animals are involved,especially if naural service
nosed onlyby examination of cervical swabs for
is used, specific pathogens should be eliminated
the presence of neutrophils. If endometritis is
[see Ch.23) and other causes sought.
suspected, treat with appropriate inirauierine
antibiotics,or PGFto shorten theluteal phase
Regularreturn to oestrus(repeatbreeder or
preceding insemination. If there is evidence of a
cyclic non-breeder)
persistent discharge, the possibility of urine pool-
ing in the anteriorvaginashouldbe investigated
The ovaries and genital tract should be examined per
(see Ch.22)
rectum to determine the presence of gross abnormal-
·Delayed ovulation:diagnosis is difficult. Treat
ities such as severe adhesions or uterine infection.
This condition can occur only if there is a failure of
with GnRI or hCGat the time ofinsemination or
fertilizationorembryonicdeath before day12ofthe
repeat insemination on the subsequent day
oestrouscycle(beforeor at thetimeof thematernal
·Anovulation:diagnosis depends on ovarian pal
recognition of pregnancy). There are a number of
pation or ransrectal ultrasonography 7-10 days
possible causes (see also Ch.22):
after oestrus to demonstrate failure ofovulation
·Infertile bull: if a numher of cows and heifers are
by ahsencc ofa CL.Treat with GnRH or hCG at the
involved he should be examined as described in
time of insemination
Chapter 30. If AI is by trained inseminator tech-
·Luteal deficiency: there is evidence that this is
nicians from an approved centre, then poor AI
quite common,although it is difficult to prove.
technique can probably be excluded. It must be
Once other causes have been eliminated,then
rememberedthat there isconsiderable varia-
a luteotrophic agent, such as hCG, might be
tion in the fertility of bulls standing atAl studs,
worthwhile at 2-3 days after subsequent insem-
although they should be above a minimal level.
inations to improve Cl formation, or at mid-
Where possible,semen from a bull with a high
cycle to stimulate accessory CLformation.
fertility should be selected, or straws contain-
Alternatively,a GnRHI analogue can be admin-
ing mixed semen from a number of bulls may
istered at day 12 or 13 after insemination and
be used (eg. Genus Fertility plus). Where DIY
intravaginalprogesteronefromabout 4days
Al isperformed by the owner or herd manager,
after insemination.
523
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Shortinteroestrousinterval
of both the dam and fetus. Where possible the whole
fetus and a portion of placenta,including cotyledons,
Usually identified by other signs of nymphomania,
should be submitted to the laboratory for cultural
transrectal palpation or ultrasonographicimaging of
examination.In some casesitmay also be beneficial to
ovaries.The cause nay be:
submitwholeplacentomesmadeupofboththefetal
·enlarged ovaries: if either one or,more likely
cotyledonand matermalcaruncle(johnsonetal1994).
both contain one or more thin-walled,fuid-filled
Possibleinfectiouscauses of abortion include:
structures this should confirm the diagnosis of fol
Brucella aborius:occurs at 6-9 months of
licular cysts.Treat with GnRH,hCG or a progesto-
gestation
gen-releasing device (PRID or CIDR)
Neospora caminum:3-8months(mean5.5months)
Alatthewrong timedue toincorrectoestrus
an increasingly diagnosed cause of fetopathy
detection.This is often preceded or followed by
worldwide
anextendedintervalsothatthesumofthetwo
intervals is 36-48 days.If large numbers of cows
·Leptospira spp.:commonly occurs at 6-9 months
have the same history,oestrus detectionshould be
of gestation
improved (see Ch.22).
Bacillus licheniformis: gives rise to sporadic abor-
tions from about 5months gestation
Salnonela spp.,especially S. dublin:commonly
Abortion
seen at around 7 months,alihiough can cause
Thisisdefinedastheproductionofoneormorecalves
abortion at any stage of gestation
berween 152 and270 daysof gestation;they either
Listeria monocytogenes:sporadic outbreaks occur at
areborndeadorsurviveforlessthan24hours.
6-9months of gestation
The cow should be isolated,the fetus and fetal
membranesshouldberetained,and thecaseshould
Campylobacter fenis fetus:occurs at5-7months of
be treated as a suspected Brcella abortus abortion. In
gestation
the UK B.aborus control is governed by Article 10 of
Tritrichiomonas fetus:occursbefore5months ofges-
the Brucellosis (England) Order2000and the equiv-
tation (in countries where present)
alentlegislation in Scotland andWales.This requires
·Arcanobacterium pyogenes:usually sporadic and
anyabortionoccurringlessthan271daysafter
occursatanystagebutusually6monthsplus
insemination or service(or265days afterimplanta-
Mycobacterim tuberculosis:occurs at any stage
tionortransferofanembryo)tobereportedtothe
DivisionalVeterinaryManagerofthelocalAnimal
Mycotic agents -Aspergillus spp.,Absidia spp
Health Office.If required by thelocal Animal Health
Mucorales group.
Mortiella spp:occurs from
Office, following an initial risk assessment of the
4monthsto term
case,clottedblood,milkandavaginal swab arethen
·Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis-infectious pus-
submittedbytheLocalVeterinaryInspectorforlab-
tularvulvovaginitis{IBR-IPV,BHV-1)virus:Occurs
oratory examination.In thecaseofdairycows that
at4-9monthsofgestation
haverecently contributed to thebulkmilktank,it
is unlikely they will request an individual investi-
·Bovinevirusdiarrhoeavirus(BVDV):occurs atany
gation,as herd level surveillance undertaken using
slage.
samples of bulkmilk should detect anybrucellosis
The approach to investigating the cause of abortion
breakdown.However,beefsuckler cows and dairy
willdependupon thenumberofcaseswithin any
heifersare all tested individually.
given herd.If sporadic,henafull aboratory investi
The physical appearance of thefetus and fetal mem-
gation is probably unnecessary because many abor-
branes should be noted,the fetus should be aged
tionsarenotassociatedwithinfeclion;howevereven
approximately andthis should beconfirmed bythe ser-
in thesecasesitisimportant tofollow thestatutory
viceorinseminationdateifavailable.Attemptstoelim-
regulations regarding active surveillance for the
inateaspecificinfectiousagentshouldbemadebynot
detection of B.abortus.Ifabortionsexceed 3-5%of
being ableto demonsirate organisms in thefetus,fetal
the herd-and it is important to consider stillbirths
mermbranes and vaginal and uterine discharges, and/
and premature calvings (excluding twins) in this
orbythe absenceof specific antibodiesinbodyfluids
calculation-ora numberofabortions occurinrapid
524
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
succession,thena thoroughinvestigation should be
6.Take air-dried,acetone-fixed impression smears
implemented.Itshouldberememberedthatmany
from fresh cotyledons,lung,liver and kidney
abortifacient pathogens are potential zoonoses and
7. Submit small pieces(approximately 1 cm²) of for-
thus,within the Uk, farmers have a legal respon-
mal-saline-fixedcotyledonwithintercotyledonary
sibility（aswell as amoralresponsibility)topro-
membrane,etalliverhear,kidneyand lungh
tect themselves and their staff under the Control
wholebrainshould alsobefixedandsubmitted
of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) reg-
S.Taketwo7mlVacutainersofclottedbloodfrom
ulations.A recommended approachis as follows
all cowsthathaverecentlyaborted
(Pritchard 1993,Cabell 2007):
9.Repeat samples from the same cows as in (8) 2-3
weeks later for possible rising antibody titres in
Sporadic abortions
the serum
1.Perform a statutory brucellosis investigation,if
10.In the case of stillborn calves where iodine defi-
required by Animal Health
ciency is suspected,remove the thyroid gland
2.Determine that all abortions havebeen reported
and submit half fresh（for iodine estimation)
and thatitisa true sporadiccase.If so,proceed to
andhalf fixed(forhistopathology).
(3）f not,orifthere is any doubt,follow ther
If an infectious cause is not identified using rou-
cedure for an outbreak investigation (see below)
tine diagnostic tests it may be necessary to extend
3.Obtain a detailed historyofthe aborted animal
thei
investigation in an attempt to confirm the
presence of a less common infectious agent.How-
4.Undertalea clinicalexaminationof thecow
ever,abortions can be caused by many other factors:
5.Examine theplacenta forevidence ofobvious
congenital defects due to geneticfactors or teratogens;
lesions,particularlyfungi or Bacillus licheniformis
trauma;allergies;dietary excesses such as high
(see Ch.23)
protein pastures(Norton &Campbell 1990)or
6.Submit serum for Leptospira serovar hardjo serol-
deficiencies such as iodine;poisonous plants such
ogy, unless it is a vaccinated herd
as brassicas,hemlock and,in theUSA,pine needles
7.Submit serum for Neospora caninn serology
（Pinus ponderosa);cheinicals such as nitrates,nitrites
and chlorinatednaphthalene;and hormones such
8.Request culture of a vaginal swab for Salmonella
as prostaglandins.Diagnosis is generally based on
dublin
circumstantial evidence and,in some cases,the
9.Obtain a detailed herd historyofchanges inhus-
presenceofpathognomoniclesions.
bandry,movementof livestock,purchase of ani-
Itshould benoted that thecause ofmany abor-
mals,hiringof bulls,signsofill health and age of
tions isnot ascertained,despite meticulous inves-
aborting cows.
tigation.IntheUKthe diagnosticrate for those
cases where a fetus and placenta is submitted for
Abortion outbreak
laboratory investigation averages around 35%
(Cabell 2007)
1.Repeat(1),(3),(4)and(9）above
2.Ideallysubmioneormorefreshwholefeusesand
Evaluation of dairyherd fertility
placentae-or severalcompletefresh cotyledons.
If this is not possible collect and submit the
following
Regular,accurate evaluation of the fertility status of
the dairyherdis an essentialpartofacontrolpro
3.Fetalstomachcontents(2ml) shouldbeaseptically
gramme.In an'all-year-round calvingherd it should
collected using a Vacutainer or syringe and needle
be done at least twice a year; in a seasonally calving
4.Collectfluidfrom thorax,pericardialorabdominal
herd it should be done at times appropriate to the
cavities(2ml)usingthemethods described in(3)
desired calving pattern. Obviously, such evalua
5.Submit about5gof freshlungliver,kidney thy-
tionsareanimportantprerequisitewheninvestigat-
mus and salivary gland. All tissues and other
ing herd subfertility (Eddy 1980). Computer-based
samplesshouldberefrigeratedandpackedwith
systems now allow regular and almost constant
ice,butnot frozen
reviewofaherd'sfertilityparameters.
525
Part
15L
 Subfertility and infertility
In order lo evaluate the fertility status of a herd
Table 24.4 Herd target and interference levels
it is necessary first of all to quantify certain repro-
Index
Target
ductive values,and to do this it isnecessary to have
Interference
level
level
access to recortds of reproductive events. This pres-
ents few problems if details are recorded as described
Mean calving to first service
65
70
below (pp.533-555), particularly if accurate records
interval (days)
of events are enfered into a dedicated software pack-
Mean calving to conception
58
95
age designed to calculate and display fertility (and
(pregnancy) interval (days)
in some cases other health) data.However, on many
Mean interval from first service
20
25
farms where analysisof herd data is ot part of the
to conception (pregnancy)
regular monitoring and decision-making process,
(days)
the information is incomplete and is dispersed in
First service submission
80
70
many places such as on milk record sheets, artifi-
rate (%)
cial insemination receipts andrecords or the farm
Overall pregnancy rate (%)
58
50
diary. Obviously, the accuracy and value of such cal-
First service pregnancy rate (%)
60
50
cuilations will depend upon the quantity and qual-
Reproductive efficiency (%)
46
35
ity of the information provided, and if called upon
toundertake an analysis of the herd’s reproduc-
Cows served that conceive (%)
95
90
tive performance it will be necessary to modify the
The above values are thoserequired lo achieve a 365-day calving incex
assessment accordingly, depending upon clinical
for the herd; in high-yelding animals such values are not achievable,
judgement,thelistoryof theherd and theprimary
and the target and interference values must be adjusted accordingly
complaints of the herd manager or owner.
The minimum information required is identity
of the cows, last calving date, first and subsequent
service or insemination dates confirmation of preg-
ally 30-G0 days or 49 days.This is used, particularly
nancy and dates when cows werc culled or left the
in artificial insemination centres, to monitor the
herd.ldeallythis informationwould be availablefor
fertility of bulls and the performance of insemi-
the current year and atleast onepreviousyear.Since
nators.Figures of so% are frequently obtained at
traditionally it was considered that the optimal
30-60 days, which is often more than 20% better
reproductive performance was for ihe cow to calve
than the true calving rate to first insemination. The
Olce a year(orevery 365 days),fertility performance
discrepancy is due to failure to identify, record and
is often measured against these targets (see Table
report if the cow returns to oestrus;culling the cow
24.4). This is sill the objective in seasonal pastoral
after she has returned to oestrus; subsequently using
dairyherds andbeef suckler herds.However,increas-
natural service; or prenatal death. It is therefore an
ingly in non-pastoral semi-intensive systems it is
imperfect measure of fertility, but can be useful if
pregnancy diagnosis is not performed.
calving cows less frequently. For example, the objec-
livemaybetocalve highyieldingHolstein-Friesian
Calving interval and calving index
cattle every14months ratherthan every 12months.
Underthesecircumstances thetarget fertilityperfor-
The calvingi
interval is the interval (in days)
mance will differ from lhat illustrated below and in
between successive calvings for an individual cow.
Table 24.4. The following measurements of fertility
The calving index [Cl) is the mean calving interval
can be made (a seasonal calving patiern is assumed
of all the cows in a herd at a specific point in time,
for illustration purposes):
calculated retrospectively from their most recent
calving date.These two measurements havebeen
used traditionally as a measure of fertility, since
Non-return rate to first insemination
they indicate how closely the individual cow or
This is the percentage of cows or heifers, in a par-
herd approximates to the traditionally accepted
ticular group over a specified period of time, that
optimum of 365 days.
havenot been presented for a repeat insemination
The disadvantages of these measurements are
within a specific period of time. The periods are usu-
that they are historical, indicating the fertility in
526
Chapter
124
Veterinarycontrolofherdfertility
the previous,rather than the current year, in that The mean CCl is a useful measure of fertility, pro-
they are calculated retrospectively. Furthermore,
videdthattheinterval from calvingtofirst service
the calving index doesnot takeinto account the
isstated,since thisprobablywill have thegreatest
fertilityofheifers and can giveanoveroptimistic
influence upon itslength.
assessment of ferility whenmany of the cows that
fail to become pregnant are culled.Forthis reason,
Daysopen
calving index should always be interpreted in the
lightofinformationon cullingforfailuretocon-
This is defined as the interval,in days,from calv
ceive,it should be recognized that in a herd with a
ing to the subsequent effective service clate of
25%cullingrateonly approximatelyhalf thecatile
those cows that conceive, and from calving to cull-
will contribute to thecalvingindex in any given
ing or death for those cows that did not conceive.
year.
Numerically, it will always be greater than the
Afarmoreuseful contemporary measurement is
mean CCI unless all cows that are served conceive,
the calving-to-conception interval.
in which case it would be the same. Days open
isa popular measturement of fertility in North
America.
Calving-conception interval
Calving-to-first-service interval
The calving interval (or index) is ihe sum of two
components, the interval from the last calving date
In thecase ofa herd that calves all theyearround,a
to the date of conception (a) and the length of ges-
meanvalueof65daysshouldresult in a mean CCl
tation (b).Thus:
of 85 days (see above).The factors that influence the
calving-to-first-serviceinterval are:
Cl=a+b.
·breeding policy of the farm.Although cows will
Therefore.
return to oestrus after calving as early as 2-3 weeks,
they should not be served before 45days(often
Cl= 85 days + 280 days= 365 days.
termed the voluntary waiting period (VWP).and
inthe case of first calvers,high-yielding cows and
The calving-conception interval (CCl) is calculated
thosethathavehaddystocia andproblemsduring
bycountingthenumber ofdaysfromcalvingtothe
thepuerperium(see Ch.7)a slightly longerperiod
servicethatresultedinpregnancy(effectiveservice);
shouild elapse. Thus, in a seasonal calving herd
this isusually the last recorded service date.The CCI
those animals that calve early in the season will
isausefulmeasurementoffertilitybutrequiresa
have their first service delayed and,for those that
positive diagnosis of pregnancy to be made.It is
calvelate,i may benecessary to advance the date of
influenced by two factors:how soon after calving
first service.thereby tightening the calving pattern
thecowsarere-bredandhowreadilyiheybecome
delayed return of cyclical activity after calving,i.e.
pregnant when they have been served.The CCI can
be expressed thus:
acyclicity or true anoestrus(seeCh.22)
failure todetectoestrusin thosecows thathave
MeanCCl=c+d,
resumednormal cyclical activity.
The second and third of these factors can be
where c is the mean calving to first service interval
improvedby ensuring that cows havereturned to
and dis ihe mean first serviceto conception inter-
val.Thelatterintervalisduetothefact that on aver-
regular palpation per rectum and/or transrectal
age it will take20 days after thefirst service for the
ultrasonography of those cows that have failed to
beseen inoestrusby42dayspost-partum and by
one oestrus interval will elapse,as the average cow
the use of milk progesterone assays. Detection of
will require approximately twoservicesbeforepreg-
oestrus dependsupontheherdmanagerknowing
nancy is achieved.Therefore:
the true signs of oestrus,having a regular routine,
recordingthe events and using oestrus detection
MeanCCl=65 days+20 days= 85 days
aids(see Ch.22)
527
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Overall pregnancyrate
O'Farrell&Crilly1999,Royaletal2000,Royal&
Flint 2004). Thishas resulted in dairy producers in
This (originally called the overall conception rate)
many parts ofthe world accepting pregnancy rates
is the number of services given to a defined group
of40%andbelowasthenorm inlactatingdairy
ofcows or heifers,over a specifiedperiodoftine
cows （see Ch.22)（Borsberry 2005).The target
thatresult ina diagnosedpregnancynotless than
pregnancy rates listed in Table 24.4 are thus suit-
42 days after service;the figure is expressed as a
ableforheifersandwell-fedbeefsucklercowsbut
percentageofthetotalnumberofallservicesand
probably over-optimistic for modern-day lactating
should include culled cows.The method of preg-
dairy cows.
nancy diagnosis should be specified. The first-ser-
vice pregnancy rate is usually calculated separately
andobviouslyrefers tofirst servicesonly.Thus in a
Oestrusdetection
12-month period,if100 cows receive 180 services,
Improvingthedetection ofoestrushasamuch
ofwhich90resulted inaconfirmedpregnancy,the
greater influence upon reducing the calving to
overall pregnancy rate would be 50%.
conception interval than improving the pregnancy
The pregnancy rate is influenced by:
rates;the lattercan onlybe improved up to a cer-
·the correct timing of artificial insemination(see
tainlevel（Esslemont&Ellis 1974,Esslemont&
Ch.22),which will be dependent particularly on
Eddy 1977).Itis important thatall observedheats
the accuracy ofoestrusdetection
arerecordedduringtheVwP，whichwillbebefore
·correct artificial insemination technique,and han-
the earliest dateforservice(ideally this should be
45 days,although the required calving pattern for
dlingandstorageof semen,especially if DlYAI is
the herd will influence this figure).This enables
used
herd managers to anticipate the time of a subse-
good fertility of the bull if natural service isused,
quent oestrus andthusshouldimprovethedetec-
and tlieabsenceofvenereal disease
tionrate.It also enables theearly detection of
·adequate nutritional status of cows and heifers at
acyclical cows.
the time ofservice and afterwards(see Ch.22)
Itis possible toestimate the oestrus detection
·completeuterineinvolution andabsenceofuter-
rate,but it is important to stress thatit isan esti
ine infection （see Chs 22,23）;this is especially
mate andnotan accuratemeasurement.Anum-
relevanttofirst-serviceconceptionrates.
berofdifferentmethodsareused andtheyallhave
Thepregnancyrate tofirst service and overall preg-
somemeasure oferror(Esslemont elal1985).One
nancyrate arevery useful measures of ferility;the
method is todetermine thenumber ofsupposed
latterisusedtocalculatethereproductiveefficiency
missedoestrousperiods.Thus an intervalof36-48
days (2x18-24) suggests that one oestrus has been
oftheherd(seebelow).Therates for the first ser-
vice are usually slightly higher than those for all
missed andan interval of54-72 days (3x18-24)
services,becausethelattergroupwill include those
suggeststhat twohavebeen missed,although this
cows that may be sterile and receive many ser-
latter rangeis fairly wide and can lead to errors.The
vices before they areculled.Mean values of60%
percentage oestrus detection rate(ODR) is calcu-
lated thus:
and58%,respectively,are obtainable,although in
manypartsof theworld thefigures aremuch lower
No.of interservice
(Table24.4)
In order to identify the influence of management
intervalsrecorded
ODR=
x100.
changes,particularly nutrition,it is worthwhile cal
No.ofinterserviceintervals
culating these two parameters on amonthly basis
recorded+No.ofmissed
(provided that there are a minimum of 10 services per
oestrous periods
month),or expressing ihem as cumulative sums
(Cu-Sums, see below)
This overestimated theheat detectionby about5%
As discussed earlier (see Ch.22),in recent years
(Esslemont etal 1985).
there hasbeen a well documentedfall in pregnancy
Another method is to calculare themean interser-
ratesofbetween0.5-1.0%perannumin dairy
viceinterval fortheherd,so thatthe ODRiscalcu-
cattle（Nebel & McGilliard 1993,Wiltbank 1998,
lated thus:
528
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
21
insemination(see Ch.3);(b)18-24 days,the nor-
ODR=
x100.
Meaninterserviceinterval
mal interoestrous interval;（c)25-35 days;（d)
36-48 days,twicethenormalinteroestrous inter-
A large number of short interservice intervals dueto
val;and (e) more than 48 days. In a well managed
inaccurate oestrus detection (seebelow)can overes-
herd, with accurate detection of oestrus and presen-
timatethe oestrusdetectionrate.
tationforservice,atleast45%ofintervals should
Onesimplemethodofassessingtheoestrusdetec-
be within the 18-24 day range,thus 12% for (a),
tionrate atroutine sessionsofpregnancy diagnosis
53%for（b）,15%for（c）,10%for(d)and10%fo1
will bethenumberofcows that are assumedbythie
(e)(Anon 1984).1f the percentage for the 36-48-
herd manager to be pregnant and are thus submitted
dayinterval is high and thefigures for the 18-24-
for examination bu are found to be non-pregnant.
dayinterval arelow,thenthisis indicative ofpoor
Non-pregnant cowsshould havereturned tooestrus
oestrusdetection
sinceserviceorartificialinsemination and hence
A largenumber ofintervals in groups （a)and (c)
shouldhavebeenobservedinoestrus.
suggests inaccurate identification of oestrus or arti-
In many apparently well-managed dairy herds
ficial manipulation of the oestrous cycle,while a
wherethecalving-to-firstserviceintervalisontarget,
largenumber of intervals in groups(c),(d) and （e)
there isafailure todetectreturnsto oestrusinnon-
couldbeassociatedwithalateembryonicorearly
pregnani cows.Thiswill result in a largenumber of
fetal death problem （see pp.519,520）.As with all
interoestrousintervalsthataretwoorthreetinmesthe
fertility measurements they should be evaluated
normal interval.Aswell asa failure to detect cows in
togetherwith otherparameters.
oestrus,there isalso theproblem thatcows thought
Using the percentage distriburion of the inter-
tobein oestrusmaybe erroneouslyidentified;thus,
oestrous and interservice intervals,a single figure
like any other diagnostictest,oestrus detection can
referred toastheoesirusdetectionefficiencyODE)is
be considered to have a sensitivity and specificity.
sometimescalculated asfollows:
In attemptingto ascertainthetruesituation in any
givenherdmilkprogesteroneassayscanbehelpful
p+q
ODE=
(see p.541).
x100
a+b+c+2(d+e)
Pooroestrusdetectionmaybedueto:
·poor accommodation inhibiting cows from exhib-
A good ODEwould be50%ormore.
iting overt signs of oestrus
*poor lighting or identification of animals
First-service submission rate
·failuretorecord signs of approachingoestrusand
Measurements ofoestrus detectionrates are not
signs of true oestrus
very accurate, and for thisreason the first-service
·inadequate regimen for observing cows for signs
submission rate can be calculated;ihis is amea-
ofoestrus,perhaps due to the herd manager
sureofhowquicklycows areserved afterthieyhave
being overworked. More detailed descriptions of
become eligible for service (after the end of the
problems ofoestrus detection and methods of
VWPorinaseasonalbreedingherdafterthestart
improving and aiding the detection of oestrus are
oftheservice/breedingperiod).Ii is defined as the
described in Chapter 22.
number ofcows orheifers servedwithin a21-or
24-day period expressed as a percentage of those
Distributionofinteroestrousorinterservice
eligible to breed at the start of the 21-or 24-day
intervals
period.
Thus once a cow hasreached theearliesttime after
Analysis of the distribution of interoestrus,ormore
calvingthatsheisreadyforservice,i.e.after45days in
usually interservice,intervals will provide use-
all-year-roundcalvingherds,sheshould beservedor
ful information abouta number of aspects ofthe
inseminatedwithin thenext 21or24 days.Hlowever,
reproductive status and management oftheherd.
pregnancy rates will probably not reach their opli-
These intervals are subdivided into the following
mum until at least 90 days postpartum(De Kruif
groups:（a) 2-17 days,excluding those intervals of
1975,Williamsonetal1980,Esslemontetal1985).
1day associatedwith doublefixed-time artificial
Furthermore,cows thathavesuffered dystocia oran
529
Part
51
 Subfertility and infertility
abnormal puerperium should not be served before
In a tight seasonally calved herd, the earliest service
60 days postpartum and should be examined rou-
datewillbeselected inrelationtowlien the cows are
tinely before service.It has been shown that there is
required to calve down the following year. Thus, cows
a good correlation between the physical state of the
that calve early in the season will have a longer time
uterus, as determined by transrectal examination,
interval before they need tobe served, compared with
and the quantity,colour and smell of mucopurulent
those that calve late in the season.The choice of 21
discharge and the regeneration of the endometrium
days is based on the assumption that this is themean
(Studer&Morrow1978)(seealso Ch.22)
interoestrous interval. However, 24 days can be used
as it is the normal maximum interval. It is irrelevant
per day, should not be served before 50 days
which is selected as long as its use is consistent.
postparium.
The submission rate is influenced by the time
Reproductive efficiency
interval to the resumption of normal cyclical activ-
ity after calving, the detection of oestrus in those
Altemptshavebeenmade to calculaie asingleindex
cows thathaveresumednormalcyclicalactivity and
thatprovidesanoverall measureiment of fertility and
their presentation for service or artificial insemina-
takes into account many different parameters. One
tion.A good submissionrate is 80%.In seasonally
such measurement is the reproductive efficiency
calving herds (see below), it will tend to be higher
(RE)of theherd (Anon 1984).Itis calculated thus:
inthose cowsthat calve earlier than in thelater
calvers.This is because,with the former, the pres-
Submission rate x Overall pregnancy rate
RE=
ence of more non-pregnant cows will ensure greater
100
interaction whien they arein oestrus,which should
improve its detection (Anon 1984). The calculation
Thus if the submission rate is high, i.e. 80%, and the
ofarolling average submissionrate canbe difficult,
overall pregnancy rate is good, i.e. 55%, then the RE
unless it is pari of a compurer programme. A rel-
is44.In a herd with a more modest submission rate
atively simple methiod of obtaining a fairly accu
of 70% and an overall pregnancy rate of 50%, the
rate measurement is to list all cows that are ready
RE is35.
for service (at or beyond the earliest service date of
The advantage of this measurement is that an arti-
45 days,or whatever has been ecided upon, since
ficially high submission rate, obtained by an over-
calving) at the start of each 21- or 24-day service
zealous herd manager presenting cows for AI when
period. At the end of this period identify all those
they are not in oestrus, will be compensated by a
thiat have been served.The percentage submission
reduced pregnancy rate. Conversely, an overcautious
rate is calculated thus:
herd manager may have a reduced submission rate
but, although the pregnancy rate may rise to 65%,
No. of cows served that are listed
producing a reasonable RE value, it is not possible
X100.
No. of cows that are listed
to increase this further.
Anothermethod is tolist allcows chronologically
Fertility factor
in order of the calving date.Add 21 days to the ear-
Another composite measurement can be obtained
liest date on orafter which they arereadyfor ser
vice, i.e. 45 + 21 (24) = 66(69) days. Thus every
by calculating the fertility factor (FF) (Esslemont et al
1985). This is obtained following the calculation of the
cow should be served before the target date of 66
or 69 days postpartum.The suhmission calculated
overall pregnancy rate(OPR)and theestimation of the
oestrus detection rate(ODR).It iscalculated hus
thus:
No.ofcows servedon or before
100
the target date
×100
No. of cows thiat should have been
Thus if the ODR is 60% and the OPR rate is 50%,
servedon orbeforethetarget date
then the FF is:
530
Chapter
1241
Veterinarycontrolofherdfertility
50x60
index（DeKruif 1975,Esslemont &Eddy 1977,
=30.
100
Esslemontelal 1985).
Another way of calculatingthisfactor is to estimate
The costofinfertilityin dairyherds
howmanycowsintheherdbecomepregnant dur-
ing a 2l-day period after being detected in oestrus
and inseminated; using the figures above it would
Poor fertilityreduces the profitability of a dairy
be30%.AsEsslemontetal(1985)comments:'Most
enterprise.Variousfigureshavebeen quoted forthe
farmers'estimateswould behigher:
financial loss and these are discussed at the begin-
ning of Chapter 22. Whilevery recent figures are not
Culling rate
availableintheliterature,thoselistedinTables24.5
and 24.6,basedonUK1995 prices,are stillvalid
One sure method of achieving a target Cl (say
in comparative terms.It is important to remem-
around 365 days)isbycullingthosecowsthat
berthatactualvalueswillvaryfromyeartoyear
are slow lo get in calf.This is rarely cost-effective
depending on the economics of the dairy industry,
because it will be necessary to replace the culled
andparticularlythecostofreplacementheifers,the
cow with a heifer.The purchaseprice or thecost
costof semen,thevalueofcull cows andcalvesand
ofrearing such areplacement ismuch greater than
the milk price.More detailed models categorizing
the price obtained for the cull. Overall culling fig-
herds by fertility standards and estimating costs
uresforinfertility shouldnotexceed5%;thus95%
basedinaherd-specificmanner dependent onthe
ofthecows thatcalveand areservedagainshould
degree of time delay between calving and subse-
become pregnant.
quent pregnancy,lactationyield and shape of the
lactationcurveandvariousotherparametershave
been published by Esslemont (2003).
Fertility index
Computerized cost calculators such as that associ-
Another singleindex that can be calculated and
atedwith theBritishCattleVeterinaryAssociation-
takes into consideration the pregnancy rate to
Herd HlealthPlanning Software are alsonowused
first service,services per conception,calving-
to calculate the cost of suboptimal fertility (http://
conception interval and culling rateis the fertility
www.bcva.org.uk).
Table24.5TheFERTEXscoreforadairyherd(Kossaibati&Esslemont1997)
A.Standardindices and thepenalty orbonusincurred for divergence
Standard values
Divergencefrom standardvalues:
penaity or bonus
Calving index(days)
360
f3.00/day
FTC culling rate(%)
5.3
770/cull
Services/conception
1.8
20/service
B.Worked example for a herd. A figure of approximately f88 per cow is obtained
Actual value
Target
Excess
Cost of unit
Total cost
Cost/100cows
Calving index(days)
380
368
12
3
36
3600
FTC culing rate (%)
11
5.3
5.7
770
4389
4389
Services/conception
2.2
1.8
0.4
E20
8
800
Totalcost/100cows=f8789
FTC,failure to conceive.
These values are for1995pricesin theUK;theywillvary depending onthechangesin thecosts and the salepriceof milk
531
Part
151
Subfertilityandinfertility
Table24.6Costs for some common diseases,based onDAISY (Kossaibati&Esslemont,1997)
Disorderor disease
Mean incidence(%)
Directcost(f)
Indiect cost()
Total/caseorcow(f)
Retained fetal membranes
5.7
83.25
215.07
298.32
Vulvar discharge
19.2
70.81
90.77
161.58
Oestrus not observed
12.61
12.61
0
12.61
Recording systems
simplebutaccuratesystemmaintainedenthusiasti-
cally than acomplexone withnumerouserrors and
onissions,
Irrespective oftherecording system used there are
certainbasicrequirements.Perhapsthiemostimpor-
Manualsystems
tantisthe ability toidentifyeasilyandaccurately
every cow from virlually any point whether she is
A simple and reliable system is as follows:
standing or recumbent. This enables all people
·The herd manager keeps a simple pocket book
working on thefarm toidentify cows inoestrus,thus
inwhichallrelevantinformationisimmediately
assisting the herd manager.Each cow should have
recorded,e.g.signsofoestrusorleukorrhoea,wih
apermanentfreezebrand ontherumpthatmust
thedate andidentity of thecow.Thisis then trans-
bekeptclean andclipped,ogetherwitha collar or
ferred toa cow record sheetanda herd record
large ear tag with a number.
sheet
Itwill benecessary torecord,atleast,thefollow
·The cow record sheet can be an index card or a
ing:calvingdate;all serviceorartificialinsemination
 page in a book. The record should be permanent
dates; results of pregnancy diagnosis. In addi-
and kept in close proximity to the place where
tion,the following are highly desirable informa
the veterinarian examines cows so that it is read-
tion:dates of oestrus during thevoluntarywaiting
ily available duringvisits.Records should bekept
period;theidentity ofthesiresused;andparturient
clean and upto date.Details ofveterinary exami-
and periparturient problems and diseases.
nations should be recorded (Fig.24.1)
There are many and varied recording systems rang-
The herd record sheet should be keptin the dairy or
ingfrom simplemanual ones involving the use of
notebooks and diaries to sophisticated on-farm
milking parlour. The information can be recorded
computerswhere the herdspersonmaycarry an elec-
with cow identity listed numerically,in the order
tronic data-logger rather than a notebook.
of the daie of first service;however,the preferred
Whatever recording system is enployed, the
systemis in chronologicalorderofcalving.Every
observed oestrus should be recorded (even those
investigationofinfertilityproblemsand themain-
tenance of good fertility require the keeping of
whenacowisnotserved),asshould thetargetdate
accuraterecords of the reproductive history of each
forfissrviceatefeachsrviceeulf
and every cowin theherd.The absence ofaccurale
nancy diagnosis examination, expected calving
and accessiblerecordsmakes the taskofthe veteri-
date and any other information about the repro-
narian difficult,if not impossible.Someinforma
ductive system or general health (Fig. 24.2)
tion is often availablein an apparenly unpromising
As an altermative to record sheets, various pictorial
situation:for example,artificial insemination
displaycharts are available,either circularorrect
receiptsandmillkrecordingsheetsespeciallyifthe
angular. These have the advantage that, by using
herd is involved in milk recording schemes.
colour codings for various reproductive states,e.g
Thevalueofanyrecordingschemeisdependent
freshlycalvedbutnotobservedinoestrus,served
upon theweakest linkin thechain,which is usually
but not confirmed pregnant, confirmed pregnant,
the accuracy of the on-farm raw data.For this reason,
they give a good visual display of the reproductive
the recording system must be designed to accommo-
status of a herd.Theyhave the big disadvantage of
date theweakestlink.Itispreferable tooperate a
notproviding a permanent record and not being
532
9
10
11
12
HERD
COW NAME
BREED
EARNO.
DAM
SIRE
DATEOFBIRTH
DATE S.19
DATE
REARINGRECORD
LIFE SUMMARY
Lact.
Calved
ConceivedD.off
DaysLengthNo.dry
Milk
B.F.
No.
Laci.
days
(1b)
MASTITISRECORD
Date
Quarter
Treatment
Date|Quarter
Treatment
NOTES
Fig. 24.1 An example of a sinple individual cowrecord card suitable for permanentrecording.
533
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
MASTITIS. PREGUANT
PREGNANT
PREGNANT
PREGUANT
5
018811
89/6S
#1071110
811
6
11/69
5512|8
S
C
P
M
1eee1160e1101
12116112
552710211611
1
603011
5S
65
3
P2610
2810
29110
示
三
45
三
E
o1s
2
51
79
719
C
#
L
D
6
十
3
A105
A176
1SX
A32
66x
60
86
88
C
534
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
Fig.24.2Herdrecord sheetformanualrecordingoffertility data.Anexplanationof thedetailsandimportant datarecorded is
given below.
Column
Comments
A
B
Recording of thelactationnumberisuseful but not essential.It enables differences in fertility that
mightberelated to agetobeidentified,particularly thesensitivefirst lactationgroup thathaveyettoreach
maturity.
C
D
anticipation of thefirstoestrus after theearliestservicedate.
E
This enables a comparison of the fertility of bullsused in theherd.
F
Thisdate should beenteredontherecord sheet at the time ofcalving;theinterval shouldnotbeless fhan
45 days.
G
Thiscanbecalculatedoncethedate of the firstserviceisknown and thusenablesthecalving to firstservice
interval tobeknown.
H
It isessential torecord thisfigure accurately
I-R
Itisessential torecord thecatesofsecond andsubsequentservicesso thattheinterserviceintervalscanbe
S
Thenumberof servicescanberecorded,and this enables thenumber of services/conceptionto
becalculated
T
Thecalving toconceptioninterval iscalculated bycounting the time interval(indays)from thecalving date（columnC)
and the lastrecorced service date (columns H,J, L,N,P,R)after the cow has been confirmed in calf.
U
Thisisbasedon the assumption that thecowwillremain pregnant to termand is calculatedby assuming afixed
gestationlength(i.e.280days)for a particularbreed
V
Thisis the target date for lactation to endand hence thecowwill be'dried off'.Normally this shouldbe 60days
before the expected calving date.
W
Thiscolumn enablesbriefcomments toberecordedonfacts that might have an influence on
reproductive events.
tamper-proof,and should always bebacked up by
basedsystems suchas theCattleInformationService
someformofpermanentrecord.
(CIS:www.thecis.co.uk)arealso commonly now
in this area,with software offering much more than
Computerizedsystems
simplefertilityrecording and analysis;forexample
In small herds a manual system isperfectly adequate.
Herd Companion is an informationmanagement
However,inlargeherds of100ormorecows there
system provided online by NMR allowing farmers
aremany advantages to computerized systems,par-
and theiradvisors toviewfertilityhealth,milkqual
ticularlythe ability toproduceactionlistsforherd
ity and disease information online; many other sim-
manager and veterinarian of cows to be examined
ilar systems are available or in development around
and the ability to produce an analysis of the fertility
theworld.Inaddition tocustom-built software,it
statusofaherd,frequentlywithgraphicdisplay.
ispossible with little or no specialist knowledge
Withthefallingcostofcomputerhardwareandsoft-
to utilize proprietary spreadsheet software such as
ware itis now commonplace tofind computerized
MicrosoftExcel forherd datarecordinganalysis and
systems adjacent to the milking parlours and cattle
graphic display.
housing.Increasinglythese arebeinglinked toa
Personal DigitalAssistant(PDA),a handheld com-
Visual presentationofdata
puterthat allowsa cow'srecordstobeaccessed and
dataentered at the cow's side(c.g.National Milk
Simplemethodsinvolving theuseofherdrecord
Records (NMR) InterHlerd sofiware:www.nmr.
sheets(Fig.24.2)or rotaryboards,especially if they
co.uk).The Internet has also revolutionized the
have some form of colour symbols, are good ways
transfer of data and allowed centralized data storage
ofpresentingdata so that theycan assist theherd
andanalysis,andinterpretation of data inreal time
manager in managing the herd. Computerized sys-
ataremote siteanywherein theworld.Internet-
temsallowrapiddataretrievalandanalysisand
535
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
tabulated and graphical presentations: for example,
confirmed by pregnancy diagnosis. Such a graph is
individual cow records(Fig.24.3)or interservice
shown in Figure, 24.5b; a rising graph represents a
intervals (Fig. 24.4).
period when eorfception rates are greaier than 50%,
Oneuseful method of monitoring the contempo-
a falling graph a period when conceptioni rates are
rary fertilityof a herd is to record the pregnancyrates
less than 50%.The dates of the services should
to all services, or first services, as a cumulative sum
be placed on the horizontal axis and any changes
or Cu-Sum (Gould 1974) recorded in chronologi-
inf
feeding, environment, management or service
cal order. Several computer programs will produce a
procedure recorded as well. This will then give a
printout of Cu-Sums for overall pregnancy rate or
good visual record of factors that might influence
allow subsets of the data to be analysed and presented
conception rates.
in this way; for example, Figure 24.5A shows preg-
Cu-Sums can be used to represent other fertility
nancy rate data in a table and Cu-Sums for the day
parameters such as first-service submission rate, bull
of thie week cows were inseininated.
used, etc. Figure 24.6 shiows a Cu-Sum diagram for-
It is also quite straightforward
npod
mat thatalso contains additional information about
Cu-Sun manually; all that is required is a sheet of
each data point
small-squared graph paper. Half-way down the ver-
tical axis ‘ink in' or cross the first small square; this
represents the first service for the year or season.
Managing fertility and routine
Move along one column and repeat ihe same pro-
visits in dairy herds
cedure for the next sinall square; this represents the
second service of the season or year. If this resulted
in conception, as determined by pregnancy diagno-
Managing fertiliry so that it is maintained at an
sis, then the square in the line above is marked. l1f
optimum level requires the active collaboration
the cow does not conceive then the square in the line
of herd manager, farm owner and veterinarian; all
below is marked. This procedure is repeated for all
three must have a positive commitment to ensure
the services, with each vertical small column repre-
that the system functions effectively.
senting a cow (Eddy 1980). If more than one cow is
It is important that fertility targets are agreed
servedon thesame day then several squareswill be
upon by all three;these may need some modifica-
marked. The Cu-Sum graph can be completed only
tion, particularly in the carly stages of implement-
after the presence or absence of conception has been
ing a scheme and inrelation to the overall policy
D2
IdentiydetailsPariydata andvanisOininand mocments|Parcnla ond ofapingPesformencstolistics|Etat datoal
Paitefesord su
HCaing
Fest mMcE
NS Lastsevie
Canrepinn
It306FaPLacSCC
06/09/2000
13/05/203101/09/200160
01/03/2001
00360
5.401
C8/06/20025/03V2002.5
105/09/20025905/08/2002.50376
7505
2.079
23/03/2003..95SER
oma
VALPED
e/10/2003111SER
FICHARD
10/10/2333.113FTC
Cyete
FABO
iecpl
/02/2004233FD
VE7
cte+2:
CE/03/2301..14NFH
11/03/2301.419C2V
latie
Fig.24.3Anexample ofan individual cowrecord (InterHerd）.Notethat the delailed event analysisof the third parity ishigh-
lighted.(Courtesy of Mr Paddy Gordon.)
536
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
Servicesbetween01/07/2006
ParityO
and 01/07/2007
Parity1
Parily 2
Begin
Parity 3+
Tolal
0.5
6-11
12-17
18-25
26-32
90-36
37-48
49-54
55-72
73-96
+26
orheal
No. serves with interval
436
3
10
11
163
41
12
102
30
491
24
23
%
100%
1%
2%
3%
372%
9%
16%
7%
11%
%9
%9
No retun within35days
64%
67%
%0G
36%
61%
66%
67%
67%
67%
69%
67%
02
PD positive
288
33%
%00
18%
39%
37%
33%
40%
%06
25%
%B
Calved
33%
10%
%6
31%
25%
29%
20%
%2C
8%
48%
A
20
Not confirmed pregnant
inte
Confirmed pregnant
rVes
12-18
49-55
55-73
96-
50-110
B
Days after previousservice or heat
Fig.24.4 An example of a computer-produced table(A) and histogram (B) illustrating the distribution of interservice intervals.
Note that in this program some of theintervals are quite shcrt,although the histogram bars are plotted inwidths proportional
to the time intervals.The lower section of each bar (green) shows those cows confirmed pregrant,with the upper section（red)
those riol yet confirmed pregrani (InterHerd). (Courtesy of MrPaddy Gordcn.)
and expectations of the farm.With the exception of
It is also important when trying to make improve-
pastoral dairy herds and beef suckler herds,where
ments in herd fertility to set realistic achievable targets.
a seasonal compact calving pattern is paramount,
Overambitious targets, whichareunlikelytobeattained,
only act to demoralize herd managers and owners and
For example, a high-yielding semi-intensive non-
canundermine therelationshipwith theveterinarian.
seasonal herd may have a target calving index of 14
On the other hand, challenging, but achievable targets
months rather than the historically excepted target
that are reviewed regularly and adjusted as progress is
of12 months.It is thus vital that the veterinarian
made can motivate all involved.
understands the wholebusinessmodel of the farm
In order to implement a scheme thatcontrols fertil
ity and thus meets the agreed targets, it will be neces-
the given system. As well as agreeing on targets for
sary to visit the herd regularly so that certain cows can
fertility, it is also worthwhile establishing interfer-
be examined. The visit frequency will depend upon
ence values so that when these are reached they will
the number of cows in the herd, the annual calving
stimulate a response to initiate remedial action.
pattern and the number of cows that can be effectively
537
Part
51
Subfertilityand infertility
Closo
Savicesbawaan|23/11/2000
ParyO
Dayclwoek
an/C5/2001
Party1
Deyin
Party3+
FDavalatlelarsevice：before01/10/2001
FD:
Ralved
41%
E
31X
16%
GE
45%
13%
Wednesdcy
53
5.Thus
9
A(i)
A(i)
Oet
Nov
Dec
Feb
MarAprMay
Jun'Jul
Month
B
of theweekwhencows were inseminated(InterHerd).Note thedifferingpregnancy rate(Monday31%vsSaturday54%).
handledby theherdmanagerandveterinarian at one
One advantage ofcomputerized systems isthat
visit（probablynotmorethian 40-50).Thus,fora
theyautomaticallyidentifytheindividualanimals
smallherdofless than60cows,onceevery3weeks
requiringexaminationby producing actionlists(Fig.
shouldsuffice;forherdsof60-150cows,onceevery2
24.7).This can also be done using simple manual
weeks;andforherdsof morethan150cows aweekly
systems,although itmaytakea litletime toidentify
visitwillprobablybenecessary.Theintensity of the
the cows.It is important to stress the need for close
calving pattern will modify the frequency of visits.
liaison between the veterinary surgeon and herd
538
Chapter
241
Veterinarycontrolofherdfertility
Clove
PaE10
102e0
141
200eo
024
1
C
BRAE
217
2004c
1
240ec
719
35
24D40
64G
21
24Dec
GG
DRAKE
22
8
24Dec
001
2
UBITUS
26D6E
AUD
110
110
200
1
0
27Dec
02
211
27Dac
297
PERCY
69
168
DRAKE
+
25
0
24
88
13
55
DDec
973
DRAE
23
2BDeo
378
E
SANDY
644
2
27
708
3
2
12
SANDY
310ec
2
SADY
SANDY
150
70
55
B2
70
17
PERCY
*07
2G
193
OBUT
inec
D
170
702
3
DRAKC
158
372
SANDT
23
74
128
SANDY
501
UDITUS
42
220
UDITUS
22
230
3
LONVS
302
7
US
6J11
03e
DRAKE
C
56
SANDY
42
15C
542
29
307
2
L0EO
Fig.24.6Anexampleofacomputer-produced'Cu-Sumthaiallowsindividual dates,cowand sireidentification,parity and
service andother data also tobedisplayed(InterHerd).(Courtesy of MrPaddy Gordon.)
manager so as to ensure thatthecorrect animals are
cowsthiathavereturned tooestrusafterserviceor
presentedfor examinationatthecorrecttime.Those
Al three times ormore(repeatbreeders)
requiring examination will be:
cowsthathavebeenservedorartificiallyinsem-
cowsthatsuffereddystocia,retainedfetalmembranes
inatedandhavenotbeenseentohavereturned
ormetritiswhowillrequireapre-serviceexamina
tooestrus after 24 days(have missed oneheat)
tion(someveterinariansroutinely examine all cows
if transrectal ultrasonography is used,or after
irrespective of their previous history,although the
42 days (two missed heats) if transrectal palpation
benefit of this may notbe cost effective)
isused
·cows with an unnatural vulvar discharge
cowsthathavebeen diagnosed pregnantbut have
later been observed to be in oestrus.
·cows that have aborted
Rearing a dairy heifer as a replacement for a culled
·cowsthathaveshownsignsofnymphomania
cow is expensive and,until she calves for the first
·cows that havenotbeenseeninoestrusby42days
after calving
time,she has contributed nothing to the income
fromtheherd.Itisimportantnot toignore the
·cows thathave notbeenservedorinseminated by 63
replacement heifers in the overall strategy for
daysaftercalving(assuminga target365 day Cl)
managing the ferility of the herd.In the case of
539
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
形
Vetcae/11/200
Vel ev er0/122001
Oe fey d
tefiail
广Exlc
Showpncy das rm 37da ate eris
ehal enEl
Pevo d
DRYSL
50172215
Gyla
NHAMi
Eylm
FO-NI
22/25/2CHT-DL
B0PDNg
2155232
ICHI
163
Em
509/03/200:15/11/2/D
NCHL206
7,2m
1CH2112
HH/A
E05
SICH3E14
HCH3
12/0/205210/D
620/10/01HT-DL
y2n
C
5317
2ylm
127/03/2001116/0/20HTDL
y1m
P
/11/00
St.345
6
HHIM
LOwCO5
1lyCm
DC/01/2031.30222/05/2HTDL
S2225242502451124
NICH3G45
0m
22/03/2031...75
12/10/20HTDL
IH/74
C1/03/2001.5121/10/201HT-0
02
PD-Mi
05/13/20003700/05/20HTEL14PDNeg23
52335g2650318 3
FD-M
2/00010
1omel13
727
DBY
731
y'm
S2次25a2635263Ha3
IUH1
1743
0m
22/03/2017215/0/20HCL49PNCNcm5
103/09/2001.6
PC3I1
249FG
DESTRUMATE
24900
ycir
CLLO
20115ER
1L402
(E
lng
HD
Fig.24.7 An example of a computer-generated work or actcn list ident fying cows that require veterinary examination at the
next routine fertility visit (Interherd), individual details of cow81 are highlighted. (Renroduced by permission of National MIk
Records (NMR) plc, Chippenham, Wiltshire.)
Holstein-Friesian heifers,there are severalimpor-
·Pregnancy diagnosis should be made by transrec-
tant stages when it is appropriate that the herd man-
talpalpation at 5-6weeks or earlier by transrec-
ager and/or the veterinarian should examine each
tal ultrasonography (see Ch. 3). Adequate feeding
individual animal. The scheme for the reproductive
should be maintained.
management is as follows:
They should beata condition scoreof approximately
● At 10-12 months of age ensure that they are ade-
3 (on a U-5 scale)and in thecase of Holsteins about
quately grown and in an appropriate condition
630 kg live weight pre-calving.
●Heifers should be served at 14-15 monihs of age
The use of milk (or plasma) progesterone
so that ideally they calve slightlybefore the cows
in a seasonally calving herd.This enables them
assays in cowfertilitymanagement
to have a longer calving-conception interval and
In Chapter 3 (p. 96), the milk or plasma progester-
to calve for the second time at the same time as
oneassayisdescribedasamethodofdiagnosing
the rest of the herd. In the case of Holsteins they
pregnancy in cows 24 days affer service. However,
should be approximately 380kg live weight and
the same assay can in other ways assist both veteri-
growing at 0.9 kg/day (Drew 2004), for traditional
narian and herd manager in managing the fertility of
Friesians equivalentfigureswould be330kg live
the herd. The assays are expensive and require sone
weight and 0.8 kg/day
degree of laboratory skill and therefore they should
·A bull with a low probability of causing dystocia
be uised judiciously rather than as a non-selective
due to fetomaternal disproportion should be used
procedure on all cows at all times. Possible applica-
whether by artificial insemination or natural ser-
tions have been described by Drew (1986) and are
vice (see Ch. 11)
as follows.
540
Chapter
241
Veterinarycontrolofherdfertility
Identificationorconfirmationofpostpartumanoestrus,
Anticipationofthereturn tooestrusinthe absenceof
before the target service date.Ata singlereclalpal-
pregnancy.If themilkprogesteroneconcentration
pation or B-mode ultrasound scan of a cow that has
islowonday19afterserviceorinsemination,then
not been observed in oestrus sincecalving itmay not
the cow can be assumed to be non-pregnant and
bepossibletomakeadefinitediagnosisofanoestrus
herreturn to oestruscanbeanticipated.Thiscan
(acyclicity) (see pp.425-431).A high progesterone
improvetheoestrusdetectionrate afterservice.
concentrationin themilk10 daysafier(orbefore)the
Despite the expense of performing more fre-
palpation of ovaries without acorpusluteum is indic-
quent milk progesterone assays,it has been shown
ative ofa non-observed oestrus.A low(or zero)milk
that it canbecost-effective(Eddy & Clarke 1987).
progesterone concentration at the same time interval
Ina studyinvolving four dairy herds,milk samples
after(or before)palpation when no corpus luteum
were collected ateither18,20,22and24days or19,
wasidentifiedisindicative ofanoestrus.Furthermore,
21 and 23 days after service. The calving-conception
two consecutive low(or zero) millk progesterone con-
intervals in twoherdswerereduced from115to84
centrations in samples collecied 7-10 days apart con-
daysandfrom85to74dayswithapotentialcost
firm that the cow is anoestrous.This use has in part
benefit of 7.4:1 and 3.4:1, respectively.
been superseded byrepeated transrectalultrasono-
Assessment of cows'response to therapy.The assess-
graphic examination of ovaries in recent years.
mentoftheresponsetotherapyisfrequentlyentirely
Ensuring thatacowisclose toorin oestrus on the
empirical.The assay of progesterone concentrations
day of insemination.Milk progesterone concentra-
in milk at thetime of treatment and at varying time
lionsshouldbelowonthedayofinsemination.
intervalsafterwardscanbeusedtoassess theluteo-
Thus,thistest enablestheaccuuracyofoestrus detec
lyticresponse afterprostaglandintreatmentor the
tion tobechecked.Ifit isdonebeforethecow is
luteotrophic response after GnRH or hCG therapy.
due tobe inseminated it can prevent the wastage of
The regular collection oflarge numbers of milk sam-
adoseofoften veryvaluablesemen.It canbeused
ples and their assay is a task that,if imposed upon an
toinvestigate aherdwherepooroverallpregnancy
rates are obtained and prevent theinsemination of
siasticveterinarian, cain result in loss of enthusiasm
cows that are alreadypregnant.
for this and otherchores.For thisreason,selectivityof
A single low progesterone sample does not neces-
samplingshouldbeamajoraimso thatthedemands
sarilyshowthatthecowisattheoptimumtimefor
for large numbers of samples are reduced.Hlowever,
insemination butratherthatthecowis notin dioestrus.
this may all change if the successful use ofan‘inline
A more accurate assessment of optimum timing(see
biosensor to measure mill progesterone concentra-
p. 439) can be achieved if milk samples are collected
tions, as reported by Delwiche et al (2001), proves to
andassayedeverydayfromday17afterthelastrecorded
be applicable on commercial farms in the future.
oestrus.Normallythesamplesondays17and18will
have high progesterone values,day 19 intermediate
Pastoral dairying
values and days20,21 and22low values.Thetim-
ing of the high:lowvalueswill depend upon the nor-
mal cycle length (see p. 21). If oestrus has not been
Milkcan be obtained most efficiently from pasture
observed,thenthecowshouldbeinseminatedonthe
when the feed demand curve of the cows coincides
third consecutive day of lowprogesterone concentra-
with the growth curve of the grass (Holmes et al
tions (Table 24.7);using such a scheme acceptable
1984). Grass growth is maximal during the spring,
pregnancy rates havebeen obtained.
declines during the summer and undergoes a brief
Table24.7Timing of insemination inrelation tomilkprogesterone concentration
Day of previous insemination
17
18
19
20
21
22
Milkprogesterone concentration
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
AI
541
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
resurgence during the autumn (depending on rain-
achieved when the calving season is as closely syn-
fall and temperature) before declining to a basal
chronized as possible with the onset of grass growth
level during the winter.Thus,by calving cows at
and is as compact as possible. Moreover, in total pas-
the start of the grass growth phase (i.e. in the early
toral systems drying off occurs bycalendar daterather
spring) peak milk yield can he achieved at the time
than with respect lo days of lactation,thus achiev-
of maximal pasture growth, thereby maximizing the
ing a calving pattern that is both early and compact
efficiency of pasture use(Fig.24.8). Cows are dried
ensures that the mean lactation is as long as possible.
off in the late autumn, when grass growth becomes
These strategies ensure that the harvest of grass is
too low to continue to support lactation.Excess
maximized,while the unitcost of milk production
pasture can be conserved during the spring to aug-
is minimized.A compact calving season can only be
ment the availability of feed during the period of
achieved if the mating season is well managed and
lowgrowth that occursin the dry summerperiod,
cows conceive over anarrowwindow of time.Hence,
or it can be retained as a supplement for use during
the fundamental ain of reproductive management of
the winter period, when grass availability can limit
pastoral dairy cows is to ensure that as many cows
stocling rates (Holmes et al 1984). Apart from such
as possible conceive over as short a period as pos-
use ofconserved grass,the only otherfeed inputs to
sible,with a calving interval of no more than 365
the system may be the use of fodder crop, including
days (Holmes et al 1984).
brassicas (especially turnips: Clark et al 1996), dur-
ing the summer dry period, or maize silage The use
Overview ofreproductive
ofcereal or otherconcentrates is rare and is usually
managementofaseasonally
confined to situations where pasture management
calving pastoral dairyherd
has broken down (i.e.either as a consequence of
adverse climatic conditionsor an excess of demand
Themain features of the annual reproductive calen-
over production).
dar (Holmes et al 1984,Macmillan 1998) are illus-
Many studies of pastoral dairying have shown that
trated in Table 24.8. For a spring-calving herd, thie
the economic performance of the herd is best when
cows will calve over a relatively short period during
thegrowthofgrass is maximized,theharvest ofgrass
latewinter/early spring. The subsequent breeding
is maximized and the reproductive performance ofthe
season starts between2'% and3 months after the start
herd is optimal (Thomas et al 1985,Clark & Penno
of calving.This is a calendar date,rather than being
1996, Grosshans et al 1996,Holmes 1996). Indeed,
derived from calculation of the postpartum intervals
the accumulated experience ofmanaging pastoral
of individual cows, with the consequence that indi-
dairying systems is that the greatest efficiency can be
vidual animals are first bred at a range of postpartum
0
20
Monti
-Daily pasiure consumtion rale (kg DM/ha)
--Daily pasture growth rate (kg DM/ha)
herd, in relation to the major management events of the znnual calendar (With permission from data supplied by C.W.Holmes.)
542
Chapter
1241
Veterinarycontrol ofherd fertility
intervals.Al,usually to bulls of dairy breeds,takes
exist,especially where there has been a significant
placefor4-6weeks,afterwhich sweeperbulls arerun
investment in thebreeding of cows of high genetic
withthe herd.The bulls areremoved after a further
merit, or where breeding policy has been towards
6-8weeks and,after theappropriate time interval,
maximizing the milk production per cow rather
the herd is'pregnancy-tested.Any cows that are non-
than usinghigh stocking rates to maximize produc
pregnant at that time will be culled when the herd
tion per unit area of land (i.e.with many cows pro-
is dried off.Drying off occurs in the late autumn,
ducingrelatively lowindividual yields).
ideally as late aspossible,although the exact timeis
dictatedby the availability of pasture and/or supple-
Nutrition and reproduction in
mentary feeds during the late summer/early autumn.
pastoral dairy cattle
Itiscommonpracticetodryofftheentireherdona
In pastoral dairying systems, there is a crucial syn-
singleday,althoughbatchesoflow-yieldinganimals
may be dried off in advance of the main herd if it
ergybetween the production system and repro-
ductive performance, such that,unless the feeding
isnecessarytoconserve autumngrass.Animalsmay
strategy isright,reproductive performancewill suf
alsobedriedoffearlyinordertoimprovethebody
fer.Likewise,unless reproduction is managed effi-
condition of young cows or cows that are too thin.
ciently. it will not be possible to achieve efficient
Non-pregnant cows may be retained in the herd until
the last drying-off date,if their production is good
utilizationofpastureandaworthwhileeconomic
return.Inthis context,and incommon with several
butitisquitecommonpracticetoremovethemfrom
other dairying systems,it is increasingly well real
theherdassoonassummer/autumn grassgrowth
izedthat achievingmaximum lifetime productivity
startstolimit theherd's millproduction.
from animals wiihin the pastoral system can only
In considering theveterinary control of fertility in
beachievedwhen their lifetime nutritional manage
theseherds,itisimportant torememberthat,from
the perspective of the herd manager, the individual
ment is optimal.
cow is of relativelylowvalue.Hence,theunitofpro
Hence,a significantcomponentof theveterinary
control of herd ferility involves managing nutri-
ductionisnormallyconsideredtobetheherdrather
tional strategies for thelifetime ofthecow(Thomson
than the cow.A few exceptionsto thisgeneralization
Table24.8Annual calendarofmainmanagemental andreproductive eventsina spring-calving.pastoral dairyherd(derived
from Holmeset al 1984)
Earlyspring
Cows calving
Calved cows on unrestricted grazing
·Yearling heifers showing cestrous activity
Late spring
All cows should have calved within 8-10 weeks.Late-calving cows may be induced
Tail-paintcows3-4weeksbeforestart of mating.Observed foroestrus
Oestrouscyclicitycommenceswithin50daysof calving.Anoestrouscowstreated beforethestartof thematingperiod
Cowswith dystociaretainedfetal membranes,metritisor hypocalcaemia forveterinary examination before the start of the
mating period
Planned start ofmating about 3monthsafter the start of calving.All cows should be bred at least once toAl in the first 4-6
weeksof themating period
Summer
Allcowsand15-month-old heifersshouldbematedbymidsummer
Pregnancy test cows and 18-month-old heifers
Autumn
Dry offonce pasture becomes scarce and/or milkproduction declines touneconomic levels
Adjust feeding toensurecowscalveat correctcondition score.Separate thin animals andfeed moregenerously
Control dietary cation-anion difference during late drypericd
543
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
et al 1991, Thomet & Thomet-Thoutberger 1999).
60-
The rearing of both calves and maiden heifers is a
crucial component of this.It is well known that,
feeding
across a wide spectrum of dairying management sys-
level
50
(kg DM/day)
tems,achieving satisfactory live weights at the time
-3
offirst mating (i.e.>60% of mature live weight;
口
Penno 1997) is imperative. For pastoral dairy cat-
vice
E
40-
口1□19
tle,this target is of particular importance, since the
ser
grass-based ration is unlikely to allow for compensa-
tory growth after the onset of lactation (Holmes et al
30—
1984). Hence, ensuring that adequate calfhood and
010115
yearling growth rates are achieved is a significant
step in maximizing overall lifetime performance.
Most obviously, feeding has to be managed cor-
20-
寸
5
rectly during the early part of lactation.As in other
6
Condition score at calving (0-8)
systems, this depends to a large extent upon man-
agement during the dry period, especially with ref
Fig. 24.9 Effects of bcdy concition score at calving and
erence to the animals'body condition (condition
postpartum level of feeding upon the interval between calving
score) ai the time of calving(Grainger & McGowan
and first cestrus.(Adapred from McGowan 1581.)
1982, Holmes et al 1984). Calving at a condition
score of 4.75-5.0 (0-8 scale:equating approxi-
cover at calving.Feeding during the dry period also
matcly to 2.75-3 on a 0-5 scale) provides enough
significantly affects theincidence of hypocalcaemia,
fat to allowbodyreserves tosupplementfeed avail-
which,as both a clinical and subclinical entity, has
able throughpasture since,unlikethe situation with
significant effects upon subsequent reproductive per-
cereal-based systems, it is rarely possible to meet
formance(McKay1994).Since the discovery thiat thie
the eniire nutrient demands of the cow in early lac-
dietary cation-anion imbalance during the late dry
tation from grass alone. Neverthieless,ensuring an
period is a key determinant of calcium homeostasis
adequatesupplyofgrass thatmeets the demands
(Wang et al 1991), a great deal of effort has been put
of lactation as closely as possible is a predictably
intocontrollingthis aspect of diet. It is not normally
important component ofminimizing the dura-
possible to achieve a zero cation-anion balance in a
tion of postpartum anoestrus (Fig. 24.9; McGowan
pastoral system,since therange ofnutritionaloptions
1981).However,there is an additional complication
that are available to control dietary cation-anion dif-
in the nutritional management of carly lactation in
ference[DCAD] are very limited.Nevertheless,sup-
the pastoral system:namely,the effects of winter
plementation with anionic salts,especially those of
feeding strategies upon the availability ofpasture
magnesium, substantially mitigates the ionic imbal-
to calving cows and the growih ofpasture in the
ances[Wilson1998).
post-ralving grazing period. In most other systems,
Hence, veterinary control of reproduction is heav-
where feeding in early lactation relies upon con-
ily involved with decisions regarding nurritional
served forage supplemented with concentrates,
strategies duringthevarious stages of lactation.The
feed availability is to alarge extent independent
main control points are:
of previous grazing management. With pastoral
·Feeding must be planned throughout the winter,
cows,decisions that were made about levelsoffeed
intake during the dry period not only affect sub-
to ensure adequate condition scores and pasture
cover at calving and the control of DCAD in thie
sequent performance but also greatly constrain
transition period (McKay 1998)
subsequent nutritional options (Clarket al 1994).
Feeding after the peak of lactation has less direct
·Since managing the availability of feed during the
effect upon reproductive performance, sinre all the
post-calving period is vital, significant veterinary
cows should be pregnant by 3 months after calving. It
input can be made to assessing the nutritional sta
tus of animals during this phase
does,however,affecttheconditionscoreat thetimeof
rying off and, consequentially, the inter-relationship
·Since many pastures are deficient in a wide vari-
between condition score at calving and the pasture
ety of micronutrients that ran limit reproductive
544
Chapter
24|
Veterinary control of herd fertility
performance through limitation of feed intake
Calvingpattern and itseffectsupon
or through direct effects uponreproduction per
reproduction
se,veterinary controlofihese aspectsofman-
When calving takes place overa short period oftime,
agement is also important(Grace 1983,Holmes
elal1984)
it is relatively easy to sustain that pattern of calv-
Ensuring that good growth rates are achieved dur-
ing.Whereit takesplace over an extendedperiod
oftimeisquiteifficultrestoreitoacomact
ing therearingperiod,especiallyup tothe time
pattern. The reasons for this difficulty are several,
offirstmating,requiresveterinary input to the
for an extended calving pattern not only affects the
management of the pre-weaning calf (largely
time at which cows can be expected to rebreed suc-
withrespect toentericdisease)andtotherearing
cessfully but also affecisihe patterns ofreproduc
of post-weaning yearling stock (with respect to
tiveperformance and procduction ofreplacement
energy intake,parasite control andmicronutrient
heifers.
deficiency).
Thecalving pattern affects the age at which heifers
arefirstbred.Itisusualtobreed all thereplacement
Calving
heifers simultaneously,so that they all calve at (or
Itismostcommonforcalvingtotakeplaceatpas-
slightlybefore)thetimewhen themain herdstarts
ture, ideally over no more than about 6 weeks.
tocalve(Macmillan 1998).Ifihey arebornfrom a
Dystocia is relatively uncommon,although little
compactcalvingpatternheywill all beofasimilar
informationhasbeenpublishedonitsincidence.
age when theyarebred.Ifhowever,they come from
an extended calving pattern,they will either be at
mixed ages when first bred or the younger ones will
Problemsof thecalvingperiod
have tobebredasynchronously(Fig.24.10).Hence,
Theincidence of retained fetal membranes tends to
in the former situation,some heifers willcalve at
below,except whereuncontrolled hypocalcaemia
occurs orwhere there areuncorrectedmicronutrient
also at a lighter body weight,so will be relatively
deficiencies.Similarly,theincidence ofpost-calving
septic perimetritis or clinical cases of metritis occur-
tersituation,theheiferwill have ashorter interval
ringlater inlactation is also quitelow.Toa large
between her.first parturition and the start of the
measure,this isthe consequence ofcalving atpas-
breeding season and,hence,a reduced probability
ture,rather than inindoor calving accommodation
ofconceiving.
wherehigh levelsoforganismscapableofcoloniz-
Similar constraints pertain when an extended
ing the uterus can build up in soiled bedding.lt is
calving pattern exists in the main herd.For cows that
also the consequence of thelow incidence of dys-
calve earlyinthebreeding season,thereisplenty of
tocia and hypocalcaemia.Veterinary treatment of
time for the uterus to undergo involution and elim-
retained fetal membranes isoftenminimal unless
inateinfectionandforthecowtoreturntopositive
the cowis clinically ill,and most cows succeed in
energybalanceby thetime of the start of mating.
resolving the subsequent uterine infection by the
For cows that calvelater in the season,there is a
start of the breeding season.
proportionally shorter interval between calving and
Small numbers of cows suffer uterine prolapse,
the start of mating,so theuteruswill berelatively
vaginal tears and similar einergencies.However,
lesswell involuted(seeCh.7)and more likely tobe
hindlimbparalysis isarelatively commonsequel of
contaminated,and the cow herself is less likely to
the delivery ofoversized fetusesby traction.When
be out of the phase of negative energy balance.Since
they occur in themiddle ofabusycalving season,
the cows that are in negative energy balance are
itiscommonpracticetomakedecisionsabout the
farmorelikelytobeacyclicalthan cowsthat are
probabilityofthesurvivalofaparalysedcowsooner
in positive balance,the incidence of anoestrus is
rather than later.Fewer ofthese animals seem to
also higher among the former.Hence,they are less
developthemastitis andmetritisthatoccurswith
likelytoconceiveearlyinthebreedingseason and
indoor calving,but keeping affected animals warm,
indeed,iftheydoconceive,itismoreprobablethat
fed and watered can be difficult when they are at
they will do so to sweeper beef bulls than by Al
pasture.
to dairy bulls.In consequence,these animals can
545
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Tight calving patlern
months
1412months
July
Sept
A
Aug
May
June
Ainr
Sept
1:0
Nov
Dec
Slack calving pattern
15monihs
14months
13months
12months
Juy
Aug
Sepl
Oct
May
June
July
Sept
100
Nov
Dec
B
Start of calving
 Start of breeding
Fig. 24.10 Effect of calving spread or ages of heifers at first joining fcr a seasonal, spring-calving southern hemisphere herd
younger animals.
eitherbecomelockedinto a cycleof late-calving-
young cowswithseveralyears of lactation aheadof
late-conception,which is remarkably difficult to
them and/or healthy cows in good condition should
break, or they fail to conceive and are culled as
be induced（Moller&MacDiarmid 1981).
non-pregnant animals.
Cows that are induced tend to have an increased
incidence ofretained fetalmembranes(Welch&
Kaltenbach 1977,Malmo 1993),although this seems
Induction of calving
to be far lower in pastoral cattle than is reported for
A further meanis of synchronizing thedateofcalving
housed animals in Europe and North America
with the onset of grass growth is to induceprema-
ture calving in cows at the appropriate stage of the
Thebreedingseason
spring (MacDiarmid 1983 and Ch.3).
However, the use of premature induction of calv-
The breeding season typically starts about 3 months
ingforthemanagement ofcalvingpatternsisincreas-
after the calving season, usually on a predetermined
ingly falling into disfavour (Macmillan 1995), with
calendar date. Cows are bred for 4-6 weeks by Al,
the realization that the duration of the calving sea-
thereafter by running sweeper bulls with the herd
son can be better managed by attention to nutrition
for a further 4-8 weels. Thus, the breeding season
in the post-calving period, the timely treatment of
is rarely more than 14 weeks long. The aim of this
anoestrous cows during the early part of the breed-
breeding programme is to ensure that as many cows
ing season and removing sweeper bulls from the
as possible are submitted for Al during the early part
herd earlier in the year.A prevalent view of the use
of thebreeding season;the target is topresent 9o%
ofinduction of calving is that induction of early par-
of cows in theherd for first service within 3 weeks
turition should primarily be used as an emergency
of the starl of the breeding season (Macinillan &
measure on late-calvingcows and thatonlyrelatively
Watson1973,Xu&Burton1996,Hayes1998)
546
Chapter
1241
Veterinarycontrolofherdfertility
Thereareanumberoffactorsintrinsicto aseasonal
100-
calving pattern that facilitate achieving such high sub-
mission rates. The most important of these are related
06
to the seasonal pattern itself (Brighling et al 1990,
rate
H-layes1998).When there arelargenumbers ofcows
80-
coming into oestrus simultaneously,a large group
sior
ofsexuallyactiveanimalsformsthatbyitsvery size
SIU
70-
meansthatthereis substantial sexual activitybetween
cows.Hence,the observationof cows that are standing
S
day
60-
tobemountedisfacilitated,since therearemany cows
both tomount and to bemounted.Secondlythere is
21
50-
considerable anecdotal evidence to suggest that most
百
herd managers can achieve veryhigh oestrus detection
40-
H
rates provided the breeding season is not long.Thus,
many herd managers can successfully detect up to
1
20
20-3940-5960-70
>79
90%of heatswhen thebreedingseasonisnolonger
than6weeks,even though farfewer can achieve such
Days calved at start of mating
high rates over a longer period of tine.
Fig.24.11 Theeffect of days calved at the start of maling on
Most farmers use auxiliary aids to oestrus detec-
the3-weeksubmissionrate.The standarderror cf themeanis
tion(see Ch.22).The most widely used is tail paint
indicated by theboxand the95%confidence interval by the
（Macmillan&Curnow1977,Smith&Macmillan
whiskers.(With permission from Hayes 1998.)
1980).Thisisrubbedoffordisturbedwhenanother
cow rides an oestrous animal,thereby providing
uponthetime after calving（Fig.24.12;Brightling et
anadditionalsourceofevidencethatthecowhas
al1990,Hayes 1998)and the number ofoestrous
beenriddlen.Typically,70%ofcows that havebeen
cycles thatthie animalhashadin theperiodbetween
in oestrus will have most of the tail paint removed,
calvingand firstinsemination(Fig.24.13;Macmillan
while a further 20%ofanimalswill have a signifi-
&Clayton1980),thechancesofacowconceiving to
cant proportionremoved.Thefinal10%havelittle
Al are highly related to time after calving.
paint removed,thus requiring observation by the
It is increasingly common for farmers to under-
herd manager of other signs of oestrus (Macmillan
takesomeformofoestrus detectionbeforethestart
1998). During the concentrated breeding season,
of the'breeding season.This is donefor tworeasons:
quitea lot ofreliance is placed on secondary signs
firstly,inorder thatanoestrouscows canbe detected
of oestrus as a means of confirming provisional diag-
and treated before he start of the mating period and,
noses of oestrus; surprisingly good reliance can be
secondly,to allowfarm staff to re-familiarize them-
placed upon restlessness, changed order at milking
selves with oestrus detection.Tail paint is applied to
andreducedmillyield.Theuseofvasectomizedbulls
cows some 4weeks before the start of mating.Any
orbullswithpeniledeviationto aidoestrus detection
cowsthatfail toexhibitoestrusbytheendof3weeks
isrelativelyuncommoninNewZealandbutismore
are presumed to be anoestrous.Anyof these animals
widelypractisedinAusuralia.Occasionallyotheraids
thathavebeencalvedmorethan28dayswill then be
todetection areused,althoughmost havenotproved
presentedforveterinary examinationaweekbefore
to be cost-effective.
the start of the breeding season.The only slight dis-
The chances of cows being seen in oestrus during
advantage of this practice is thatit extends the period
the first 3 weeks of the mating period depend upon
ofoestrus detection,which can potentially lead to
the interval since calving （Fig.24.1l;Hlayes 1998).
poorer observation of repeat services.
Thus cows that are calved significantly less than 40
The pressure to achieve compact calvingpatterns
days at the start of the matingperiod have a signifi-
hasalsoledtotheadoptionofanumberofregi-
cantlylowerchanceofdisplayingoestrusthanani-
mensdesigned tomaximizehenumbersofcowsthat
mals that arelonger-calved(Rhodesetal 1998).This
conceiveinthefirstfew days ofthebreedingperiod.
is obviously ofconsiderablesignificancein termsof
MostofthesearebaseduponthestrategicuseofPGF
thechanices ofanindividual animal beingpresented
eitherwithorwithoutthedetectionofpre-mating
forservice.However,since conceptionrates depend
period heats.An example ofsuch a regimen is to
547
Part
5
 Subfertility and infertility
Lo
induce oestrus with PGF on the day before mating
starts in all cows that wereinoestrusmore than6days
65
(%)
before the stari-ofthe breeding season.The remaining
service
60
cows are induced 6 days later,when ey have a sus-
55
ceptible corpus luteum. Hence, most cows can be mat
ing within the first week of the breeding period.
first
50
As well as anoestrous cows, animals that have
0
had dystocia, retained fetal membranes or vaginal
45
uOI
 go s  q pxa e e ss
40
breeding season.
Con
35
There has been a debate concerming the relative mer-
its of one versus multiple insemination sessions each
30
day, with the conclusion that the advantages of increas-
25
ing thenumber of insemination sessions have a mar-
>0
20-3940-5960-70
ginal effect upon conception rates. Indeed, timing of
>79
insemination hasremarkably linle effectupon concep-
Days calved at starl of rmating
tion rates,exceptin thecaseoflow-ferilitybulls,which
Fig. 24.12 Effect of days caved at the start of mating upon
have higher conception rates after insemination late
in, or after, oestrus (Fig. 24.14; Macmillan & Watson
herds using whole herd pregnancy testing The standard error
1975).Hence, the decision wheiher to use AI techni-
of the mear is indicated by the box and the 95% confidence
cians or to inseminate one's own cows is based upon
interval by the whiskers.(vvith permisson from Hayes 1998.)
cost and/or convenience rather than conception rate.
Ar the end of the AI period,bulls are turnedin with
thecows to servetheresidual animals thathavenot
70
First service
Second service
conceived to Al. The target is that between G5% and
75% of cows should have conceived to AI (Hayes
1998), which should minimize the requirements for
bulls.However,it is common practice o use an exces
sive ratio of bulls to cows during the post-Al period,
in order to ensure that a single infertile bull does
rate
notjeopardize theherd'sreproductiveperformance.
nception
Many bulls have a veteriniary examination for breed-
ing soundness before they are turned in with the herd,
40
although it is all too common to have to examine
infertile bulls after the end of the breeding season.
30
'Pregnancy testing'
The initial stage of pregnancy testing is the observa-
20
tion of non-reurn to oestrus.Indeed,given the brev-
0
>1
ityoftheIperiodthisisactuallyaital stage,i
1
0
>1
Number of pre-mating heats
failure to observereturnsto oestruswill inevitably
ean that the cow has no further opportunities to
Interval fromcalving
conceive to AI and therefore, if she does conceive,
to first insemination(days)
it will be to a sweeper bull. It has been widespread
<30
practice to examine entire herds for pregnancy about
30-39
>39
6weeks after theremoval of sweeperbullsfrom the
herd. This examination has two funclions: first, to
Fig. 24.13 Average pregnancy rates to first or second insemi-
identify the cows that are not pregnant so thal, as
naticns after varied intervals from calving to first insemination,
previously described,they can be culled when the
in relation to the occurrence cf pre-mating hests. (Derived
herd is dried off and, second, to identify the cows
from Macmillan&Clayton1980.)
that have conceived to sweeper bulls.
548
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
06
et al 1977, Rhodes et al 1998). On examination
per rectum,these animals are found to have inac-
tive ovaries.Most cows that lack significant ovarian
structures (i.e. a corpus luteum or a preovulatory fol-
08
licle) are treated with some form of progesterone-
releasing intravaginal device (see Ch.22).
rate
Conception
70
Monitoring herd fertility
The key parameters of herd fertility for the season-
ally calving herd are (apart from the calving inter-
60-
val) the interval between the start of calving and the
mean calving date of the herd, and the proportion of
cows that are culled for failure to conceive.
Computer-aided herd ferility analysis for the sea-
sonally calving herd requires the use of rathier differ-
Early
Mid
Late
Post
ent assessment parameters from those that are used
Stage of oestrus
for the year-round or weakly seasonal calving herds
Sirefertililygroup
of Europe and North America described previously.
-O-Above average
To meet this need, computer programs based upon
—Average
the requirements of seasonally calving herds have
Below average
been developed. An example of such a program is
Mean
DairyWIN, which uses the following key criteria to
assess herds' reproductive performance (Table 24.9):
Fig.24.14 Effect of timing of insemination upon conception
rate.Above-average-fertility bulls achieve high coniception
1.submission rate during the first 3 weeks of the
rates at all stages of oestrus but the conception rates achieved
breeding season
by lower-fertility bulls decrease as the timing of insemination
becomes suboptimal. (Data from Macmilan & Watson 1975.)
2. conception rate to first service
3.interservice intervalanalysis
More recently, this pattern has been changing It is
4. proportionis of die herd conceiving 4 and 8 weelks
increasinglycommon to examine the entireherd,either
after the start of thebreeding season
by a manual examination per rechuim 6 weeks afier the
5.proportion of the herd culled for failure to
conceive.
after theend of theAl period,so that thecows that have
conceived to AI can beidentified (Macmillan 1998)
The proportion of cows conceiving 4 and 8 weeks
after the starl of mating and the percentage of cows
culled for failure to conceive are important retro-
predictions of gestational age to be made. lt also per-
mits the identification of cows that have relapsed into
spective summaries of herd performance.The former
anoestrus in time for them to be treated before the ter-
information describes the expected calving pattern
mination of the breeding season. Cows that are not
for the forthcoming calving season. The latter is
identified as pregnant at this preliminary examination
regarded by farmers as a crucial indicaior of repro-
arere-examined 6weeks after thebulls arewithdrawn,
ductive performance,for it not only subsuines all of
the foregoing information but epresents a key finan-
again allowing acurare derermination of gestational
cial outcome, given the high ratio between the value
age. In this way, reliable information is generated about
the proportions of cows that have conceived at each
of replacements and culls. Where reprodurtion has
stage of the breeding season, allowing appropriate deci-
been well managed,culling rates of as litle as59%
sions to be made about the cows'future management
can be achieved. Hlowever, recent years have seen a
steady increase in the proportion of cows culled for
infertiliy, a trend that has been variously correlated
Management of anoestrous cows
with the increase inherd size,increase inyield and
The majority of anoestrous cows are in true, nutri-
substitution of Holstein genetics for more traditional
tional anoestrus (Macmillan et al 1975,Fielden
Friesian and Jersey breeds.
549
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Table24.9Keytargets used byDairyWiN for assessing thereproductiveperformance of spring-calving.pastoral dairy herds
(reproduced with permission)
Proportionofcowscalved4weeksafterplannedstartofcalving
67%
·Proportionofcowscalved8weeksafterplannedstartofcalving
%56
Proportion of cows calved<40 days at planned start of mating (PSM)
10%
·Proportionofcowssubmittedforserviceby21 daysafterPSM
%06
·Proportionofcowssubmittedforserviceby28daysafterPSM
92%
Proportion of interservice intervals<17 days
13%
Proportion of interserviceintervals18-24days
%69
Propcrtion of interservice intervals 39-45 days
7%
·49-day non-returnrate(NRR)to first service
61%
Pregnancy rate to first service
60%
Services per conception
1.7
· Proportion of cows pregnant 4 weeks after PSM
57%
· Proportion of cows pregnant 8 weeks after PSM
86%
· Proportion of cows non-pregnant 165 days after PSM
7%
·Calving to conception interval
83days
·Proportion of cows aborting
%5>
Submission rates and oestrus
WIN(Fig.24.15A) indicates that there was a poor
detection efficiency
submission rate(55%)in the first3weeksof the
mating period,a problem thatwas complicated by
Determining the causes of failure tomeet targets for
inadequate oestrus detection (23% short interser-
any of the key criteria of herd reproductive perfor-
vice intervals)and,not unsurprisingly,a low con-
mance caninvolvea considerable amountofprobing
ceptionrate(53%49-daynon-returnrate to first
into herdmanagement.Forexample,it ispossibleto
service).Further analysis of the causes of thisprob
have a low submission rate for a number of reasons.
Most obviously,there maybe a high incidence of
animals that were calved less than 40 days at the
anoestrouscows or a failure to detect oestrus.The
start of the mating period, animals that had a poor
main causes ofanoestrus have already been con-
submission rate throughoui the mating period (Fig.
sidered,while thecausesoffailure ofoestrus detec-
24.15B). In parallel with the poor submission rate,
tionaremany.Buta low submission ratecan also
the conception rates of animals that actually were
be caused by a poor calving patten,such that cows
servedwere poor,especiallyin theanimals thatwere
may still be in the period ofphysiological （rather
calved less than 60 days at first service(Fig,24.15C).
than pathological) postpartum anoestrus at the start
Hence,the poor calving pattern became a self-per-
of thebreeding season.In this situation,aconscious
petuating problem that was exacerbated by the poor
decision may have been made by the herd manager
condition scores of the entireherd atthe time of
not to attempt to breed cows until an appropriate
calving.A similar problem was shown by theherd
period has elapsed after calving.Indeed,if a signif
illustrated inFigure 24.16,in whichverylow sub-
icant proportion of the herd has calved late,high
missionrateswereachievedin the animalsthatwere
submission rates arenot actually desirable and may
calved less than40 days at the start of mating.
be accompanied by lowpregnancyrates due tothe
Determining whether lowsubmissionrates aredue
insemination ofcows at tooearly a stagepost-par-
toahighproportionofanoestrouscowscan oftenbe
tum(Xu&Burton1996),with theassociatedcostof
facilitated by examining the submission rates of indi-
effectivelywastedsemen.
vidual age-classes of cows (Macmillan et al 1975).
Anexample of sucha herd is given in Figure
In pastoral management systems, it is usually the
24.15.The ReproductiveMonitorReport from Dairy
animalscalvingforthefirsttimethat areunder the
550
Reproductive Monitor Report
Stock Class.Adult Cow
Period 1
Target
CALVING PERFORMANCE
O-Calved ≥40 days at PSM
4-week calving rate
61%
67%
—Calved<40 days at PSM
8-week calving rate
%98
95%
-Targets
100-
SUBMISSION RATES
X
Percentcalved<40daysa1PSM
15%
10%
90-
21-day submission rate
55%
90%
28-day submission rate
64%
92%
80-
70
RETURN INTERVALS
submitted
Return inlervals %2-17days
23%
13%
60
Heturn intervals%18-24 days
57%
69%
Heturn intervals %39-45 days
2%
50
7%
Animals
40
CONCEPTION RATES
30
1st service 49-day NR
53%
61%
1st service pregnancy rate
42%
60%
20-
10-
IN-CALFRATES
4-week in-calf rate
38%
57%
0
8-week in-calf rate
73%
86%
WeekWeekWeekWeekWeek Week
%not in-calf by PSM+165days
10%
7%
1
2
B
4
6
A
B
Week submitted for first service
—%pregnant (non-return by 49 days)
--All services
-O-2ndservice
Serves/conception
06
day
08
70
60
uo
50
ncepticr
egnant
40
30
20
<40
40-5960-7980-99
>99
days
days
days
days
days
C
Days calved at service
submission rates, poor conception rates and a high proportion of short interservice intervais. NR, not recorded (reproduced with
after calving and conceptionrate tofirst,second and allservices,and upon services per conception,for theherd shown in(A).
551
O-Calved>40 daysatPSM
O-2-yearold
—Calved<40 days at PSM
—3-year old
-Targets
+-4-8-year old
100-
区
oe-+6-8-
—Targets
90-
100
80-
90-
70-
submitted
80-
09
70-
50-
ed
Animalss
60
40-
iqns
50-
30
nals
40-
20-
Ani
30-
10
20
0
Week
10-
WeekWeekWeekWeekWeek
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
Week submitted for first service
WeekWeekWeekWeek WeekWeek
Fig. 24.16 Relat onshin between time after calving and submis-
2
3
4
6
Wecksubmittcd forfirst service
Fig.24.17Relationshipbetween age and submission ratefor
heifers calving for the first time in inadequate body condition.
greatestnutritional strcss Burkeetal1995,McDougall
etal 1995),with thesecond calversless atrisk, alhough
still vulnerableifthey arenot wellmanaged during their
Failure of oestrus detection as a cause of low sub
first lactation. Hlence, a separate analysis of younger
mission rates is a less frequent problem. Analysis of
cows will often reveal deficiencies in their management
interservice intervals may help to explain such prob-
that have led to anoestrus.
lems. When oestrus detection is simply inaccurate.
Inadequate growth rates and poor condition
there is usually a high incidence of short (i.e. less
scores of first-calved heifers al the time of mat-
than 17-day) and long (25-35-day) intervals, and of
ingwere thie cause of theproblem shown in Figure
missed heats(37-48-day intervals). Clinical exami-
24.17.First-calved heifers were insufficiently
nation ofsupposedlyanoestrous animals will,in this
grown to compete for feed with adult animals and,
situation,reveal a high incidence ofanimals that are
sincethey could notobtainenough foodfor lacta-
cyclic and have active luteal structures within their
tion,they were certainly unable to obtain enough
ovaries.An example of such a problem is shown in
for growth. Hence, they lost excessive condition,
Figure 24.18.At first glance, the high 3-week sub-
leading to the poor submission rates. Many first-
mission rate (91%) seeims excellent, but the high
level of short interservice intervals（35%)and the
culled as non-pregnant at the end of their lacta-
low conception rate (42%) indicate that many of
tion. However, it can also be seen that the prob-
the animals that were presented for insemination at
lempersisted intothe secondlactationofthe
the start of the mating period were not, in fact, in
heifers that did conceive,for the submission rates
oestrus(Fig.24.18A).Moderate levels of over-detec-
of3-year-old animalswereonlymarginallybetter
tion of oestrus in the early part of the mating period
than that of the 2-year-olds.Nol until the third lac-
do not represent a serious problem but, in this case,
tation had the surviving animals reachedmature
the herd's reproductive performance suffered seri-
bodyweight and acceptablelevels ofreproductive
ously, leading to low percentages of the herd being
performance.
pregnant by 4 and 8 weeks into the mating period.
552
Chapter
241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
Reproductive Monitor Report
Stock Class:Adult Cow
70
Period1
Target
09
SUBMISSION RATES
Percent calved<40 daysatPSM
11%
10%
vals
21-day submission rate
91%
90%
50
28-day submission rate
inter
94%
92%
40
RETURNINTERVALS
Return intervals%2-17days
35%
13%
as
Return intervals%18-24days
44%
%69
30
inter
Return inlervals %39-45 days
2%
7%
CONCEPTION RATES
20
1st service49-day NR
44%
61%
Total service49-dayNR
51%
61%
10
1stservicepregnancyrate
42%
60%
Total servicepregnancyrate
39%
60%
Services per conception
0
2.6
1.7
2-17
18-24
25-38
39-45
>45
IN-CALFRATES
4-week in-calf rate
49%
57%
B
Interservice interval (days)
8-week in-calfrate
75%
%98
Intervals between first and second services
%not in-calfbyPSM+165days
11%
7%
Allinterservice intervals
A
Target distribution
Fig.24.18DairyWIN analysisofa dairyherdwitha lowconceptionrate.(A)MainparametersoiReproductive Monitor,showing
high submission rates,but paor ccnception rates due to poor oestrus detection (reproduced with permission).(B)Analysis of
interservice intervalsof theherdshownin(A).Theproportionsof interservice intervals of 18-24daysarewell below target,but
alothercategories(especially intervalsof 2-17 days)are above target
Interserviceintervalanalysisisthusofgreatestvalue
thefaceofapoorplaneofnutrition,althoughit is
asameans ofinvestigatinglow submissionratesor
morecommonforanoestrus,rather thanlowpreg-
poor conception rates.The presentation of interser-
nancy rates,to characterize the infertility that fol-
vice interval informationin a simplehistogram form
lows malnutrition.
(Fig.24.18B) is sometimes a useful introduction 10
As described above,poor pregnancy rates also
discuissingthedelicatequestionofpooroestrusdetec-
occur in thefaceofinaccurateoestrus detection.
tion efficiency with the relevant farm workers.
A common syndrome is tofind mediocre preg-
nancy rates during the first week of the breeding
Other causes of infertility（seeCh.22)
season.This results from the common fault of
over-delection'ofoestrus in the first 3weeks of
The causes of low pregnancy rates are similarly mul-
the mating period, particularly in its first week,
tifactorial.Primary causes of poor pregnancy rates
when herdmanagers are often excessivelyzealous
include poor insemination technique,poor semen
intheirattemptstoachievehigh submissionrates.
quality (especially where semen used for DlY Al
Sucha situation isgenerallyregarded as ofrela
has been poorly stored) or infertile bulls. Low preg-
tivelylintle significance,since the‘over-detection
nancyrates arealsoconsidered to occur in theface
ofoestrus resultsin most cowsbeing correctly
of some micronutrient deficiencies, especially cop-
inseminated at some point,with the main eco-
per and selenium (Lean et al 1998), although the
nomicloss comingfromwastage of semen.
evidencefortheseremains somewhatcontrover-
However,the desireto achievehigh submission
sial.Likewise,poorpregnancy ratesmay occur in
rates also results in cows being presented for
553
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
service too soon after calving. The ability of the
trated in Figure 24.19, oestrus was synchronized
in many cows sothat they were in heat in the fist
various stages after calving facilitates the diagno-
few days of tharfhating period (Fig. 24.19B). Hlence
sis of this problem (Fig.24.16).
a very high3-week submission rale was achieved
Unfortunately,the brevity of the breeding sea-
(Fig.24.19A）.However, observation of repeats was
son and the retrospective nature ofpregnancy rate
poor, as there was a high proportion of 39-45-day
interservice intervals (indicating missed heais) and
of a problem, it is often too late to take effective
a significant discrepancy between the 49-day non-
remedial action.lt may, however, be possible to
return rate and the pregnancy rate (indicating failure
extend the AI period or to usePGFto shorien the
t0observe returns to service).Hence,a large numher
luteal phase in ihose that are known not to have
    s()
conceived, to allow them extra opportunity. Many
the mating period.
farmers use oestrus synchronization at the siart of
Infectious diseases should not be ignored as a
the breeding season to ensure thal asmany cows
cause ofpoor conception rates.Diseases that were
as possible are mated within the first weel. This is
once thought to be eliminated,suchas campylobac
often an effective tool in the compaction of calving
teriosis and trichomoniasis, are still found in herds
patterns but it nieeds to be backedup by efficient
in some marginal arcas, while the significance of
oestrus detection.For example,in the herd illus-
BVD as a cause of apparent low pregnancy rates is
Reproductive Monitor Report
Stock Class:Adult Cow
—Achieved
Period 1
Targei
-
SUBMISSION RATES
100-
Percent calved40 days at PSM
10%
10%
21-day subrmissionrate
84%
90%
90
28-day submission rate
93%
92%
80-
RETURN INTERVALS
Return intervals %2-17 days
13%
8%
70-
Return intervals %18-24days
61%
69%
mitted
Return intervals%39-45 days
60-
12%
7%
subr
CONCEPTION RATES
50-
1st service 49-day NR
65%
61%
40-
Total service 49-day NR
70%
61%
E
1st service pregnancy rate
44%
G0%
30-
Total service pregnancy rate
42%
60%
Services per conception
20-
2.4
1.7
IN-CALFRATES
10-
4-week In-calf rale
55%
57%
0
8-week In-calf rale
%99
B6%
WeekWeekWeekWeekWeekWeek
%not In-calf byPSM+165days
17%
7%
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
B
Week submitted for first service
but after which there is a failure to detect oesrus and returns to service.(A) Main parameters o Reproductive Monitor, showing
high initial submission rates, high non-return rate but poor corception rate, and a high praportion of 39-45 day inter-service
intervals (reproduced with permission). (B) Changes in the proportion of cows suomitted for service with fime after the start of
mating.Note that initial submissionrates arewellabovearget dueto theuse ofoestrus synchronization before the start of mat
ing, but end up below largel, due to poor cestrus detecticn.
554
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
discussedin Chapter 23. Ureaplasmosis also appears
A final example of the effects of a management
to be a significant cause of conception failure.
decision upon herd fertility is shown in Figure
A characteristic hallmark of most of these dis-
24.20. In this herd, calving was induced in two
eases is the presence ofextended interservice inier-
groupsofcows in anattemputo tighten thecalv
vals,chiefly in the 25-35-day and 36-48-day
ingpattern.In the first group,calvingwas induced
categories.
at the start of the calving period, so the animals
Causes of poor pregnancy raies are determined by
had plenty of time to recover before mating. They
progressive elimination of possibilities.DairyWIN can
had also been selected for induction long before
be used to determine whether problems can be attrib-
the event, so had had preferential management in
utedto anindividual AI sireortoidentifythedatefrom
the pre-induction period. These animals had good
which theproblem arose.Such analyses may hen lead
reproductive performance and hence good concep-
tO exanination of straws of semen, comparison of dif
tion rates.By contrast, a second group were induced
ferent AI technicians’ conception rates, observations of
at the end of the calving period. As the decision to
herd managers' insemination technique, examination
induce was not made in good time, the cows had
of cows thiat arepresented as being in oestrus or breed-
no preferential management before induction.
ing soundness examination of bulls. Unless there are
Thus, these animals were still in negative energy
very clearindications ofvenereal disease within a herd,
balance and were still undergoing uterine involu-
alloher possibilities should be eliminated before
tion atthestartof thematingperiodsovery fewof
investigating this possibility.
them eventually conceived
Reproductive Monitor Report
Stock Class: Adult Cow
Whole
Early
Late
herd
induced
induced
CALVINGPERFORMANCE
4-week calving rate
62%
8-week calving rate
%06
SUBMISSION RATES
Perccnt calved<40 days at PSM
21%
0%
%8
21-day submission rato
57%
65%
13%
28-day submission rate
68%
%8
13%
RETURN INTERVALS
Return intervals%2-17 days
26%
29%
13%
Return intervals %18-24 days
43%
64%
%69
Return intervals%39-45 days
6%
0%
0%
CONCEPTION RATES
1st service 49-day NR
45%
%69
33%
Total service 49-day NR
53%
G1%
50%
1st servicepregnancy rate
42%
64%
17%
Total service pregnancy rate
%
53%
25%
Services per conceplion
2.9
1.9
4.0
IN-CALFRATES
4-week in-calf rale
35%
57%
13%
B-week in-calf rale
67%
91%
43%
%Not in-calf by PSM + 1G5 days
17%
%6
44%
Calving was inducedwith the intention of tightening apoor calvingpattern（reproducedwithpermission).
555
Part
51
Subfertility andinfertility
Managing fertilityand routine
A schemeformanagingthefertility ofasucklerherd
visitsin beefsucklerherds
to satisfy the requirements previously listed is as fol-
lows,and canbemodified depending on the time of
the proposed calving season:
Veterinaryinvolvementinassistingtheherdman
Theherdiscalving duringSeptemberand October.
agerin themanagement of fertility in beef suclkler
Details of dystocia,retained placenta,uterine
herdsis oftenminimal.However,sincegoodfertility,
infection and other non-reproductive diseases
togetherwithcorrectnutrition,isamajorinfluence
should berecorded
on theprofitabilityof suckledcalfproduction,there
is a need for veterinary input with the implementa-
EarlyNovember orearlier if possible:examine the
tion of fertility control schemes and routinevisits,
bull orbulls forhealth,bodilycondition and fer-
althoughitwillnotbeatthelevelrequiredfor dairy
tility.Ensure that there are adequate numbers,and
herds.
as faras possible that they are freefrom venereal
Apart from the obvious differences,suckler cows
disease
have a greater longevity than dairy cows,9ormore
·Early to mid-December:assess the condition
years comparedwith 6years,and produce six or
scoreofall cows-they should be atleast2-
seven calves in a lifetime.Although the use of natu-
and examineperrectum all cows thathadrepro-
ral service is still the norm,which means that the
ductive disorders and disease. ldeally all cows
malehasagreater directinfluence on fertility and
should be examined for return of cyclical ovar-
could transmitvenereal diseases,oestrus synchroni-
ian activity
zation and Al are increasing in popularity in many
·Mid-December:introducebullorbullsforSweeks
UKbeef suckler herds(Penny1998).
and remove in mid-February
Therequirements for goodreproductiveperfor-
Examine manually,or using ultrasonography,per
manceina sucklerherd are asfollows:
rectum all cows for pregnancy fromthe timethat
A calf peryear,thus a365-day calving index
thebull was removed and for the nexi 6-8weeks.
·Acompact calving periodof approximately2
Estimate gestational age and predict the calving
months. This elisures that calves are of similar
date for each animal
Calvesweaned inJune:assess thecondition score
health and reduces calf mortality by ensuring that
of cows andmodify feeding if necessary
late-born calvesdo not acquire infectionfrom older,
·Calving during September to Octoberat condition
earlier-bon animals.In addition,cows areata simi
lar stage in their production cycle;thus theirfeeding
score3.
andother aspects of management will be the same
·Cows should calve at the best time of year to uti-
References
lizethe availablefeed,thusinspring,summer and
autumn, depending on individual farm circum-
Anon1984In:Dairy herdfertility,ReferenceBool259
stancesbutnotwinter
HMSO:London,p 13,15,20
Cows shouldcalveata conditionscoreof21/-3
Ayalon N 1972 In:ProceedingsoftheVlith International
Congress on Reproduction and Artificial Insemination,
It isimportant to usefertilebulls,runningwithrea
Munich,vol 1,p741
sonablenumbers ofcowsand heifers.Particularly
Ayalon N1973Annual ReportofRescarch no 2.Kimron
in heifers,asirethatproduceseasycalvingsshould
Veterinarynstitute,eitDaganIral
beused
AyalonN 1978J Reprod Fertil 54:483
Barrett GR,CasidaLE,Lloyd CA1948|Dairy Sci31:682
·Ideally,heifersshouldbeservedsothat they calve
BeardenHI,Hansel W,BrattonRW1956|Dairy Sci 39:312
2-3weeks before the cows in the herd,to provide
BishopMWH1964JReprodleril7:383
the opportunity for a longer calving-conception
Borsbeny S 2005In Pract 27:536
interval
·Primipara may lose excessive weight;hence they
Boyd H,Bacsich P,YoungA,McCracken JA 1969BrVet 
125:87
shouldbe fed separately from and additionally to
Bradford G 1969 Genetics 61: 905
the rest of the herd.It may be necessary to wean
Brightling P,Larcome MT,MalmoI1990 ln:Brightling P,
their calves slightly earlier.
Larcome MT,Malmo ) (ed) Investigating shortfalls in
556
Chapter
1241
Veterinary control of herd fertility
reproductive performance in dairy herds.Dairy Research
McFeely RA,RajakoskiE 1968In:Proceedings of the
Council,Melboune,Victoria,3
International Congress on Animal Reproduction and
Burke CR,McDougall S,MacmillanKL1995PocNZSoc
Artificiallnsemination,Parisvol Il,905
Anim Prod55:76
McGowanAA1981ProcNZSocAnimProd41:34
CabellE2007InPract29:455
McGuirk B2004 In Pract26:272
ClarkDA,PennoIW199G1n:Proceedingsof the48th
McKayB1994ProcSocDairy CattleVet11:S9
Ruakura Farmers'Conference,p20
McKayB1998ProcSocDairy Ca1ileVet15:61
Clark DA,Carter W,Walsh B,Clarkson FH,Waugh CD 1994
Macmillan KL1995In:Proceedingsofthe 47th Ruakura
ProcNZ Grassland Assoc56:55
Dairy Farmers'Conferencep 36
Clark DA,Howse SW,Johnson RJ et al 1996 Proc NZ
Macmillan KL1998 In:FieldenED,Smith IF （ed)
Grassland Assoc 57:145
Reproductive management of grazingruminants in New
Corner GW1923 AmerIAnat31:523
Zealand.NewZealand Society ofAnimal Production,
De KruifA 1975TijdschrDiergeneesk 100:1089
Hamilton,New Zealand
DelwicheM,TangX,BonDurant R,Munro C2001 TransAm
Macmillan KL,Clayton DG1980 ProcNZ SocAnim Prod
SocAgric Engin 44 1997
40:238
DrewB1986InPract 8:17
MacmillanKL,Curnow R|1977NZIExpAgric5:357
DrewB20041n:AndrewsAH,BloweyRWBoyd H,Eddy
Macmillan KL,Watson|D1973NZ|ExpAgric1:309
RG(ed) Bovine medicine:diseases and husbandry of
Macmillan KL,WatsonID 1975AnimProd21:243
caltle,2nd edn.Blackwell,Oxford,p54
Macmillan KL,FieldenED,WatsonJD 1975NZVetI23:1
Eddy RG1980InPract2:25
MalmoJ1993ProSocDairyCattleVe110:225
Eddy RG,Clark PF 1987VetRec 120:31
MollerK,MacDiarmidSC1981ProcNZSocAnimProd
EsslemontRj2003 CalulePract11:237
41:71
Esslemont Rl,Eddy RG 1977 BrVet |133:346
Nebel RL,McGilliardML1993|DairySci76:3257
EsslemonRI,Ellis PR1974Vet Rec95:319
NortonJH,CampbellRSF1990VetBull 60:1137
Esslemont Rl,Kossaibati MA 1997VetRec140:36
O'FarrellKl,Crilly11999CatlePract7:287
EsslemontRlBaillieHCooperMj1985Fertilitymanage
Penno IW1997In:Proceedings of1he49th RuakuraDairy
ment of dairy catle.Collins,Londonp71,85
Farmers'Conference.p 72
FieldenED,MacmillanKL,MollerK1977Bovine Pract 1l:10
Penny C 1998 1n Pract 20:351
Gayerie de Abreu F Lamming GE, Shaw RC 1984 In:
Pope GS,Hodgeson-Jones LS 1975 Vet Rec 96: 154
Procedings of the 1Oth lnternational Congress on Animal
Pritchard G1993 CaitlePract 1:115
Reproduction and Artificial Insemination.vol ll,p 82
Rhodes FM,Clarl BA,Nation DPetal 1998 ProcNZSoc
Gould CM1974Cited byEddyRG1980
Anim Prod58:79
CraceND 1983Themineralrequirements ofgrazing
RocheJEIreland 1I,Boland MP,McGeadyTM1985Vet Rec
ruminants.NewZealand Society ofAnimal Production,
116:153
Hlamilion,NewZealand
Royal MD,Flint APF2004Cale Pract12:21
GraingerC,McGowan AA 1982In:Macmillan KL,TaufaVK
Royai MD,DarwashAO,Flint APFetal 2000Anim Sci
(ed)Dairy productionfrom pasture.NewZealand Sociely
70:487
forAnimal Production,Hlamilton,NewZcalandp134
Simpson JL 1980 Fertil Steril33:107
GrosshansT,XuZZ,BurtonLI1996ProcNZSocAnimProd
Smith JEMacmillanKL.1980 In:9th International Congress on
56:27
Animal ReproductionandArtificialInsemination,Madrid
Gustafsson H,Larsson K,GustavssonI1985Acta Vet Scand
vollll41
26:1
Sreenan IM,DiskinMG1983VetRec112:517
Hamerton IL1971 Human cytogenetics.Cited in KingWA
Sreenan IM,Diskin MG1986In:Sreenan JM,Diskin MG
1985
(eds)Embryonic mortality in farm animals.Martinus
Hanly S 19611Reprod Feril 2:182
NijhoffDordrecht.p I-1l
Hlayes DP1998 ProcSocDairy Catle Vet 15:189
Starbuck GR,Darwash AO, Lamming GE 1999 Cale Pract
Holmes CW 1996Dairy Farm Annu48:28
7:397
Holmes CW,Wilson GE Mackenzie DDS etal 1984Mill
StuderE,Morrow DA 19781AmVet Med Assoc 172:489
production frompasture.Butterworths,Wellington,New
TanabeTY,AlmquistJO19531Dairy Sci36:586
Zealand
TanabeTY,Casida LE 1949 |Dairy Sci 32:237
Johnson CT,Lupson GR,LawrenceKE1994VetRec 134:263
Thomas GW,Mathews GL,WilsonDG 1985Proc Aust Soc
King WA 1985Theriogenology23:161
Anim Prod,p333
Land RB,Atkins KD,Roberts RC 1983 In:HaresignW(ed)
Thiomet PThomet-ThoutbergerE1999RevSuisseAgric31:127
Sheep production.Bullerworih,London,p515
ThomsonNA,Barnes ML,PrestidgeR1991 ProcNZSoc
Lean I,Westwood CT,RabieeAR,Curtis MA 1998ProcSoc
AnimProd51:277
Dairy CattleVet 15:87
Wang CBeedeDKDonovan GAetal991 Dairyci
MacDiarmid SC1983AnimBreedingAbs51:403
74(Suppl 1):275
McDougallS,BurkeCR,WilliamsonNBet al 1995ProcNZ
Welch RAS,Kaltenbach CC1977ProcNZSocAnimProd
SocAnimProd55:236
37:52
557
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
Williaimson NB, Quinton FW, Anderson GA 1980 Aust Vet I
WiltbankMC1998CartlePract6:261
56:477
Xu ZZ. Burton L 1996Proc NZ Soc Anim Prod56:34
Wilmut l, SalesDl,Ashworth CJ 1985Theriogenology 23:107
Wilson GF1998ProcSocDairy CaeVet 15:31
558
25
Chapter
Keith Smith
Infertility and subfertility in the ewe and doe
(female goat)
Sheep
inourunderstandingofneonatallamblosses and
controlof diseaseinbothewes and lambshavealso
contributed to an increase in numbers oflambs
Theleveloffertilityinsheepisusuallyexpressedas
reared(Eales&Small 1986)
thereproductive performance of the flock.This can
ThelastMLCfiguresforeweproductivityinlow-
be defined as the number of lambs born per100
landandupland flockswerepublishedin2002
ewes put to the ram (i.e. true lambing percentage).
and related to the findings of 2001,the year of
The breeding season commences with the introduc-
foot and mouth disease in theUK,when 2.4 mil-
tion oframs,and allphysicaland financialperfor-
lioneweswerelosttothenationalflock.In54low-
mance should becalculated from thisoint,taking
land flocks the percentages of lambs born, born
into consideration ewes that die,those that are
live,andweanedwere166%,157%and 149%,and
culled and those that abort orarebarren.The Meat
for 67 upland flocks the values were 152%, 144%
and Livestock Commission (MLC) (1988a) recog-
and 138%,respectively. In lowland flocks 5%,and
nizes two categories of reproductive wastage: ewes
upland flocks 4%,of the ewes were empty;2% in
that die during gestation (dead ewes) and those that
both groups died during pregnancy.
fail to lamb (empty ewes).Empty ewes area cost
Inadetailedstudyof5488ewesin34flocksinvolv
to the flock but are often not included in costings,
ing pure breeds or crosses, Smith(1991) found that,
making between-flock comparisons difficult and,
ofthe6.4%(348)ewes that suffered truereproduc-
in some cases, giving an over-optimistic impres-
tive losses,3.4% were barren,2.4% aborted,0.3%
sionofreproducliveperformance(Maund&Jones
weremultiplymatedbutfailedtoconceiveand 0.3%
1986).Threefactorsinfluencethenumbersoflambs
were anoestrous; the proportionof deaths in the study
sold:fertility,i.e.whether the ewes are pregnant and
waslow-1.2%.Before the adventof accurateand
lamb;fecundity,i.e.the number of lambs born per
inexpensivemethods of pregnancy diagnosis,espe-
pregnancy; and survival rate to weaning.
cially B-mode ultrasound (White et al 1984),bar-
In theik,efforts to maximizenumbers of lambs
ren ewes werefrequenty not identified until they
sold have concentrated upon theuse ofmore prolific
hadfailed tolamb.Barren ewes areusually culled
breeds and improving ewe nutrition (MLC 19ssb).
and as a consequence there is some genetic selec-
However, despite increased veterinary input and
tion againstpoorfertility.Fecundity is influenced by
considerableimprovemenis in awareness of disease,
genetic selection,age of the ewe,nutritional status
its diagnosis and treatment,theproportion ofewes
andenvironment.Lamb survival ratewill beinflu
failing to lamb in the Uk has stood consistently at
enced mainlybymanagement factors,the environ-
approximately 6% for the past 100 years (Heape,
ment andalso geneticselection for such traits as
1899;MLC1984,1988a).Howeverimprovements
good motheringbehaviour.
559
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
The better level of fertility of sheep compared
anovo-testis,while Smith et al（1996)reported a
withcattleisareflection of themorenatural breed
ewewith oneacyivefemalegonad andaninactive
ing environment to which the former are subject.
testiswith a pampiniform plexus. Cases of intersex-
Ewes are generally allowed torun with the ram dur-
uality are seen,mainly at lamb castration.They are
ing the breeding season and not segregated;thus
male pseudohermaphrodites referred to by shep-
oestrusdetectionproblems arenotencountered.
herdsas'wilgilsThefact thatseveralmaybeseen at
Furthermore,most breeds of sheep have alon-
oncein a flocktends topoint toapossibleheredi-
ger period of acyclicity after parturition than the
tary cause. Other developmental defects of the geni-
cow,thus allowing the reproductive system time
tal organs ofsheep arerare,although thereisgood
to recover from theeffects ofpregnancy.Published
evidenceofanassociationbetween ovarianhypo-
informationonnormalconceptionratesinBritish
plasia and breeds withhigh fecundity(Davis et al
lowland ewes is vague.However,the fertility of
1992,Vaughanetal 1997).
ewes,asmeasured bypregnancy(conception)rates
tofirst servicebySmith (1991) was 91.6%.In the
same study,99.4%hadconceived by the third mat
Functional factors
ing.The main factors responsible for infertility in
sheep are specific infectious agents that usually
Exceptin thecaseofunthrifty ewes(which areusu-
result in abortion.Much veterinary research into
ally culled),anoestrus is uncommon in sheep;Smith
sheep reproduction concentrates on these prob-
(1991)identifiedtheconditionin0.3%of5488low-
lems.Structural,functional and management fac-
land ewes.In fact,when therams are turned out with
tors areof limited importance.
theflockitisusual formost ofthe ewestobemated
within a month.Thefirst oestrus of the breeding
season in some ewes is anovulatory and, according
Structural defects
toDutt(1954),morefrequentlyewesfailtobecome
fertilized attheseearlymatingscomparedtolater
Structuraldefects ofovinegenital organs areuncom-
ones. Ovarian follicular cysts,commonly encoun-
mon.Inanabattoirsurveyof208lsheepgenitalia
teredincattle,areoflimitedimportancein sheep
Emadyetal(1975)found0.72%withmacroscopic
Smith(1996) identified follicularcysts in2.9%and
abnorimalities.In amorerecentandextensivesur-
10.02%ofabnormalparousandnulliparousgenital
vey, involving 33506 ovine genital tracts (9970
tracts respectively.Luteal cysts were rare.
parous) from two UK abattoirs,Smith (1996) iden-
Embryonicdeath,or resorption,is a conspicuous
tified 6.57%ofparous and 1.95%of nulliparous
feature of sheep infertility and is more often associ-
tractswithpathologicallesions.Mostinvolved the
atedwithmultiplethan with singleconception.lu
ovaries and their associated bursae,with fibrin tags
ispossiblethatagreaterdegreeofembryonicdeath
andparaovarian cystsbeingmostfrequently identi
follows early matings.Using laparoscopy and com-
fied.However,it is unlikely that theselesions alone
paringthenumber ofcorporaluteawithithenum-
wouldcauseinfertility.Thereisno doubt thatmany
berof fetuses theincidence of the condition has
oftheotherlesionsidentifiedin thissurveywould
currently been estimated at 20-33%(Wallace&
have caused infertility or sterility(e.g.ovarian apla-
Ashworth1990,Bruere&West1993)
sia,ovarianhypoplasia,bilateral hydrosalpinx,apla-
Earlyembryonicdeathhasalsobeenassociated
sia of the paramesonephric ducts,freemartinism,
with infectious diseases such as toxoplasmosis and
hermaphrodism andpseudohermaphrodism).
Border disease(see below). In a survey by Johnston
Owingtotherarityofanastomosesof theadjacent
(1988),35.2%ofbarrenewes had elevaled anti-
allantoicvesselsoftwins,thefreemartinconditionis
bodytitres toToxoplasma,comparedwith19.2%of
likelytoberare,but incidences of0.23-1.22%have
fertile ewes.
beenrecorded (Dain1971,Long1980,Smith1996).
A specificenvironmentalcause ofsheepinfertility
Even higher levels have been detected in the more
due tograzing onpastures of subterranean clover,
prolificbreeds:for example,6.85% in Booroola F
was describedbyBennettsetal(1946)inAustralia.
ewes(Cribiuetal1990).Truehermaphroditism has
This clover containslarge amounts oftheoestro-
beenrecorded insheep.Chaffauxet al(1987)and
genic substance genistein,the ingestion of which
leads tocysticdegenerationofthe endometrium
560
Chapter
25！
Infertility and subfertility in the ewe and doe
and permanent sterility.Although small amounts
Smith's study they had a profound effect upon the
ofoestrogenic suibstances havebeen identified in
onset ofcyclical activity and hence a morecompact
otherplants,nocomparabledegreeofinfertilitydue
lambing season. Of teased ewes,84.8% exhibited
tosuch substanceshas been seen outsideAustralia.
oestrusinthefirst16daysafterexposureto thefertile
Asynchronyorimbalanceofthehormonalchanges
ram,whiletwocycleswererequiredfortheunteased
thatoccur around thetimeofoestrusand during
ewes to show comparable activity.Smith(1991) also
theearlylutealphaseprobablyresultsinembryonic
demonstratedthenecessityofadequatelyisolating
death.In an experimental studyinvolvingovariecto-
ewesandramsbeforeteasingfromsighit,soundand
mized ewes asrecipients for sheep embryos,a rigid
smell of each other.
regimen of steroid hormonereplacement is neces-
sary to ensure embryo survival (Wilmut et al 1985).
Ram:ewe ratio
The sequence is:(1) progesterone supplementation
to simulate the previous luteal phase;(2) estradiol
Thenumberoframsperewewillvary depending
to simulate oestrus;(3) low levels of progesterone
uponanumberof factors:ageoftheram;ageof the
supplementation to simulate early dioestrus; fol-
ewes;whethermore thanoneramistobeusedwith
lowed by (4) high levels of progesteroneto simulate
the group of ewes, the terrain and the size of te
thenormal luteal phase.
enclosure.Ram:ewe ratiosof1:25to1:40are suit-
able in non-synchronized flocks.However,where
synchronization is attempted,aratio ofatleast 1:10
Management factors
should be available
Oestrusdetection and artificial
Nutrition
insemination
It is important that ewes arein good bodily condi
Thebestmethod ofoestrus detection iswith a rad-
tion at tupping.Increasing theenergy intake several
dled vasectomized ram, very few visible signs being
weeks before tupping, so that the ewes are gain-
detectablein the ewe.Artificial insemination(Al)in
ingweight（flushing),will increase the fecundityin
sheephiasnot assumedthepopularity achieved in
those eweswith thegeneticpotential.Provided the
cattle;however,numbers are increasing.Anumber
level of feeding is maintained foramonth aftermat-
offactors havebeenresponsible,notablythedisap-
ingthisshouldensuregoodpregnancyrates.Some
pointingresultsusingfrozen/thawedsemen depos-
reduction in foodintakeisreasonableduringthe
itedintracervically.The spermatozoa areunable
second and thirdmonths ofgestation,butfeeding
tocolonizeortraversethelength ofthecervix and
shouldbe increasedin thelast 6-8weeksbefore
arerapidly lost from the ewe's reproductive tract.
lambing (MLC 1988b).
However,theuseofintrauterineinseminationby lap-
aroscopy has been much more successful,with preg
Non-infectiousabortions
nancy rates ofover70% usingboth freshextended
semen andfrozen-thawedsemen(Mckelvey1999).
Non-infectious abortionsmay becausedbyrough
Thepenetrabilityofthecervixoftheeweiscurrently
handling (winter shearing prehousing dipping
under investigation in order to devise a method that
vaccination procedures),metabolic diseases (espe-
will produce similarresults to those obtained by lap-
cially twin lamb disease) and transportation. Dog
aroscopic Al andreduce the rumber of pathological
worryingis alsocommonlyblamedforsheepabor-
lesionsfrequently detectedfollowingtheintracervi-
tion.Vaginal prolapse producing excessive straining.
cal technique(McKelvey 1999).Artificial insemina-
especiallywhen infection has softened thecervical
tionisbestusedin midoestrus,or12-14hours afier
plug,may lead to abortion.Congenital goitre in
its onset.
lambshas alsobeen implicated asacauseofabor
tion(Watson et al1962).
Non-infectious abortions rarely result in more
Teasing
than2%oftheflockabortingandwhen theper-
The introduction ofvasectomized teasers into the
centageis higherit ishighly likelythat aninfectious
flock, before fertile rams, had no effect on preg-
cause of abortion is present and should be fully
nancy(conception)rates[Smith1991).However,in
investigated(seebelow)
561
Part
151
Subfertilityand inferlility
Increasing fecundity
laboratories from 1996-2005,is summarized in
Table25.l.
Increasedovulationralescanbeachievedbythe
Those speciff infectious agents that cause infer-
administration ofequinechorionicgonadotrophin
tility andsubferilityinsheep，especiallyfetopathy
(eCG)onthe12thor13thdayoftheoestrouscycle.
withabortion,will bedescribedbelow.
Goodresultshavebeenobtainedbyinmunization
against androstenedione. A commercial product is
Enzooticabortionofewes
nolonger available in the UK(seep.55).
Enzootic abortion ofewes(EAE) is alsoknown as
Infectiousagents
ovine enzootic abortion or kebbing. Infection is
caused by Chlamydoplila aborus(previously classi
fied as Chlanydia psittaci imnunotype1),which has
Non-specific infections ofthe genital tract,espe-
a predilection for the pregnant uterus. It may also
cially theuterus,are ofminimal importance in ewes,
infectgoats,cattle,deerand humans andis thecom
probably because in most breeds of sheep there is a
monest cause ofovine abortion in theUk；;it has
longperiod of anoestrus following lambing. In the
been estimated as causing economic losses of E10 to
smallnumber ofewes inwhichbacterial contami-
E20 million annually(Aitkenetal 1990).For many
nation occurs at lambing or postpartum,which is
years,in Scotland and the English border counties,
less than20%,theyarerapidly eliminatedwithin a
shepherds andveterinarianswerefamiliar with an
week(Regassa&Noakes 1999) and thus before the
enzootic abortion in flocks.The causal organism
genital tract can be exposed to a period of progester-
was identified by Stamp et al (1950).The disease is
oneinfluence;thiswill occur atthenext dioestrus,
nowwidespread inBritain andcommon in Europe
whichwill normallybe many months away.In the
and thewesternUSA.C.abortushasa lhighly special-
cow,retention ofihe fetal membranes(RFM)post
ized life-cycleinvolving alternate intra-andextracel-
partum is quite common, and this is a major risk
lular phases that confer advantages for evasion of
factor in the development of endometritis and sub-
hostimmuneresponses and facilitate thenainte-
fertility.RFMisrelativelyuncommoninewes;where
nanceoflow-grade asymptomaticinfection(Aitken
itdoesoccur,attemptedremovalbyapplyingtrac-
1986).Itoccurs mostcommonlyinflocks that are
tionto theexposedportionsof themembranescan
intensivelymanaged over theparturientperiod
be attempted.If left,theywill usually separate and
beshedwithin5-6days.Ifanaffectedeweshows
Epidemiology
signs of systemic illness due to the development of
metritis, she should be treated with an appropri-
The major source ofinfection,responsiblefor over
atebroad-spectrum antibiotic.However, there are a
80% of new outbreaks in clean flocks,is the pur-
number of specific infectious agents that can have a
chase of infecied ewes of any age (Greig 1996).
profound effect upon ferility,particularly by caus-
Spread may also be by wildlife, e.g. foxes, gulls and
ing abortion and perinatal mortality.
crows. Sheep-to-sheep spread is the commonest
A number of infectious agents have a predilec-
route,and lambingtimeis thegreatest timeofrisk,
tion for thegravidreproductivetractofsheep,fre-
when infected ewes shed large numbers of infec-
quently resulting in abortion.Every year in the UK,
tious particles into the environment.Susceptible
abortion annually claims thelives of approximately
ewes inhaleor ingest C.alortus from infecied pla-
1 million lambs (Fraser & Stamp 1987）. Abortion
centae and fetal fluids from aborting ewes,which
perseis only part ofthe story,n someinstances bar-
areheavilycontaminatedandarethemainsourceof
ren ewes may be involved,as are weak non-viable
infection for susceptible sheep(Aitken et al 1990);
lambs,either beingborn to timeor prematurely.
dead lambs andcontaminated bedding can also be
All abortions occurring in a flock should be
implicated.Infective particles（elementarybodies)
regarded as infectious,unless proved otherwise.
may surviveforweeksatlow environmental tem-
A survey of diagnoses recorded atVeterinary
peratures.Ewesinfectedearly inpregnancyusually
Laboratory Agency (VLA) regional laboratories in
abort;otherwisetheorganismsliedormant until the
England andWales andDiseaseSurveillance Centres
next pregnancy. C.abortus isnot transmitted in the
in Scotland,listing the infectious causes of ovine
millofinfectedewes.However,lambs may acquire
fetopathy identified in material submitted to their
infection from uterine discharge on rhe teats.Of the
562
Chapter
Table 25.1 Frequency of isolation of pathogens from sheepfetopathies recorded at theVeterinary Laboratory Agency regional laboratcries in England and Wales and
DiseaseSurveillanceCentresinScotland
15
Sheep
1996 (%)
1997(%)
1998(%)
1999(%)
2000 (%)
2001(%)
2002 (%)
2003(%)
2004(%)
2005(%)
Yersinia
0
0
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.8
1.0
0.6
Infertility
pseudotuberculosis
Diagnosis not listed
4.5
7.4
10.2
4.9
6.6
8.2
7.4
6.1
5.9
9.7
Arcanobacterium
1.2
1.3
1.2
1.0
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.3
1.0
1.3
pyogenes
and
Bacillus
1.4
0.9
0.7
0.9
0.7
0.7
1.2
1.9
1.2
3.0
licheniformus
subfertility
Campylobacter
11.0
9.4
10.6
18.3
13.8
14.6
11.4
13.6
20.6
9.2
Chlamydophila
49.9
50.9
38.2
8
43.1
44.3
44.1
40.0
31.3
36.5
abortus
Coxiella burneti
0.0
0.1
0.17
0.12
0.5
0.11
0.0
0.2
0.08
0.08
Fungi NOS
C.0
0.04
0.0
0.06
0.11
0.11
0.09
0.0
0.0
0.0
the
Listeria
2.3
2.3
2.4
E'E
2.6
2.3
2.7
E'E
5.5
3.7
monocytogenes
ewe
Saimonella
0.0
0.0
0.04
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
and
abortusovis
Salmonella dublin
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
1.4
2.5
1.7
0.8
1.1
Idoe
SalmoneilaNOs
2.6
2.8
2.4
2.6
3.1
5.3
4.2
6.2
6.3
5.0
Salmonella
0.2
0.2
0.17
0.12
0.2
0.4
0.09
0.0
0.0
0.3
typhinurium
Toxoplasmosis
26.5
24.4
33.6
30.0
27.2
20.7
24.8
24.9
26.3
29.5
Total submitted
4680
4559
4168
2891
3096
1859
2285
2596
2460
2410
%identified
60.6
53.9
58.1
56.6
56.9
51.2
50.5
53.7
50.8
52.2
Diagnosis not
39.4
46.1
41.9
43.4
43.1
48.8
49.5
46.3
49.2
47.8
reached
Nos.nototherwisespecified.
Part
151
Subfertilityandinfertility
lambsinfectedby the ewes,feld evidence suggests
and thereafterat arateof5-10%.However,these fig
ihat around 30% may developplacentitis in their
ures donottakejntoaccountlamblossesintheneo-
first pregnancy (either as lambs orshearlings), a pro-
portion of which may abort(Greig 1996).
1996).
Chianydophila acquired outwith pregnancy lie
The disease is extremely rare in hill flocks,unless
dormant.However,they can be reactivated from
housed forlambingin facilitiespreviouslyused by
their latent state during pregnancy. Neither the
infected lowland flocks
site of latencynor the precise triggers of reactiva-
Although rams can become infected and may
tion have been identified.Latently-infected flocks
develop epididymitis,thereisno evidencethat hey
areunrecognizablebyimmunologicalmethods.
play anysignificantroleinthetransmissionofEAE
TheworkofBuxtonet al(1990)demonstrated that
(Appleyard et al 1985).In the UK,rams rarely run
ewes were susceptible to infection from early ges-
with ewes during lambing/abortion times and there-
tation onwards.Thetonsil andlymphoidtissue of
fore are not exposed to Chlanydophila infection.
thepharynxhasbeenshowntobeaprimary site
ofinfection,with subsequent blood-borne spread
Diagnosis
10 major organs and lymph nodes.Thereafter,until
60-90 days ofpregnancy, the site of Chlamydophila
Clinical signs. There are no premonitory signs of
persistence has not been ascertained and, although
impending abortion.Ewes are not ill. Hlowever, a
infectionoftheplacentaeandfetusesoccurredfrom
few ewes may show evidence of a vaginal discharge
60 days gestation,pathological changes were not
for several days beforehand and possibly behav-
observeduntil after day90.Rapidreplication of C.
ioural changes.There maybe abortions,premature
abortusleadstolocal necrosis and contiguousspread
lambs,weaklylivelambs and normal lambs with
ofinfection involvingthecotyledonaryand inter-
infected membranes.Ewesmay retainfetalmem-
cotyledonary placenta and apposing endometrium,
branes leadingto metritis,but no other clinical
resultingin abortion thatusually occurs in thelast
signsare seen.
2weeks of pregnancy. The macroscopic signs of a
Placental lesions andstaining.Theplacenta isusually
placentitisaresimilartothatfollowingBrucellaabor-
acutely inflamed, thickened and necrosed showing
tus infection in cattle.The intercotyledonary allan-
typical signs of a placentitis (Fig.25.1). Smears from
tochorionisoedematous,thickened andleatheryin
infected intercotyledonary areas,andthe wet skin
appearance; there is degeneration and necrosis of
of the fetus,can be stained by themodified Ziehl-
thefetal cotyledons and a thickyellow deposit on
Neelsenmethod todetectintracellularinclusionbod-
the chorion.
ies,whichoccur assmall,acid-fastcocci;theymaybe
Those ewes that are infected late in pregnancy do
not abort unil the following pregnancy. In split-
lambingflocks,late-lambingewesmayacquireinfec-
tionfrominfectedewesintheearlier-lambingflock
and abort in the same scason(Blewell et al 1982).
Infected bought-in sheep may abort in the first year,
spreading infection at lambing time to susceptible
ewes and lambs,resulting in an abortion storm the
followingyear.
Mostaborted lambs arewelldeveloped,freshand
shownoautolyticchanges,indicativeofrecent death
in utero;someinfected ewesmay produceboth dead
and live lambs.However,lambsborn alive may be
weak,fail to survive andin spite ofgood nursing
contribute to the overall losses from EAE.A small
number of ewes may develop post-abortionmetritis
(Aitken1986).Abortionratesvaryfrom5%to30%,
Fig.25.1Ovineplacenta infectedwith C.abortus showing
evidence ofacute placentitis and thickened andnecrotic
theupper levelmost likely tooccurin thefirst or
secondyearfollowingtheintroductionofinfection,
placentomes.
564
Chapter
1251
Infertilityand subfertilityin the ewe and doe
seenintracellularlyasclumps orsingularlyscattered
·Dispose of dead lambs and membranes not
throughout the smear:thesemay be confused with
needed for diagnosis.
Coxiella burieti organisms,which arelarger.
·Cleanlambing area andcover with clean straw.
Serology.The demonstration of specific Clilamy-
·Discourage use of ewes to foster lambs, as infec
doplila antibody infetalfluidsorprecolostral lamb
tion may be picked up from vaginal discharges
serum with a fluorescent antibody test is specific
and infected fleeces.lf lambs are fostered they
evidence of Chlamydophila infection.
should not be used for breeding.
The complement fixation test is the routine diag-
nostic test used, titres of at least 4/32generally
·In following years consider vaccination policy
and/or strategic useof oxyletracycline.
being accepted as positive. Paired samples should
be taken,at the timeofabortion and 3-4weeks
Ewes that have acquired infection do not develop
post-aborting:in positive ewes samples show a
positive titres until they abort;therefore it isnot
significantrise in antibody titres.Vaccinated ewes
possibleto screena flock todetect latent infection.
will have lower titreswithno evidence of arise.An
Protection by vaccination, using either Enzovac
enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay(ELiSA)and
(IntervetUK)orCevacChlamydophila(Ceva),both
indirectimmunofluorescentantibody test are also
of which contain a temperature-sensitive strain of C.
available.
abortus that requires a2-month periodafterinjection
to develop‘protective' antibody levels.Vaccination
Treatment
canbeusedfrom5monthsofage,andalsoinolder
animals between 1 and 4 months pre-tupping.The
Antibiotics,which will reduce rather than elimi-
vaccinewill protect lambsfrom transplacentalinfec-
nate abortions,can beused inflocks with extended
tion.High-riskflocks,i.e.thosewith more than 5%
lambing seasons. For the best results, treatment
abortions per year,and sheep bought from non-
should be given as soon after 95-100 days of gesta-
accreditedflocksshould havevaccinationrepeated
tion as possible,atwhich timepossiblecases ofpla-
yearly or biannually.Low-risklocks,i.e.where fewer
cenial infectionwill have commenced.Although it
than5% abortions occur,andsheepboughtin only
is expensive,long-actingoxytetracycline,atadoseof
fromaccredited flocksneed tobevaccinated once
20mg/kg repeated every 10-14 daysuntil lambing
only.An inactive preparation, Mydiavac (Novartis
has been used (Aitken 1986).This treatment will
UKLtd),as also been developed,and experimental
reduce thenumber oforganisnis shed but does not
data indicatesthatitmayreduce thelevelof abor
eliminate infection.Nor can it reverse pathological
tion inpreviously infectedewes during an outbreak
changesalreadypresentina heavilyinfectedpla-
ofinfection.
centa;hencesome abortionswill still occur despite
treatment.
(b)ifEAEisnotpresent
Control
Strenuouseffortsmust bemadetoprevent the dis
ease gaining entry using the following management
Aitken et al(1990)state that control should aim
strategies:
atkeeping the flock clean by buying all replace-
·Maintaina closed flockandpurchaseramsfrom
mentstockfrom EAE-accredited flockswithinthe
known sources,or replacements from EAE
PremiumHealthScheme(underthecontrol ofthe
monitoredflocks
Scottish Agricultural College).
Purchased ewes should be lambed separately from
theindigenousflockin thefirstyear,and all abor-
(a)FollowingthediagnosisofEAE
tions andbarren ewes should beinvestigated.
·Isolate,forup to weeks, andmark all ewes that
abort.
Zoonotic risks
·Sendfurtherdeadlambs andmembranestoa lab
C.aborts from sheep can be extremely danger-
oratory for diagnosis as more than one cause of
ousto pregnant women,growingrapidlyin the
abortionmaybepresent in theflock.
unborn baby's placenta. Initial mild, influenza-like
·Reduce risk of spread to other ewes.
symptoms become progressively more severe,and
565
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
abortion occurs within a week. Disseminated intra-
Toxoplasma can be detected in the uterine caruncu-
vascular coagulation may develop in the mother,
larsepta 10 daysafteroocystingestion,and placental
causing critical illness. Intensive nursing normally
trophoblast celis after 10-15 days; toxoplasma-spe-
results in complete recovery but, regrettably, to date
all thebabies have died (Buxton 1986)
1989).
Following infection sheep are considered to remain
Toxoplasmosis
persistehtlyinfected for life,o be immune to the par-
asite and therefore unlikely to abort again with toxo-
Toxoplasmagondi infection is the second mostcom-
plasmosis (Beverley et al 1971, Buxton et al 2006).
mon cause of abortion in the UK and also in New
However, Hartley (1966) reported that a small pro-
Zealand; it has been shown to cause early embryonic
portion of persistently infected ewes may, in subse-
mortality, abortion, stillbirths and weakly offspring
quent pregnancies, transmit toxoplasms to the fetus
in many domestic species, including sheep, and has
and abort; it has been suggested by Duncanson et al
a worldwide distribution in animals and humans.
(2001) that this may be due to a recruidesence in the
Infection in non-pregnant sheep is typically mild
ewe causing a vertical transmission to the fetus. More
and inapparent, but in preguancy it is essentially
reseach work is necessary to confirm this.
a disease of the conceptus and the gestational age
at infertion affects the nature of the disease process
Clinical signs
(Blewett&Watson 1983).
The causal organism has a complex life cycle,
The effect upon reproduction depends upon the
involving an asexual cycle that can occur in any spe-
stage of pregnancy when infection occurs. If early
cies of mammal or bird and a sexual cyclethat can
in gestation,i.e.before 60-70 days,fetal resorption
onlybe completed incats and wild Felidae. In the cat
usually occurs,with ewes returning to oestrus or
family,the parasite multiplies within the epithelial
remaining bafren.Unlike the case with EAE,numer-
cells of the intestine and,as a consequence, oocysis
ousbarren ewes that have not been seen to abort
will be excreted in the faeces for about 8 days,dur-
may be detecied in the flock at scanning or lamb-
ingwhich time tens of thousandsof oocysts canbe
ingtine.With early embryonic mortality,providing
shed. These sporulate within a few days and are then
a ram is still present and the breeding season has
ingested by sheep(Frenkel 1973)
noi ended, ewes are capable of conceiving,now with
a good immunity. Infection in mid-gestation resulis
Epidemiology
in abortion or mummification; in the latter case,
only one member ofa setof twins or tripletsmay be
The principal vector in the spread of toxoplasmosis
involved (Fig.25.2). Infection after 120 days usually
is the cat and its related wild species. Infective toxo-
results in stillbirth,orweakly ornormal lambs
feed orbedding.Theyarepassed in the faeces ofyoung
cats, which become infected when they first begin
to hunt. Although toxoplasms have been demon-
strated in the semen of experimentally and naturally
infected rams (Spence et al 1978),infection of the
ewe at tupping would be unlikely to cause abortion.
Toxoplasms can alsobepassed in milk during acute
infections.Lateralspread within a flock from aborting
ewes islikely toberelatively unimportant.However,
lambs born alive that survive from infected ewes
can be congenitally infected.As few as 200 oocysts
will infect one ewe, anid as many as 1 millionmay
be present in 1g of cat faeces (Buxton 1989). Once
ingested sporozoites are released, they penetrate
the intestines and are distributed to many organs,
Fig.25.2 Mummified ovine fetus surrounded by fetal
where tissue cysts forn; a febrile response occurs
membranes showing cotyledons asscciated with infection
after 5-12 days in conjunction with a parasitaemia.
with T. gondii.
566
Chapter
251
Infertility and subfertility in the ewe and doe
The gross appearance of the placenta, particu-
Confirmation can be made using Giemsa- or
larly the cotyledons,is fairly typical of the disease.
Leishmann-stained smears of those cotyledons con-
Cotyledons are bright to dark red in colour with
taining thewhite nodules.Alternatively,histological
multiple small white necrotic foci 1-3 mm in diam-
sections of the cotyledons may be required to dem-
cicr (so called ‘frosted strawberries) (Fig. 25.3).
onstrate the presence of the parasite. Examination
These nodules may be spaise or so numerous that
of the brain, especially in those lambs that die soon
they become confluent; sometimes normal coty-
after birth,may reveal foci of glial cells and leuko-
ledons are present. The intercotyledonary areas of
cncephalomalacia,which are characteristic ofthe
the allantochorion appear normal (unlike infection
infection(Buxtonet al 19s1).Immunofluorescent
with C.abortus) (Fig.25.4).
staining of cotyledon sections can alsobe used.
A number of satisfactory serological tests on the
Diagnosis
maternal serurn have beeri used including the dye test
of Sabin and Feldman, the indirect fluorescent anti-
The condition is characterized by barren ewes, abor-
body (IFA) test,radioimmunoassay and the ELISA
tions, stillbirths, and mummified and weally lambs.
lest (Buxion 1983). The ELISA test has been modified
The appearance of the placenta is diagnostic.
to detect anti-Toxoplasma inmunoglobulin G (IgG)
(Buxton et al 1988) in body fluids (Buxton 1983). The
indirect haemagglutination test (IHA) has been devel-
oped so that kits are available for use by veterinarians
in practice laboratories.A single serum sample with
an elevated titre may well only indicate past infection.
However, serology of ewes is difficult to inierpret as
antibodies remain elevated for years; paired samples
may prove beneficial;when re-taken after a 14-day
interval a rising titre is indicative of an acive infec-
tion.Infected lanbswill have precolostral antibodies,
and serology can be performed on pleural, pericardial
Or peritoneal fetal fluids, or lamh serum.If postcolos-
tral samples only are available, it is necessary to dem-
onstrate IgM and IgG antibody (Buxton 1983)
Fig.25.3 Ovine cotyledon infected with T.gondi showing the
Treatment and control
typical 'frosted strawberry'appearance.
Chenoprophylaxis with monensin given in the
food at the rate of 15 mg/animal/day during preg-
tion in sheep (Buxton et al 198s) but it is no longer
licensed in the UK for this purpose. Decoquinate, the anti-
coccidial drug. fed daily at 2 mg/kg body weight, also
significantly reduces the effect of T. gondii oocysts
ingested by pregnant sheep and is licensed in the
UK for this use. Both these products work best if
they are being fed at the time sheep encounter infec-
tion rather than after infection hasbeen established.
(Buxton et al 1996)
Ewes can be treated during the acute phase of
the disease with sulphonamides and potentiated
sulphonamides such as trimethoprim,but this is
Fig.25.4 Photograph of rormal allantochorion (right) and
expensive.A recent study has demonstrated the
one infected with T. gondii (left）. Note that, while the cotyle-
efficacy of a combination of sulfamethazine and
dons appear different, the intercotyledonary allantochorion is
pyrimethamine, which is used lo treat the disease in
similarin both specimens: clear and transparent.
humans(Buxton et al 1993)
567
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
Although there is virtually no danger of lateral
Campylobacteriosis
spread from aborting ewes, isolation in the early
Campylobacters the third most common cause of
stages of an abortion outbreak should be imple-
abortion in the Lik,and the commonest cause in
mented, since there is a possibility that other infec
New Zealand;both C. fetus feus and C.jejumi cause
tious agents may also be present,
Ewes that have aborted will be immune (see
abortion in ewes, the former being the main organ-
previous mention of possible recrudesence)and
ismisolated.
should be retained in the flock, and new addi-
Epidemiology
tions should be exposed to possible infection with
oocysts from contaminated food or bedding as
Infected,and often symptomless,aninals excrete
early as possible before the start of the breeding
these organisms in faeces. C. jejuni is mainly from
season.
a wildlife source and C. fetus fetus from carrier
An effective vaccine (Toxovax, Intervet,Li). has
sheep.Unlike in cattle,where the route ofinfec
been developed using living tachyzoites of the S48
tion is mainly venereal,in sheep it is by ingestion
sliain of T. gondi (O'Connell et al 1988,Buxton
and mainly intestinal. Once abortions occur, there
et al 1991). Ewe lambs should be vaccinated from
is lateral spread to other susceptible pregnant ewes.
5 months of age while ewes and shearlings should
The organism survives well in cold, oist condi-
be vaccinated during the 4-month period prior to
tions but soon perishes in hot, dry weather. The
tupping; pregnant animals must not be vaccinated.
only clinical signs of the disease are abortion,usu-
Recent studies show that the degree of protection
ally in the last 6 weeks of gestation; lambs at full
produced by the S48 tachyzoites was as good at 18
term may be born dead or in a weak condition,
months as 6 months after vaccination.The manu-
Apartfrom somevulvar swelling and thepresence
facturers statethat other live vaccines shouldnot be
ofa reddish-colouredvulvar discharge, ewesrarely
administered within 4weeks oftheadministration
show any other clinical signs.Metritis nay develop
ofToxovax.
after abortion, some ewes becoming ill and even
dying. Aborted material is infective.Ewes infecied
Transmission andpathogenesis
less than 3 months into pregnancy are not affected.
Without doubt, the principal vector in the spread of
If ewes are infected more than 3months into preg-
toxoplasmosis is the cat and its related wild species.
nancy, a bacteraemia develops, with placenitis
They excreie oocysts in their faeces and contaminaie
being the main lesion.In late pregnancy, abor
pasture, forage and other foodstuffs.Young cats and
tion occurs between 1 and 3weeks after infection.
older breeding cats are the main problem. Old neu-
Flocks infected for the first time may have levels
tered cats on a farm are helpful, not only in reduc
of abortion varying from 5-50%. There is a strong
ing levels ofvermin but inkeeping feral cats away.
immunity after infection, but this is serotype-
Foodstuffs should be protected from faecal contami-
specific.Symptomless carriers may excrete the
nation by cais.Wild rodents, especially mice, are the
organismfor up to 18months.
main source of infection for cats.
lnfection of ewes outside pregnancy produces
Diagnosis
a good immunity. Replacement ewes should be
exposed to the farm environment as soon as pos-
·There are signs of placentitis with oedema and
sible after purchase, so that they can ingest oucysts
necrosis of the feta! cotyledons; the intercoty
alid acquireimmunitybeforetupping(seeprevious
ledonary membrane is oedematous, hyperae-
section).
mic and slightly opaque. However, these lesions
Toxoplasma gondi can affect humans but usually
are not pathognomonic. The aborted fetus looks
does not cause clinical disease.The exceptions are
fresh, with no specific visible gross pathology;
women who become infected for the first time dur-
however, in approximately 25% of the aborted
ing pregnancy. Placental and fetal infection results in
fetuses there are characteristic circumscribed,grey,
severe damage to the unborn child. Other people at
necrotic foci in the liver (Fig. 25.5) 10-20 mm in
risk are those who are immunosuppressed and they,
diameter (Dennis 1991).
lilke pregnant women, should not assist at lambing
·Disease is coimmonest in young ewes, or older
time (Buxton 1986).
ewes that havelost theirimmunity.
568
Chapter
25
Infertility and subfertility in the ewe and doe
·Turn over feed troughs, preventing birds from
feeding at them.
●Try to keep the flock closed. Bought-in ewes should
be mixed withi the resident sheep for as long as
possible before mid-pregnancy, then separated in
late pregnancy and lambed separately.
In theUSA,NewZealand,Australasia and Europe,
a formalin-killed adjuvant vaccine incorporat-
ing the most prevalent serotypes, I and V, has
been used (Gumbrell et al 1966). Two injections,
15-30 days apart, are given either before the
breeding season or during the first half of preg-
nancy. The immunity lasts for approximately 3
years, but replacement ewes must be vaccinated.
There is some evidence that in the early stages of
an outbreak of campylobacteriosis in a flock,vac-
cination of all remaining pregnant ewes might
be worthwhile.Since there is a 10-14-day delay
before immunity develops after vaccination, early
diagnosis is imperative. No such vaccine is avail-
Fig.25.5Ovine fetal liver showing the characteristic circum-
scribed grey necrotic feci.
able at present in the UK.
Salmonellosis
·The organism can be identified in Gram- or modi-
fied Ziehl-Neelsen-stained smears from the pla-
Several serotypes cause ovine abortion, including
centa and feialsiomach contents and culiured
Salmonella abortus ovis,S.typhimurium,S.dublin
from the placenta,fetal stomach or liver.
and S.montevideo.Occasionally exotic strainshave
been isolated, often associated with imported for-
·Serology is not useful.
eign protein.
Treatment and control
Epidemiology
As soon as campylobacteriosis is suspected, abort-
Many species of animal,including humans, may act
ing ewes should be isolated from pregnant ewes.
as sources of infection,which may result, in early
If extensive lateral spread is a possibility, pregnant
pregnancy, in barren ewes and, in late pregnancy, in
ewes should be treated with intramuscular injec
abortions, and dead and weak lambs. Depending
upon the serotype,affected ewes may become illand
drostreptomycin on 2 consecutive days.
losses may be catastrophicin both ewes and lambs;
·Dispose of aborted materials as the disease is
meanwhile, those that recover may act as symptom-
zoonotic.Avoid infecting sheep over 3 months in
less carriers.
lanb, or wildlife that can later act as reservoirs of
infection.
Clinical signs
Whencampylobacteriosis has beenconfirmed,mix
aborted ewes with those already lambed to stimu-
These will varywith the serotype oforganism and
late production of a strong immunity.The disease
are summarized below.
is self-limiting, and most ewes from an infected
Salmonella abortus ovis. This is a host-specific strain,
flock acquire an immunity in the first year, irre-
once common in thesouth-westofEngland but now
spective of whether or not they have aborted. This
rarely isolated. Few systemic clinical signs occur in
acquired immunity lasts about 3 years,in most
ewes other than abortion, which usually occurs in
circumstances, equal to the expected breeding life
the last 6 weeks of pregnancy. Symptomless carriers
ofthe ewe.
are often a problem(Jack1968).
569
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Two distinct clinical pictures may be observed in
Lambs born alive maybecome ill with fatal sep-
the lambs:
ticaemia or ppeumonia, especially in cases of S.
Theymaybeborn weakanddiewithin afew
typhimrionand S.dublin infection.
hours of birth
·Identification of the organism follows culture of
They may beborn healthy, suddenly become ill
fetal stomach contents,placental tissue orvaginal
and diein thefirst10 daysoflife.
discharges. In addition,fluorescent antibody tech-
niquesmayalsobeusedfortherapiddiagnosisof
Salmonellamontevideo.This strain hasbeen aprob-
organismsin the sametissues.
lemin south-eastScotlandforseveralyears.Apart
from abortion,there hasbeen litue evidence of sys-
·Serological tesis canbeused to diagnose infection
temicillness.During the severe winter of 1982,an
with S.abortus ovis.
abortion rate of 10.1%was noted in11500breeding
ewes.Severeweather,with prolonged cold stress,
Transmission and pathogenesis
necessitated close congregation of these sheep for
the early provision of foodstuffs. These arrange-
S.abortus ovis is host-specific and is usually intro-
duced into a flock by infected sheep.Other strains
mentsmayhavecompoundedtheproblemand
led to water courses being polluted,resulting in
ofSalmonella are not host-specificand canbe intro-
duced throughcontaminatedfood,water,wildbirds
animals downstream becominginfected.However,
itwas eventually thoughtthat seabirdshad amajor
or other infected livestock.Once the disease has
become established,it will readily spread by inges-
part to play.The disease is not as severe as cases
of S.typhinuriun and S.dublin infection,and diar-
tionofcontaminatedbedding,foodorwater.There
rhoea is not a feature in lambs born alive(Linklater
is always a danger that symptomless carriers may
1983).
remainintheflock,providingapersistentreservoir
ofinfection.
Salmonella typhimurium.The clinical picture in
the ewe is totally different from those previously
S.montevideo appears to have a predilection for
described.Anorexia,pyrexia (up to 106°F) and pro-
shieep andcould become endemicin the sheep
fuse scourareusual.Afoul-smellingvaginaldischarge
population of the LIK (Linklater 1983). It has been
isolatedfrommesentericlymph nodes of sheepat
may be present.Death may occur from septicaemia
abattoirs all theyear aroundand thus thecarry-over
or dehydration in 6-9days.Lambs may bebon
dead,and those that areborn alive may showsigns
ofinfection from year to year can occur in sheep
themselves.
ofsevereillnesswith diarrhoea andahighmortality
rate.Severelosses among the ewesare notunusual
Numerousobservershavecommentedthatthedis-
Treatment and control
ease often follows times of stress, e.g. after gathering.
A number of general principles have been suggested
winter shearing.housing and vaccination (Hunter
for thecontrolofS.montevideothat are applicableto
Salmonella dublin.The clinical signs are not nor-
otherSalmonellastrains(Linklater1983):
mally as severein bothewesandlambs aswith
Isolateaffectedsheepthathaveaborted,orscoured
S.typhimriuminfection.Deathisusuallyfrom septi-
profusely, and treat with an antibiotic to which
caemiaordehydration,andmortalityrates areusually
the salmonellae are sensitive,thus limiting excre-
much lower(Baker et al 1971).
tion of theorganism
·Keep aborted ewes separate from those yet tolamb
Diagnosis
·If birds are possibly the source of infection, turn
overfeed troughs when not in use;regularly change
Iis important to stress that Salmonella strains,
thefeeding area and avoid feeding on the ground
other than S.bortus ovis,arezoonoses,hence care
shouldbeexercisedwhendealingwithinfected
Avoid stress situations arising within the flock,
material.
such asfrequentmovingandmake sure thatfood
·The clinical picture is that of scouring and
stuffsare freely available with sufficient trough
pyrexic ewes. Before, or in association with,
space to avoid competitiveness
abortion, a foul-smelling vaginal discharge may
·Try to prevent sheep drinking from streams and
be present.
open ditches by using piped fresh water.
570
Chapter
251
Infertility and subfertilityintheewe and doe
Listeriosis
liver and the production of leratitis in rabbits are
additional tests.
Listeria have a worldwide distribution in sev-
eral domestic species, especially ruminanis, and
account for approximately 2% of ovine abortions
Treatment
in the UiK. Two strains of Lisieria produce disease
The organisms are sensitive to a wide range of anti-
in sheep, L.monocyiogenes and L, ivanovii, and the
biotics that may prove beneficial if given to ewes
disease maybepresented in one or more of the fol-
that have aborted and are discharging.
lowing forms:
encephalitis
Transmission and pathogenesis
abortion
L.monocytogenes is ubiquitous,frequently found in
·diarrhoea and sepricaemia
soilbut also isolatedfrom foodstuffs andfaeces of
·keratoconjunctivitis, iritis and mastitis
healthy animals. Soil is the most likely source of
infection, especially following the feeding of soil-
septicaemia and death in young lambs
contaminated silagewhere poor fermentation has
The incidence of listeriosis has increased in the UK
occurred. Sheep are probably frequently exposed
in recent years, with encephalitis being the common-
to infection, but presumably it requires some other
est form. Neurological signs characteristic of listerial
factors to precipitate clinical listeriosis. Following
encephalitis are circling with evidence of unilateral
ingestion in late pregnancy, the organism penetrates
facial paralysis, head tilting, and urning. Abortions
the gut mucosa and infecis the fetus, causing a sep-
ticaemia and placentitis,both of which may kill the
fetal lamb.As a consequence,abortion occurs.
they are most frequent in late pregnancy. Initially,
sheep may be pyrexic. There are no distinguishing
 characteristics to the abortion, and usually no trypical
Control
cumplications followingexpulsionof the fetus,which
Allabortedewesshouldbeisolatedandthe abor-
maybe autolysed.Weally lambs are oftenbon,and
tion site cleaned up.
grey/white miliary foci of necrosis may be seen in the
In Iceland, listeriosis is called 'silage disease
and it has been suggested that the feeding of silage
villi are necrotic and the chorion is covered with a
appears to make ewes more susceptible to listeriosis
brownish red exudate; there is a heavy brown vaginal
(Gronstol 1980).
discharge (Low & Linklater 1985), and rarely death of
The incidence of listeriosis in all its forms has
the ewe occurs from metritis or septicaemia.
increased dramatically with the practice of feed
Several forms of the disease may be present in
ing silage to sheep,especially that stored inround
the flock at fhe same time. In one outbreak, diar-
bales. In a survey carried out in Scotland by Fenlon
rhoea andsepticaemia occurred 2 days after the
(1985), L. monocytogenes was isolated from 2.5%
commencement of silage feeding and,although the
silage was removed, encephalitis was seen 4 weeks
1984 respectively,and from22%and 4% samples
of big-bale silage. A more recent survey in Scotland
seen in thesame ewes, and it is rarefor the nervous
shiowed that 10% of flocks hadcases of listerio-
disease and abortions to occur together.Abortions
sis and 80% of these fed silage(Martin &Aitken
under field conditions have been reported as soon
2000).
as 7 days after the feeding of suspect silage (Low &
Attempts should bemade during silage production
Renton1985).
to develop conditions that are not favourable for the
multiplication of the organisms.Low & Linklater
Diagnosis
(1985) made the following recommendations:
Diagnosis is based on isolation of the organism
●se additives to reduce the pHI of the silage; make
from vaginal swabs, fetal membranes or the fetus,
high-quality silagewith a pH below 5,avoiding
and fetal liver lesions.
gross soil contamination (where the ash content
Smith et al (1968) haveused fluorescent antibody
exceeds 70 mg/kg dry matter), i.e. avoid mole hills
techniques,while noculation of mice withnecrotic
and havingforageharvesters settoo low
571
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
· Coinpact and seal silage the same day as made,
becomes responsive to antigenic stimuli between
making sure that round bales are securely tied and
days 60-80 of gestation afterwhich other signs may
not punctured
become deterriblein the lambs (Neltleton 1990)
·Avoid feeding obviously mouldy or poor-quality
silage that can be smelled or has come from the
Diagnosis
top or sides of the pit
This cah be made on clinical signs in lambs, sup-
·Remove any silage that has not been eaten by
ported by histopatliologicalexamination of the
sheep after 48 hours
brain and spinal cord,virus isolation from the lamb,
·On farms where listeriosis occurs annually it
or a fluorescent antibody staining technique. Usually
would be advisable not to graze any fields with
there are no gross lesions detecied in the placenta.
livestock that are intended for silage-malking.
Listeriosis also has zoonotic implications.
have tobe examined in relation to the antibody lev-
els present in other ewes in the flock.
Border disease
Transmission
This disease was first recognized in flocks along the
English-Welsh border in the 1950s (llughes et al
Pestiviruses from other species can also, under
1959), affecting newborn lamhs that showed neuro-
experimental conditions,cause Border disease in
logical symptomssuchastremor and acoarsefleece
sheep so that,among domestic animals,catle in
(so-called ‘hairy shakers') and were generally weak
particular but also goats represent potential sources
with a high mortality rate.Since then,it hasbeen rec-
of infection. Carlsson (1991), reported rwo nalu-
ognized in many other areas within theUIK (Barlow
ral outbreaks of Border disease where sheep were
&Dickinson 1965,Acland et al 1972,Sweasey el al
housed in close confinement with calves persistently
1979, Nettleton 1990). It has also been shown to
infectedwithnon-cytoplasmicBVDvirus
calise reproductive failure.
However, the most lilkely source of infection is
from ewe lambs that haverecovered from Border dis-
Aetiology
easebeing introduced into the flock.These individu-
als remain chronic excretors of the virus for a long
The disease is due to infection with a pestivirus
period of tine, yet appear healthy. Although likely to
similar to thatwhich causesbovineviral diarrhoea
have reduced fertility, they can givebirth to infected
(BVD) in cattle and European swine fever.
progeny that themselves are a source of infection.
Someram lambscanexcrete thevirus in theirsemen
Clinical signs
andtheymay have poor fertilityassociatedwith
small, soft testes (Barlow and Gardiner 1983).
'The clinical signs in lambs are well docuniented
elsewhere,so called‘hairy shakers’or‘fuzzy lambs’
Treatment and control
(Barlow& Gardiner1983,Netilelon 1990).In adult
ewes,infection results in a mild pyrexia that would
There is no treatment and, as yet, there is no com-
probably go undiagnosed.However, if ewes are preg
mercially available vaccine, although one may
nant,the outcome depends upon the age of fetal
become available eventually. The disease is best con-
development;the virus will affect the fetus caus
trolled by ensuring that the flock remains closed
ing fetal death with mummification,abortion or,if
and hence the disease does not gain entry. Once it is
early on in fetal life,death with resorption,or the
present in a flock it is important, in the carly stages
birth of weakly affecied lambs.Abortion can occr
of the outbreak, to altempt to segregate pregnant
at any stage ofgestation,although it is mosi com-
ewes from those that have given birth to clinically
mon around 90 days with the voiding of a brown.
affected lambs.At the same time, to ensure that non-
mummifiedorswollenanasarcouisfetus[Barlow&
pregnant ewes develop an immunity, they should be
Gardiner 1983).The conceptus is most susceptible
exposed to infection and, thereafter, any surviving
to experimental infection within the first 60 days of
lambsfrom theinfected flockshouldnotberetained
gestalion and if infection occurs at an early stage
for breeding and should be sent for slaughter, so
the only clinical sign will be barrenness. The ferus
that syrnptomless carriers do notremain.
572
Chapter
251
 Infertility and subfertility in the ewe and doe
Leptospirosis
Control
The disease occurs in late gestation and the imme-
Control is by vaccination, using a quarter of the cat-
diate postparum period, resulting in severe losses
tle dose of L. hardja vaccine before tupping, with a
for the farmer.A totalof 6.4% ofaduli sheep in
repeat dose in 2-4 weeks (Ellis 1992).
England and Wales from 3722 sera, collected from
Those ewes that have not aborted when an abor-
1S8widely distributed flocks,had antibodies to
tion storm occurs can be treated with 25mg/kg of
Leptospira interogans serovar hardjo (Hathaway et al
dihydrostreptomycin as a single dose.
1982).
It usually occurs during two short periods of time
Brucellosis
when sheep are physiologicallyimmunoconpro-
mised, i.e. in ewes 2 weels before lambing and in
Sheep can be infected with both Brncella meliten-
neonatal lamhs in the first week of life.
sis and B. ovis. The former is endemic in many
Mediterranean countries,Africa and Central
America:it does not occur in the UIK.The latter has
Epidemiologyand transmission
been reported in paris of castern Europe, South
The disease is not seen in traditionally managed
Africa,western states of theUSA,NewZealand and
hill flocks but it occurs when they are bought as
Australia;it does not occur in the UK.
replacements for intensively reared and housed
B.meliensis is primarily a disease of sheep and
lowland flocks. Reproductive wastage occurs dur-
goats, but can affect other species, including man
ing the first lambing season but not in subse-
(Malta fever).Transmission is by direct ingestion of
quent years. There is still debate over whethier or
the products of abortion or drinling infected millk.
not sheep are a maintenance host for the infec-
It causes abortions,stillbirths orweaklambs in late
lion or whether ihere is a requirement for cattle
pregnancy.The placental lesions are similar to those
asan established maintenance host tobe closely
identified with B.aborus infection in cattle,and
involved (Cousins et al 1989).Nevertheless,it is
diagnosis is by direct examination or cuulture of pla-
generally recognized as good practice, in the con-
cental smears,fetal stomach contents orvaginal dis-
trol of the disease,to minimize contact between
charges. Serological tests, such as ihe compleiment
the two species.
fixation test, are used.The disease can be controlled
by using B.melitensis or B. nbortus S19 vaccines.
B.ovis's main eflect is upon the ram, where it
Clinical signs
causes an epididymitis and subsequent infertility or
The clinical sign in adult ewes is reproductive
sterility (see Ch. 30).Following experimental infec-
wastage in the form of late-term abortion, still-
tion of the ewe, the organism causes a placentitis fol-
birth and the birth ofweak lambs.Of 872 aborted
lambs examinedatStorrmontinNorthernlreland
small weak lambs.However, under field conditions,
between 198l and 1987,a totalof17% were
abortion rarely occurs, and according to Hartley et al
infected with Leptaspira,the majority with hiardjo.
（1954).ifit doesoccur,theincidence isusually low
L.hardjo has also been isolated from the brains of
(7-10%). While a ram can be infected after serving
lambs with meningitis.Agalactia, as seen in cows
a ewepreviously served by aninfectedram,the ewes
(see Ch.23), has also been observed in L.hardjo-
themselves are not infected venereally. The method
infected ewes in Northern Ireland (McKeown&
ofinfection of ewes is not fully understood.Until
Ellis 1986).
recently it was thought that B. ovis was host-spe-
cific; however, infection has been discovered in stags
showing similarclinical signstothose seen inrams
Diagnosis
Stags contract infection from infectedramis or other
In cases of abortion,stillbirth orweakly lambs diag-
infected stags (Ridler 2002).
nosis is based on theisolation ofthe organism from
aborted fetuses or fetal membranes, iis demonstra-
Q fever
tion, by a fluorescent antibody technique, in the
same tissues or placenta,or the presence of a rising
This is due to infection with thericketsiaCoxiella
antibody titre in paired blood samples.
burneti Although of little significance in sheep
573
Part
5
 Subfertility and infertility
farming, it has been associated with a small
Treatment
number of outbreaks of ovine abortion in the
Oxytetracycliuecan be used for the rest of the naive
UK(Marmion & Watson 1961).Its main impor-
tance is its public health implications, producing
flock.
influenza-like symptoms, pneumonia and car-
diac lesions in humans, and thus it is important
Control
that the agent is recognized when fetal material is
Infected ewes thiat survive develop an immunity.
examined to avoid the possibility of human infec-
while the majority of all sheep from tick-infected
tion.Microscopically,it may easilyhe misiaken for
B.abortus or C. abortus.
Placenta and vaginal discharges are heavily con-
age.Newly purchiased norn-acclimatized sheep
taminated, allowing spread of infection at parturi-
should be introduced to farms before tupping,pref-
crably when tick numbers are at their highest. Ticks
fion orlater by aerosol from thefleece or dustin the
lambing area, acting as a source for human infection
can also be controlled by adopting the appropriate
(Watson 1973).
dipping routine.
It is noteworthy that rams during the breed-
ing season,when exposed to tick-borne fever for
Ureaplasmosis
the first time, can have reduced fertility for sev-
Lreaplasma spp. have been isolated from normal
eral months due to poor sperm quality (Watson
ewes (Ball et al 1984) and from ewes with granu-
1964).
lar vulvitis(Doig& Ruhnke 1977）.There is some
suggestion that they are common inhabitants of
Blue tongue
the urogenital tract of sheep.Ureaplasmas have
been identified as a cause of infertility and abor-
The blue tongue virus (BTV) appears to have orig-
tions in cattle and in otlier non-domestic species,
inated from the African coniinent,where it had
and may have a possible role in infertility and abor-
adapteditself tobothvertebrate and invertebrate
tion in sheep (Livingstone et al 1978). The ram has
hosts and for many years it was accepted that it
been implicated as a major distributor of infection
was confined lo the central African continent
(McCaughey& Ball 1981).
(Bruere & West 1993). However, spread occurred
to the north African countries surrounding the
Mediterranean and into Cyprus and Turkey in
Tick-borne fever
the mid 1940s. Blue tongue was first diagnosed
This is limited to those areas where the sheep tick
Ixodes ricinus occurs, since almost all ticks har
of the states of America,where it was detected in
bour the infective agent Anaplasma phagocytophi-
cattle, sheep, goats and wild ruminants (Bruere &
hum. The disease is known in the southwest of
West 1993).
England,Scotland,Scandinavia,the Netherlands
It was first recognized in Europe in 1956,being
and South Africa. Abortion in adult sheep, previ-
seen in both sheep and cattle first in Portugal
ously unexposed to ticks,occurs naturally follow-
and then Spain.In the late summer and autumn
ing tick-borne fever infection in late pregnancy,
of 2006 outbreaks of blue tongue in sheep and
usually 2-8 days after the commencement of a
cattle occurred in north-west Europe. A total of
fever, which can be as high as 107"F. A proportion
2056 cases were reported up to January 2007; in
of pregnant ewes may die. Some fetuses may die in
Septernber 2007, the disease was reporied for the
utero, become mummified and be expelled weeks
first time in the UK. Blue tongue is caused by the
later. Recovery in non-pregnant ewes is generally
blue tongue virus (BTV),which is transmitted by
luneventful.
the Culicoides midge: it affecis all ruminants, espe-
cially sheep, where the infection can be serious, as
Diagnosis
in some wild ruminants, e.g.white tail deer. The
European outbreak was caused by blue tongue
Diagnosis can be confirmed by identifying the organ-
virus serotype8,not previously detected in Europe,
ism in the leukocytes of ewes that have aborted, or
and the vector was the midge Culicoides devulfi.
during the septicaemic phase.
Interestingly some European breeds of sheep are
574
Chapter
25
Infertilityandsubfertilityintheewe anddoe
more susceptible to infection than other breeds.
Control
The disease has been seen in the Mediteranean
Serotype-specific vaccines have been developed
countriesofEuropeforsometimewherethecli-
and their use in sheep has reduced morbidity and
mate is warmer and thevecior midge is ableto
overwinter or the virus survives longer in the sus-
mortality.
ceptible host (Elliott 2007).
Themost important control measure is therestric
tion of movement ofruminants.Following the
European outbreakof 2006 the UKhasrestictions
Epidemiology
onthemovementofanimalsfromBTVrestricted
This is about the relationship between the blue
zones in Europe and the transiting of these zones by
ruminants. Imported ruminants are tested 7-10 days
tongue virus, the vector (the midge) and the rumi-
nanthost,theinteraction andoutcome ofwhich is
after arrival attheir destination.
dependenton climaticfactors,especiallytempera
fure.Blue tongue does not spread by direct contact
Goats
and is only spread by certain species of the biting
midge (Elliott 2007）. Itis also possible that the virus
may be transmitted by using the same needle on a
In theabsence ofanymajorinfectiouscauseof abor
flock of sheep during vaccination procedures. Cattle
tion,infertility in the goat is generally not a major
areimportant in the epidemiology ofthe disease,
problem,normally with onlya small number of
the main reservoir of infection, and may remain
barren does remaining at the end of thebreeding
viraemic for up to 100 days.
season.
Clinical
Structural defects
Signs are due to widespread damage of the endothe-
lium of blood vessels; pyrexia occurs, lameness due
Abnormal sexual differentiation during embryologi-
to haemorrhages in the coronary band and salivation
cal andfetal development,resultinginintersexes,is
due to hyperaemia of the muzzle, tongue and buc
relativelycommonin thegoat,especiallyinbreeds
calmucosa;purple-blue discoloration of the tongue
such as the Alpine, Saanen and Toggenburg. It is
maybeseen,hencethediseasename ofbluetongue.
much moreprevalent inpolled individuals,where
The infection in Belgium up to the end of October
‘pollednessis a simple dominant character with
2006 resulted in a mortality rate of 1.35% in sheep.
fill penetrance but is also associated with a reces-
Poor conception rate may be seen and reproduc-
sive hermaphrodite effect with incomplete pene-
tivelosses may occur inpregnant sheep with early
trance (Baxendell 1985).Intersexes can also occur
embryonicmortality,abortion,mummificationand
as a result of freemartinism,where placental fusion
the birth of stillborn or deformed lambs thatmaybe
occurs in twins of dissimilar sex;examples of goat
blind and unable to stand.Rams may be temporar-
freermartinism havebeenreportedbySmith&Dunn
ilyinfertile.
(1981).However,the incidence ofhermaphrodit-
Generally the disease in goats ismild and may
ism appears to be higher than that of freemartinism
often be missed;in cattle the disease is usually
in this species;freemartinism in goats is much less
sub-clinical,up to5%may have mild clinical signs
common thanin catle(Jackson2004).
(Elliott 2007),
Hermaphrodites that have been described in goats
No specific treatment is available, and it has to be
are mainly male pseudohermaphrodites, having
symptomatic.Immunity is life long:it is serorype-
testes and the accessory reproductive organs of the
specific,with lintle cross protection against other
female; they are genetic females.
serotypes.
Intersexes varyin the degree ofexternal struc-
turalabnormality.Mostaregenerallyfemale-likein
Diagnosis
appearance at birth but, as they grow and mature,
therewillbe evidence ofan enlarged clitorisperhaps
Variousserologicaltestsareavailabletodemonstrate
testes in ihe inguinal region and the development
antibodiestothevirus;theviruscan alsobeisolated
ofmale secondary sexcharacteristic,including the
from blood or lymphoid tissues.
typical male odour (see Ch.4).
575
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Functional factors
and in some thiere is a degree ofudder develop
ment if not,the onset of lactogenesis. lhose thiat
are lactatirfg may have a fall in yield. This type of
The goat is a seasonal brceder responding to the
false pregnancy generally lasts for ihe duration of
effects of declining day length. lt is not unusual to
the gestation period, or even longer, until the CL
have irregular oestrous cycles at the beginning and
has regressed spontaneously.The term'cloudburst
end of the breeding season, especially in goatlings,
is lsed to describe the voiding of large volumes
with short cycles of between 5 and 7 days.
of fluid from the uterus as the pseudopregnancy
Anoestrus may be due to starvation, parasitism or
is terminated. Following this, the abdominal dis-
mineral deficiencies. In the case of the latter, phos-
tension disappears; some does may search for the
phorus and tie trace elements copper, iodine and
'missing'kids
manganese as well as vitamin E have been impli-
● Following oestrus, when the doe was not mated,
cated.Itcan also beinfluenced bychronicdebilitating
there is cessation of cyclical ovarian activity but
diseases.
there is no marked hydromeira.At the end of the
period of acyclicity. affected does expel a bloody
discharge (Smith 1986). Therefore, any unbred
Hydrometra or pseudopregnancy
does that do not return to oestrus after their first
('cloudburst')
oestrous cyde in the autunn, should be treated
Hydromeira is the accumulation of sterile secretions
with PGF for possible pseudopregnancy.
within the uterine lumen.The aetiology of the con-
Differentiation of hydrometra from normal preg-
dition is not known precisely but it is always asso-
nancy can be made using transabdominal B-mode
ciatedwithhighprogesterone levels secreted by a
ultrasound imaging, demonstrating the presence
persistent functionalcorpus luteum(CL),cessation
ofa fluid-filleduterus in the absence ofa fetus or
of cyclical activity andvariable degrees of abdomi-
placentomes.After 50 days of anoestrus, pregnancy
nal distension.The incidence of the disease varies
and pseudopregnancy can be differentiated on the
between herds andwithin the same herd from year
basis of serum oestrone sulphate levels (see preg-
toyear.Studies involving 71 dairy herds in France
nancy diagnosis in goats in Ch.3).Treatiment with
found anoverall incidence of 2-3%(Mialot et al
2.5mg PGF, will be followed by expulsion of the
1991),although on one farm in the study it was
fluid and oestrus will occur in approximately 4 days.
20%.In Holland,Hesselink(1993a) found a mean
By using a second injection 12 days after the first,
incidence in three herds, totalling 550 does, of 9%.
good levels of ferility can be achieved with 85%
The disease occurs more frequently in older does
conceiving, compared with 95% of unaffected ani-
and is unrommon in yearlings. A more recent sudy
mals (Hesselink 1993b)
in the UK (Griffiths et al 2006) detected an over-
all incidence of5.74% (511 cases out of 8906 does).
Other findings were similar to those of Hesselink,he
Cystic ovarian disease
incidence in maiden females(0.94%) beingmuch
Iyngset (1968) found an incidence of 2.4% ovar-
less than the incidence in adults (6.64%).
ian cysts at necropsy. Most were unilateral, single
and varied in sizebetween 1.2and3.7cm.Jackson
to be an association with the use of progestogen
(2004)quotes an abattoir survey where cysts were
sponges and eCG treatment to advance the onset of
seen in 12% of does examined, but the nature of
cyclical activitybefore the start of the normal breed-
the cysts and their progesterone contents were not
ing season.
known.
One possible cause of bydrometra is early embry-
Cystic ovarian disease has been described in dairy
onic loss. However, not all animals will have been
breeds and has been particularly evident where they
mated by the buck prior to the development of
have grazed oestrogenic clovers and legumes (Baxendell
pseudopregnancy.
1985). A history of nymphomania may suggest follicu-
Two types of pseudopregnancy occur:
lar degeneration, and the typical clinical signs are those
·Fertilization, after mating. is followed by early
of continuous oestrous and short interoestrous intervals
embryonic death,the CLpersists and the doe acts
with a failure to conceive.They should be treated with
as if pregnant. The abdomen becomes enlarged,
1500-2500iulofhuman chorionicgonadotrophin
576
Chapter
251
Infertility and subfertilityin the ewe and doe
(hCG); gonadotrophin-releasing hornone (GnRH);
Nutrition
or progesterone treatment for 18 days (Smith 1986).
Vitamin A, certain minerals (manganese and iodine)
and energy deficiencies reduce fertility and may be
Abortion in Angora goats
associated with abortion when the deficiency is
Abortion has bcen recognized as a problem in
chronic.
Angora goats in the Eastern Cape province of South
Africasince the turn of the century, and it has reached
Stress
such proporions as to threaten the viabiliry of the
mohair industry.
Stress-induced abortionhas been described above in
Recent studies have identified two types of abortion:
Angora goats. However, there is evidence that other
breeds of goat willabort if subjected to stress.This can
·The most common is a 'stress-induced’ abortion,
result from being chased by dogs, inadequate feeding.
whichoccurs inpoorlygrown and immature does
transportation and adverse weather, particularly dur-
The aborius is fresh and may be bom alive.This is the
ing the fourth month of gestation (Shelton 1986).
major type of abortion loss in production operations.
High metabolic requirements for fibre production in
the Angora predispose the breed to nutritional and
Infectious agents
otherforms of stress toa greater degree thian goats of
ouher breeds (Shelton 1986). It has been suggested
by Wenzel et al (1976) that hypoglycaemia in preg-
Non-specificinfections appear to play a minor role
nani does stimulates the immature fetal adrenal to
in causing infertility in does, probably for simi-
produce oestrogen precursors, which result in the
lar reasonis discussed above for the ewe. Hlowever,
placental synthesis of oestrogens and subsequent
specific infectious agents are important in causing
abortions;blood glucose concentrations are influ-
abortion.Llnfortunately,little information on their
enced by short-term interruptions in food intake.
relative importance in the Uk is available. Many
Most abortions occur between 90 and 120 days of
of these specific infectious agents are also impor-
gestation,at the time of rapid fetal growth.ltmay be
tant in sheep. A survey of diagnoses recorded at
seen as a storm 1-2 days after stress
VLA Regional Laboralories in Englandand Wales
Habitual abortion' is probably a genetically deter-
and Disease Surveillance Centres in Scotland list-
mined hyperactivity of the maternal adrenal cortex,
ing the infectious causes of goat fetopathy identi-
prematurely initiating the process of parurition
fiedinmaterialsubmittedtotheirlaboratoriesfrom
(Shelton 19s6).Fetuses, which are usually born
1996-2005 is summarized in Table 25.2.
dead,are often oedematous.Habitual aborters
should be culled, together with any live offspring
Brucellosis
that may have survived. Does abort in the absence
of stress, and levels as high as 5% may occur in
Brucella melitensis is the organism most frequently
flocks that do not practise culling,
involved and is endemic inmany Mediterranean
countries, Afica and Central America; it does not
occur in the UK. B. abortus has occasionally caused
Management factors
ahortion but B.ovis has not been isolated from
goats.
Timing of service or artificial
B. melitensis causes abortion in late pregnancy,
stillbirths or weakly lids; following the first expo-
insemination
sure,abortion may be in the form ofa storin.Few
Optimum pregnancy rates are obtained when does
abortions occur in other years, and some does
are mated towards the end of oestrus (which lasts
may become sterile from uterine lesions.Kids may
12-36 hours) and just before ovulation. Some goat
becomeinfected from does'milk(Smith 1986).The
owners serve their does only in the first 12 hours
disease can be diagnosed by barterial culture from
of oestrus, supposedly to increase the number of
thefetus,fetal membranesorvaginal discharges,and
femalekids but with a consequential reduction in
can be controlled by routine vaccination. It is impor-
pregnancy rates (Baxendell 1985).
tant to remember that B.melitensis is a zoonosis.
577
Part
8
5
Subfertility andinfertility
Table25.2Frequencyof isolationofpathogensfromgoatfetopathiesrecordedat theVeterinaryLaboratoryAgencyregional laboratoriesinEnglandandWalesand
DiseaseSurveillanceCentresinScotland
Goat
1996(%)
1997(%)
1998(%)
1999(%)
2000(%)
2001(%)
2002(%)
2003(%)
2004(%)
2005(%)
Diagnosisnot listed
25.9
14.3
6.3
0.0
0.0
7.1
33.3
0.0
12.5
10.0
Arcanobacterium
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.7
5.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
pyogenes
Campylobacter
2.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
12.5
0.0
Chlamydophia
14.8
21.4
25.0
20.0
29.4
28.6
16.7
20.0
25.0
70.0
abortus
Coxiellaburnettii
3.7
14.3
18.8
0.0
17.6
21.4
0.0
0.0
12.5
0.0
Fungi
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Listeria
14.3
12.5
26.7
17.6
21.4
0.0
20.0
25.0
10.0
mionocytogenes
Salmonella
0.0
7.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
abortusovis
Salmonella dublin
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Toxoplasmosis
18.5
28.6
37.5
40.0
29.4
21.4
50.0
60.0
12.5
10.0
Total submitted
49
46
38
35
42
37
20
30
19
34
%identified
55.1
30.4
42.1
42.9
40.5
37.8
30.0
16.7
42.1
29.4
 Diagnosis not
44.9
69.6
57.9
57.1
59.5
62.2
70.0
E'88
57.9
70.6
reached
Chapter
251
Infertilityandsubfertilityintheeweand doe
Campylobacteriosis
Leptospirosis
Thisisuncommon.Itiscausedbyinfectionwith
Although it is not a frequently diagnosed cause of
Campylobacter spp.,probably C.jejumi and possibly
abortion there arereportsin theliterature(Vander
C.fensfens.Doesmayormaynot showevidence ofa
Hoeden1953,Baxendell 1985),particularlyassoci-
systemicillness andmay abort in lategestation orpro-
atedwith Leptospira grippotyphosa infection.There is
duce stillborn or weakly kids and have a post-abor
usually systemicillnessprecedingthe abortion asso-
tion muco-or sanguinopurulent discharge.Multiple
ciatedwithsepticaemia,butclinical signsoficterus
necroticfoci upto2mmin diametermaybe seen in
are not often present.
theliver of the aborted kids.Diagnosis,treatment and
Diagnosis is based upon identification of the
control are similar to those described for sheep.
organism and serological tests.The disease can be
treatedintheacutephasewithstreptomycinbutit
isdoubtful if thiswillprevent abortionfrom occur-
Chlamydophila(enzootic) abortion
ring. Control measures, involving the use of vac-
cines,might betried in an outbreak.
Thisis animportantcauseofinfertility ingoats in
many countries,and is the commonest cause of
infectious goat abortion in the USA (East 1986).
Listeriosis
Infectionis due toChlamydoplilaabortus,which is
Encephalitis duetoListeriamonocytogenesinfection
similar to,or identical with,the strain responsible
isquitecommonin goats.Thesameorganism can
forenzooticabortion in sheep.
cause abortion in late gestation or stillbirth.The
Abortions usually occur in thelast4weeks of ges
does may showno signsbefore aborting but may
tation,with levels ashigh as 25-60%in doeskid-
develop a necroticmetritis and vaginal discharge
dingforthefirst time;stillborn andweaklykidscan
shortly afterwards.
also occur.
As in sheep and cattle, poorly fermented, soil-
Mathews(2007) states that anumberof features
contaminated silageisalikelysource ofinfection.
different from those seenin sheep may be seen in
The pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and control
goats:
are similar to those described for sheep.
·Abortion may occur at any time of pregnancy
·Colonization of the placenta may occur at any
Salmonellosis
stageofpregnancy
From timeof infection to abortion may be as little
There arenohost-specificSalmonella species in the
as2weeks
goat. However, the ubiquitous salmonellae have
Vaginal secretions may occur as early as 9 days
been reported to cause abortion(Baxendell 1985).
before abortion and last as long as 12 days after
abortion
Toxoplasmosis
The doe may become ill with septicaemia and
Toxoplasmagondii is thecommonest causeofinfec-
pneumoniapost-abortion.
tious goat abortion in the Uk.lt causes fetal death
Diagnosis and treatment are similar to those
with resorption ifinfection occurs early in gesta-
described above for sheep.Does infected inlate
tion,or abortion of kids,which may be stillborn,
pregnancy usually abort during the subsequent preg-
alive but weak or normal, depending upon the time
nancy and can prodluce infected kids,which,after a
in pregnancy that the doe was exposed to infection.
latent phase,abort during theirfirst renancy.h
Hlowever,unlike in sheep,fetal death is preceded
disease is best controlled by good hygiene to prevent
in somecases bya period ofsevereillness with
lateralspreadtosusceptibleanimalsespeciallykids
pyrexia,anorexia,diarrhoea and muscle wealness
and young does,and theuse of avaccine,which has
(Dubeyetal 1980).Duringan acute infection,toxo-
beenmadecompulsoryinsomecountrieswhereihe
plasms maybeexcreted in themilk(Dubey 1980)
diseasehasbecome widespread (Polydorou 1981).
andbea sourceofhumaninfectionifthemilkis
Enzovax,whichisused in sheep,is not licensed for
drunk unpasteurized (Skinner et al 1990). Also,
use in goats in the UK.
experimentally at least,toxoplasmsmay bepres-
C.abortus is a zoonosis.
ent ingoat semenfora variable time after infection
579
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
(Dubey & Sharma 1980)but the epidemiological
dullness,depression and anorexia.Theabortion rate
significanceofthis,asin sheep（Blewettet al 1982),
can be veryhighin some infecled herds（5-50%,
maybe very slight.
Miller et al 4986). Large numbers of organisms are
The placentallesionsarevery similar to those
expelledintotheenvironmentfromplacental tissue,
described in sheep.Diagnosis is dependent upon
uterine fluids,colostrum and milk (see Sheep sec
identification of the organism in placental tissue or
tion).Ticks havealsobeen implicated in the spread
serologicaltests.Buxton(1998)statesthat,likesheep,
ofQfeverandmaybetheinitial meansofintroduc
themajority of does develop a protective immunity
tion into theherd.
following infection and areprotected against future
Diagnosis ismadeupon identification ofthe
challenges duringpregnancy and shouldberetained
organism in smears of the placenta or the organs of
within the herd,while young, non-pregnant does
the abortus, and serological tests deimonstrating a
shouldbeexposedtoinfectionbeforetheybecome
rising antibody titre.
pregnant.However,repeated abortion has been
There is no vaccine and does can remain chronic
reported(Dubey1982).Harwood(2007) states'that
carriers of the organism; C. burneti is a zoonosis and
immunity in goats following infection appears to be
is excreted in milk.
poot,rshort lived,in comparison tosheep and asa
result some goats that have been previously exposed
andconsidered to beimmunemay besusceptible
References
toanewenvironmental challengeorto thereacti-
vation ofanexistinglatentinfection duringtimes
Acland HM,Gard GP,PlantJW1972Aust Vet]48:70
ofstress,disease orinjurySeeRecrudescenceunder
Aitken ID 1986In Pract8:236
Toxoplasmosis in sheep(p.566).
Aitken ID,ClarksonM],LinklaterK1990Vet Rec126:136
Domesticcats andwildFelidaeplayacriticalrole
AppleyardWT,AitkenID,Anderson Il 1985Vet Rec
in the spread of thedisease,as in sheep.
116:535
Treatment and control measures are similar 1o
Baker JE,Faull WB,Rankin JEF 1971 VetRec S8:270
those described for sheep (see above). Toxovax is
BallH,McCaugheyW,IrwinD1984BrVetI140:347
not licensed for use in goats.
Barlow BA,DickinsonAG 1965 ResVet Sci 6:230
Barlow RM, Gardiner AC 1983 In:Martin WB (ed) Diseases
T.gondi is a zoonosis and thus care should be
of sheep.Blackwell Scientific,Oxford,p 129-133
taken inhandling possibly infected material.
Baxendell SA1985Proceedings ofRefresherCourse No
73.University of Sydney Postgraduate Committee in
Border disease
VeterinaryScience,SydneyNewSouthWales355-362
BennettsHW,Underwood El,ShierFL1946Aust Vet J22:2
Borderdisease isonlyrarelyrecordedingoatsinthe
Beverley IKA,WatsonWA,PayneIM1971Vet Rec88:124
UK. There appears to be only one single case of nat-
BlewettDA,WatsonWA1983BrVetI139:546
BlewetDA,Gisemba FMiller IKetal 1982VetRec 111:499
ural diseasequotedintheliterature,whichoccurred
BruereAN,WestDR1993The sheep.Veterinary Continuing
in Norway (Loken et al 1982);however,Harwood
Education,Massey niversity,PalmerstonNorth,
(2007)states thattwoconfirmedcaseswereinvesti-
New Zealand
gatedbytheVLA.bothofwhich haddirectcontact
Buxton D 1983 In:Martin WB (ed)Diseases of sheep.
with known infected sheep.
Blackwell Scientific,Oxford,p124-128
Following experimental infection the disease pres-
Buxton D 1986VetRec118:510
BuxionD1989InPrac1 11:9
entsadifferent clinicalpicture fromthatseen in
BuxtonD 1998VetRes29:289
sheep(Harwood 2007);early abortion,fetal resorp-
Buxton D,BarlowRM,FinlaysonJetal 1990| Comp Pathol
tion and mummification occur more commonly
102:221
whilethedeliveryofweakfull-termkidsorkidswith
Buxton D,Blewel DA,Trees AIet al 1988  CompPathol
tremors occurs less commonly.Markedplacentitis is
98:225
another notablefeature.
Buxton D,Brebner J,WrightSetal 1996VetRec138:434
BuxtonD,Gilmour JS,AngusKWetal1981ResVeti
32:170
Qfever
Buxton D,RodgerSM,Maley Set al2006Small RuminRes
46:43
Qfever,caused by Coxiellaburnetiican causeabor-
BuxtonD,Thoms0nKM,MaleySetal1991 Vet Rec129:89
tionandstillbirth ingoats withoutprevious clini-
Buxton D,ThomsonKM,Maley Setal 1993Vet Rec133:310
cal signs or following a few day's illness involving
CarlssonU 1991VetRec128:145
580
Chapter
251
Infertilityandsubfertilityintheeweanddoe
Chaffaux St,Metejka M.Cribiu EPetal 1987RecMedVet
Low C,LinklaterK1985In Pract7:96
163:15
LowJC,Renton CP1985Ve1Rec116:147
Cousins DV,EllisTMParkinsonJ,MrGlashan CH 1989Vet
Lyngset O1968 Acta Vet Srand 9:364
Rec124:123
Marmion BPWatsonWA1961 1CompPathol71:360
CribiuEP,DurandV,ChaffauxSt1990RecMedVet166:919
Martin WB,Aitken ID 2000 Diseases of sheep,3rdedn.
DainA1971| Reprod Fertil 24:91
Blackwell Scientifie,Oxford,p25
Davis GH,McEwen JC,Fenessy PFet al1992Biol Reprod
Mathews)2007Diseasesof thegoat,2nd edn.Blackwell
46:636
Scienice,Oxford,p24-28
Dennis SM 1991 In:Kirkbride CA(ed)Laboratory diagnosis
Maund B,lones R1986RASE Unit Newsletter,no8,Dec
of livestockabortion,3rdedn.lowa State UniversityPress,
McCaugheyW],Bal1 HJ 1981VetRec109:472
Ames,1A,p 82-85
MckelveyWAC1999InPract21190
Doig PA,Ruhnke HL 1977Ve1 Rec 100:179
McKe0wn JD,Ellis WA1986VetRec118:482
Dubey IP1980 J AmVet Med Assoc178: 661
Mialot JP,Saboureau L,Gueraud IM et al 199i RecMedVet
DubeyIP1982|AmVet MedAssoc180:1220
167:383
Dubey IP, Sharma SP 1980Am J Vet Res 41:794
MillerRB,PalmerNC,Kierstad M 1986In:MorrowDA(ed)
DubeyJP,SharmaSP,LopesCWG1980Am/Vet Res 41:1072
Current therapy in theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,
DuncansonP,Terry RS,SmithJE,HideG2001 Int J Parasitol
Philadelphia, p 607-609
31:1699
MLC1984.1988aSheepyearbooks.MeatandLivestork
DuuRI1 1954AnimSci13:464
Commission,MiltonKeynes,Buckinghamshire
Eales A,Small 11986Guide toveierinary careat lambing.
MLC1988bFeedingtheewe.Meatand Livestock
Longman,Harlow,Essex
Commission,Milton Keynes,Buckinghamshire
EastNE 1986In:MorrowDA(ed)Current therapyin the-
NettletonPF 1990 RevSci Tech Off Int Epiz9:131
riogenology.WBSaunders,Philadelphia,p603-604
O'Connell E,WilkinsWETePungaWA1988NZVetJ36:1
Elliott H2007VetGoatSoc|23:31
PolydorouK 1981 BrVetJ137:411
EllisWA 1992 In:MartinWB(ed）Diseases of sheep,2nd
Regassa E Noakes DE 1999 Vet Rec 144:502
edn.Blackwell Scientific,Oxford,p78-80
RidlerAl.2002PhD Thesis,Massey University,NewZealand
Emady M,Noakes DE,Arihur G11 1975VetRec96:261
Shelton MC1986In:MorrowDA(ed） Current therapy in
FenlonDR1985IApplBacleriol59:537
theriogenology,2ndedn.WB Saunders,Philadelphiap
FraserA,StampIT 1987 Sheep husbandry and diseases,6th
610-612
edn.CollinsTechnical &Professional,London
Skinner LTimpereleyAC,WighmanDetal 1990 Scand
Frayer-Hosken RA,HuberTLet al 1992] AmVet Med As5oc
Infect Dis22:359
200:1528
SmithKC1991Dissertation.Diploma in SheepHealtand
Frenkel JK1973 Cited in:Buxton D 1983 In:MarinWB(ed)
Prodluction.Royal College ofVeterinary Surgeons,London
Diseases of sheep.Blackvell Scientific,Oxfordp125
SmithKC1996 PhD thesisIniversity of Bristol
Creig A 1996Proceedings ofa Seminar of Flock Health
Smith KC,Long SE,Parkinson1] 1996Vet Rec138:497
GiffithsDE,JohnstonAM,MartinezT,KhalidM2006Goat
SmithMC1986 In:MorrovDA(ed) Current therapy in the-
Vet Soc|22:59
riogenology.2nd edn.WBSaunders,Philadelphia,
Gronstol 111980ActaVetScand21:1
p575-629
Gumbrell RC.SavilleDl.Graham CF1966NZVet|44:61
Smith MC,Dunn HO1981 JAmVetMed Assn 17S:735
HarleyW11956NZVet|44:106
Smith RE,Reynolds IM,Iarris IC1968CornellVet58:389
HarleyWI.Jebson IL.McFarlaneD 1954NZVeuI32:80
Spence IB,Beatie CP,Faulkneretal 1978VetRec102:38
Harwood D2007GoatVetSoc]23:40
Stamp IT,Watt JA,Nisbuet DI1950VetRec62:251
Hathaway SC,LitleTWA.Stevens AE1982Vet Ree110:99
Sweasey D,Patterson DSP,Richardson Cetal 1979Vet Rec
HeapeW1899RoyAgricSoc111,10:217
104:447
Hesselinl JW1993aVet Rec132:110
Van der Hoeden1953]CompPathol63:101
HesselinkJW1993bVetRec133:186
Vaughan EK,Long SE,ParkinsonTetal1997VeRe
Hughes LEKershaw CE Shaw IC1959Vet Rec71:313
140:100
HunterAG,Coigall W,MathiesonAO1976VetRec98:126
Wallace IM.Ashworth CJ 1990 ProcSheepVet Soc14:134
lack EI1968VeiRec82:558
WaisonWA 1964Vet Rec76:1131
JacksonP2004 GoatVet Soc|20:9
Waison WA 1973 BrVet J 129:309
JohnstonWS1988VetRec122:283
WatsonWA,Broadhead GD,KilpatrickR1962Vet Rec
LinklaterK1983Proc SheepVetSoc7:16
74:506
Livingstone CW,GauerBB,ShelionM1978AmJVet Res
Wenzel D,LeRoux MM,BothaLj 1976AgroAnim 8:59
39:1699
White IR,RusselAJEFowlerOG1984VetRec115:140
LokenT,Bjerkas1,HyllsethB1982ResVetSci33:130
Wilmu1 ISalesDI,Ashworth CI 1985Theriogenology
LongSE1980VetRec106:175
23:107
581
126
Chapter
DalePaccamonti
and Jonathan
Pycock
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
The objectiveof theveterinarian worling in any
inthe Northern hemisphere （1 August in the
horse-breeding enterprise,regardlessof size,should
Southern hemisphere)irrespective of their actual
betoproducethemaximumnumberoflive,healthy
birthdatewithin thatyear.Because the natural
foalsfromthemaresbred duringtheprevioussea-
breeding season centres on thesummer solstice
son;we could add to this‘as early as possible' in
(21 June), horse breeders are plagued with prob-
many breeding programmes. Perhaps the biggest
lems attempting tobreed mares in thewinter and
obstacleto achievingthis aimisthesubfertile or
early spring outside their most fertile period.The
problem breedingmare.Very fewmaresareperma-
promotion ofyearlings in the autumn sales con-
nently and completely infertile,but subfertility of
tributes to the pressure for early breeding, since
varying degrees is a major problem. There are many
well-grownolderyearlingstendtosellforhigher
causesofsubfertilitythatwarrantamaretobecat-
prices.Inmany breeds,competitiveevents between
egorized as a‘problem breeding mare'and while it
2-yearolds arecommonplace,andahorse that is
is important to recognize theunderlying cause,the
3or4monthsolderthanothers inthe event is at
impleinentation ofa successful treatiment strategy
an advantage.
is equally important. Mare owners frequenily have
Infertilityinthemare canbe a herdproblem or an
problemmaresfromwhichtheywanttoproduce
individual mare problem and can be a very frustrat-
foals and the veterinarianmust beable to helpmax-
ing dilemma.From theviewpointofherdfertility,itis
imizethechance of thiswhereverpossible.Itmight
important toreviewrecordstounderstand the degree
take several cycles to establish a pregnancy and even
ofinfertilitythatactuallyexistssopposedtothel
then there is an increased possibility of pregnancy
ent's perception.Somegrasp of normal expectations
failure.Commitmentfrom bothmareowner and
of fertility is useful. Assessment of reproductive effi-
veterinarian isneeded;heowner should bemade
ciencyisanextensivesubjectand,fora moredetailed
aware of this at the outset andbegiven arealistic
review,the reader should refer elsewhere (Hlearn
expectation as to the chance of success.The aim of
1999,Love 2003).Possibly the two most impor
this chapter is to consider the problem-breeding
tant,or atleast the two most-quoted,parameters
mareandhowtoprovideaneffectivemanagement
in connectionwithreproductiveefficiency areend
policy that canbe applied in daily clinical practice.
of-season pregnancy rate and live foal rate.From an
There aretwo majorways in which we have nega
economicstandpoint thesemaybethemostimpor-
tivelyinfluencedfertility:
tant benchmarks;however, from the veterinarian's
Reproductive performance is usually not the prime
point of view, pregnanicy rate per oestrous cycle
criterion in breeding horses
is a more up-to-date indicator of the efficiency of
For many breeds,e.g.Thoroughbred and Quarter
the breeding operation.A well-managed stud farm
Horse,1Januaryistheofficialbirthdateforfoals
shouldtypically achievepregnancyrates(diagnosed
582
Chapter
1261
Infertilityand subfertilityin themare
at 15daysofgestation)per oestrouscycle of65%,
Table 26.2Factors to includewhen obtaining ahistory during
an end-of-season pregnancy rate of s5% and a live
an infertilitywork-upforamare
foal ratein excess of75%.Thesefigures may be lower
than owner expectations,and it isagoodidea to dis-
Age
cuss them with mare owners at the beginning of the
Previous use
breeding season.The figuresneed to be reviewed
Current use
in the light of thehistory andpast breeding perfor-
Intended use
mance of a particular mare.Pregnancy rates at the
Anypertinent health history
endoftheseasonwill dependonthefertilityofthe
Has she everreceived any hormones for training orbehav-
stallion, the fertility ofmares, and management.This
ioural modif ication?
lastfactorisoftenrelatedtothevalue ofthehorses
Hasshe cycled normallyin thepast?
involved,ie.frequent veterinary attention in cases
whereitisjustifiedbythepotentialvalueofthefoal
Has shebeenbred?(natural cover,artificial insemination？;
fresh,cooled orfrozen semen?;fertile stallion?)
resultsinbetterfertility.Veryexpensivestallionstend
toattractmore fertile mares,orthestud may accept
Hasshe ever been pregnant?(outcome?)
onlyyoung,fertilemares.Well-nanaged studs tease
Has she ever foaled?(any problems curing celivery,any
maresregularly and individually;this isvery time-
postpartun complications?)
consuming.Anexperienced studmanager knows,for
example,thereasons why some mares fail to exhibit
oestrous behaviour.In turn,the length of time that a
requiredregardingherbreedinghistoryis summa-
mare fails to show oestrus before being presented to
rized in Table 26.2.
theveterinary surgeon for examination depends on
stud policy and the owner's wishes.
Theclinician shouldbeawareofhowtoinves-
Causes ofinfertility and subfertility
tigate the problem breeding mare.A protocol for
such aninvestigation ofan infertile or subfertile
mare is outlinedin Table26.1 and the information
Failure to cyclenormally
A frequent complaint by an owner,when present-
Table 26.1 Outlineofprotocol for clinical examination ofan
ingamare toaveterinarian because ofinfertility
infertile mare
is,thatshe either doesnot cycleor doesnotcycle
normally.The first conditionthat must beruled out
Routine procedures in all cases
when presented with a mare that does not cycle is
1.Obtainpreviousbreedinghistory
pregnancy. There are a number of situations, such
2.Assess physical condition,general heath
asarecentlypurchasedmare,orwhere amareor a
stallionescaped from theirliving area,oramarewas
3.Evaluate perineal conformation
housed with a colt that was considered too young
4.Examinereproductive tract bypalpationperrectum
to be able to breed; where mares could be pregnant
5.Examinereproductive tractbytransrectal ultrasound
withouttheknowledgeof their owner.Althoughthe
6.（Obtain culture ofclitoral fossa,clitoral sinuses)
normal behaviour of pregnant mares is anoestrus,
7.Examine vagina andcervixvisuallywith speculum
a small percentage of mares may exhibit signs of
8. Perform manual examination of vagina and cervix (while
oestruswhilepregnant.Obviously.pregnancy must
performingnextstep)
beruled out before any invasive diagnostic proce-
9.Obtain culture and cytology of uterine umen
dures are performed.
10.0btain endometrial biopsy
Seasonality
Proceduresperformedin selected cases
1.Perform hysteroscopic examinatcn of uterine lumen
Another common cause ofmares failing to exhibit
2.Collectperipheral venousbloodsampleforhormoneanalysis
oestrus is seasonalcyclicity.Althoughmaresnear
the equator do not show clear seasonal cyclicity,
3.Collect samples(e.g.blood,hair follicle,tissue biopsy）for
chromosome analysis
maresin thehigherlatitudestypicallyenter into
aperiod of anoestrus during the winter when the
583
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
photoperiod isshort.Ovaries aresmall andinactive
environmentalconditions.Investigations continue
and the uterus and cervix are typically flaccid.
with the aim qffinding an easy method to get mares
Follicles,ifpresent,are typicallyless than 15mm,
cycling bythebeginning of the breeding season.
andserumprogesteroneis lessthan1ng/ml.Some
Evenwiththesemethodstoinduceearlier cyclicity,
maresuallyolrmultparousmaremayexhiit
mares stillgo through springtransition,aperiodof
signs ofbehavioural oestrus when teased with a stal-
variablelengththatcanbefrustratingfromabreed
lion.However, examinationwill reveal reproductive
ing management standpoint.Mares will develop fol-
quiescence.The arbitrarybirthday of1Januaryfor
licles thatreach ovulatory diameter butregressrather
horses in the Norihern Hemisphere and I August for
than ovulating.On average,3.7 follicular waves will
those in the Southern Hemisphere puts pressure on
developbeforethefirstovulation of theyear(Sharp
breeders and veterinarians to get mares pregnant in
&Davis 1993). A numher of ways to shorten spring
thewinter tohavefoalsborn asclose totheir arbi-
transition have been suggested,including adminis-
trarilyimposedbirthday'as possible.The problem is
trationofprogestogens,follicularaspiration(Klump
that mares,beingseasonal long-daybreederswould
etal2003)and administrationofovulation-induc
normallybein anoestrus at that time ofyear.Infact,
ingagents.Most of thereportedly successful proto
theaverage date of thefirst ovulationof the yearfor
cols are more effective in late transition than early
mares in the Northern Hemisphere is 7April (Sharp
transition.
1980).Therefore,much effort has been made to
Progesterone/progestogen withdrawal therapy is
inducecyclicityearlierthanwouldnormallyoccur.
oneoption.Progesterone exertsa negativefeedback
Studfarmmanagerswhodonotusesuchschemes
on luteinizinghormone(LH)secretion.When the
find themselves experiencing subfertility due toa
source ofprogesterone is withdrawn,or its effect
reduced number of breeding opportunities.
wanesbecauseofthewithdrawalofthenegative
Themosteffectivewaytoshortenwinter anoestrus
feedback effect,there is an increased release of LH,
is by lengthening the photoperiod, beginning in
resultinginfollicularmaturationandovulation.
early December, to provide 16 hours of light.The
Progesterone can be administered as an oil-based
light shouldbe added aitheendofthedayrather
intramuscularinjection,orallyas thesyntheticpro-
than in themorning tobeeffective.An alternative
gestogen altrenogest orbyusinga silasticprogester-
protocol is to providea 1 hour pulse of light during
one-releasing intravaginal device （PRID)(see Fig.
thenight,9.5-10.5hours after the onset of darkness
1.37).However, such therapy is effective only in
(Palmer and Driancourt 1981). Photoperiod is not
maresthatarealreadyintothelatetransitionalphase
the only determining factor of when a mare begins
andisineffectiveinmareswithminimalfollicular
tocycle.Ithasbeenshown that nutritionplaysavery
activity,particularly duringdeep anoestrus.Examples
importantroleaswell.Mares in goodbodycondi-
ofsuggested protocols include oral,in-feed medica-
tionweremorelikelytocyclethroughouttheyear
tionwith thepotent progestogen altrenogest,which
and,if theydidenterwinter anoestrubegancyclng
contains 2.2mg/ml of the active substance.This
a month earlierthanmareswith slightlypoorerbody
should be addedto the food onceper day at a dose
condition(Gentry etal2002,Walleretal2006).
rateof0.044mg/kgbodyweightfor7-12days.The
Following winter anoestrus,mares go through a
responseisvariabledependingonhowfaradvanced
period referred lo as spring transition, character-
intothetransitionalphasethemareis at thebegin-
izedbyirregularperiods ofanovulaioryfollicular
ning ofthe progesterone supplementation.In my
development andoestrousbelhiaviour.Springorver-
practice,whether oral progestogen or an intravagi-
nal transition ends with the first ovulation ofthe
nal coil is being used, the follicular status of every
breedingseason.Asomewhat similarperiod,fall(or
mareis examined after7 days.Inmareswith follicles
autumnal) transition,occurs at the end of thebreed-
more than 35mm, supplementation is stopped(or
ing season and is similarly characterized by anovula-
thecoil isremoved)andthemare is monitoredfor
tory follicular development.
ovulation.If the follicles areless than 35mm, sup-
Pharmacologicalmethodstoinduceearlier cyclic-
plementationiscontinuedfor5moredays,atwhich
itythat have shown promiseinvolvetheuse of
time the treatment is stopped or the coil removed.
dopamine antagonisis such as sulpirideand dom-
Oestrus usuallyoccurswithin 6days andovula-
peridone.Results have been variable and appear to
tionbetween7and13daysafter thelast treatment
beaffected byfactorssuchasnutritionalsiatusand
By examining the mare while under treatment,
584
Chapter
261
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
the possibility of an unexpected ovulation can be
minimized.The use of intramuscular injections of
 progesterone and estradiol-17β in oil for 10 days pro-
duces a similarresponse to altrenogest,butihe inter-
val to oestrus is longer because of the suppression of
follicular development by the estradiol.
Repeated daily injections of equine pituitary gland
extract to mares in winter anoestrus lead to follic-
ular development, while Hyland et al (1987) have
DEPTH
reporied success using a mini pump that infused
70mm
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) intra-
venously over aperiod of 28 days,Theselast two
treatments are impractical for routine use. There
have also beenreports using GnRH or its analogues,
0020
10:45
19/08/05
administered byinjection,infusion or subcutaneous
Fig. 26.1 Ultrasoncgraphic image of early equine corpus
implant, to hasten ovulation in transitional or even
luteum (see arrow).
anoestrous mares (Harrison et al 1990). It is expen-
sive, as treatument is niecessary for at least 1-2 weeks,
with a mean of 15.8 days (Ginther & Bergfelt 1990).
It is noteworthy that these authors found a high
of oedema.A key factor in the emergence from ver-
multiple ovulationrate associated with GnRH treat-
nal transition is the development of steroidogenic
ment.The use of a short-term implant of the GnRH
competence by the follicle, leading to an increase in
analogue deslorelin has been reported (McKinnon
circulating cestrogen concentrations that cause the
ct al 1997,Meyers e1 al 1997).In the auuthorsexpe-
release of LH from the pituitary due to a positive
rience, there hias been no clear advantage of deslo-
feedback mechianism. Oestrogen is responsible for
relin over human chorionic gonadotrophic (hCG)
the appearance of uterine oedema (in the absence of
in inducing ovulation in cyclic mares. However, its
progesterone) and this may be why the detection of
value in accelerating the first ovulation of the breed
uterine oedema is important in signalling the emer-
ing season following seasonal anoestrus may be a
gence of themare from the transitional period
real benefit to the practitioner,
Cysticovarian disease comparableto the condition
During the transitional period before the first ovu-
described in the cow (see Ch. 22) does not occur in
lation oftheyear,maresdemonstrateerraticoestrous
the mare.The persistent follicles that occur during
behaviour of varying intensity. The presence of mul-
the transitional and other periods are structurally
tiple large follicles, possibly as large as 30-40mm,
makes detection of ovulation difficult by palpation
alone. Even outside this transitional period, misin-
terpretation of ovulation, even by experienced clini-
cians, has been shown to be as high as 50%. It is
much easier to visualize the corpus haenorrhiagi-
cum/early corpus luteum (CL) ultrasonographically
when the anechoic follicle is replaced by an intensely
echoic area representing the early CL (Fig.26.1).
Itisrecommended that the interval between mat-
ings should not exceed 2-3 days,although there
havebeen no critical studies onthe survival time of
sperm in the mare's genital tract. It is important not
to begin breeding too early or this will result in the
uterine oedema (Fig. 26.2) is an indication that the
follicle should ovulate within a few days, although
Fig. 26.2 Uterine oedema observed in the uterine horn using
ultrasonography.
sometransitional folliclescanovulatein the absence
585
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
normal;however,theirpresencemay explain why
thisconditionhasbeen diagnosed in thepast.
Abnormal cyclicity during the
breeding season
Failure tocycleorirregular cyclesduringwhatis con-
sidered tobethenormal breedingseasonareanother
matter.Irregularoestrousbehaviourmaybeobserved
in a mare that has lost a pregnancy after the endo-
metrial cups have been established.Endometrial
cups, derived from fetal tissue that invades the
endometriumatapproximately5weeksgestation
(Fig.26.3),produce equine chorionic gonadotro-
Fig.26.4Multiple follicles and luteal structures on theovaries
phin (eCG), which has LH like activity in the mare.
of a mare 60 days pregnant.
Folliculardevelopmentcontinuesthroughoutearly
pregnancy and eCG causes these mature follicles to
ovulateorluteinize,forming secondaryand acces-
sizedthat a contributingfactor is glucocorticoid
sory corpora lutea respectively (Fig.26.4). Because
production by abdominal fat,which inhibits LH
of thepresenceof thesefollicles and development of
release.
additionallutealstructures atvarious times,mares
'Silent heat’where a mare is having a normal
may showbriefperiods of oestrus butfail to ovulate,
oestrus and ovulation but fails to show oestrous
ormay show a prolongedperiodof anoestrus.This
behaviour,may cause problems when the breeding
condition will persist until the demise of the endo-
programmerelies onteasingandnatural cover,but
metrial cups (beginning at approximately 80 days
withtheuseofultrasonography and artificial insem-
gestation) and the disappearance of eCG from the
ination is more easily remedied.The incidence of
circulation,usuallybetween100and150 days.
silentoestrushasbeenreportedtobe6%(Nelson
Rarely, Cushing's syndrome caused by adenoma-
elal19s5).Silentoestrus ismorecommonin mares
tous hyperplasia of theintermediatepituitary has
with a young foal at foot and in maiden mares
been associatedwith anoestrus in aged mares.This
early in the breeding scason. Other faciors affect-
ispresunablydue to destruction of thecellssecret-
ingoestrous behaviourincludebeingkeptwithvery
ing LH and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH).
dominantmares and stallion preference.Fillies that
Mareswith equinemetabolicsyndrome ofien expe-
arein training and havebeen treatedwithanabolic
rience ovulatoryfailureandithasbeenhypothe-
steroidsmay bemorelikely to sufferfrom thecondi-
tionbecause of'androgenization
Ultrasonography andvaginal examinations con-
firm that the mare is in oestrus and hasfollicles of
an ovulatory size.It is essential to distinguish the
condition from a prolonged luteal phase in which
there is alsofollicular development.The use of pros-
taglandin （PG)Fis recommended if any doubt
exists about thepresenceofluteal tissue.
Treatmentisbasedon thoroughandcareful teas-
ing.Frequent and persistent teasing may persuade
themare to showoestrus.Management options
include safely restraining the foal within sight of
the mare,removing the foal out of auditory range
and tranquillizing the mare.Alternatively,plac-
ingthemareina stablenexttoastallionmaybe
Fig.26.3Endometrial cups(arrows)present on the
helpful.Ifpermissible,artificial insemination can
endometrial surfaceof theuterus.
be used.To breed mares naturally during a silent
586
Chapter
26
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
oestrus, some form ofrestraint may be necessary;
incorrectly tobe pregnant.With stud far maniage-
many mares approaching ovulation accept the stal-
ment practices oftoday, a persistent CL ordioestrous
lionwheniwitched andhobbled.Anintramuscular
ovulation is easily diagnosed and treated.Plasma
injectionofestradiolbenzoate（10-20mg)6hours
progesterone profiles are indistinguishable from
before breeding can be tried as a last resort.The vet-
those ofpregnant animals.The uterusbecomes firm
erinary surgeon must ensure that the mare is physio-
andtubular(toned)and thecervixis typicalofthat
logically teady to be bred.In some cases when the
ofpregnancy.Transrectal ultrasound imagingfails to
mare is not psychologically prepared for breeding,
detectaconceptus.
oestrogens are of little value and tranquillizers may
Failure of synthesis and/orrelease ofPGFat the
be more appropriate. In many cases, it is a failure of
end ofdioestrusisthemostlikely causeofpersistence
theoestrusdetectionsystemrather thana truerepro-
of the CL. Ginther (1990) has suggested that it might
ductive disorder ofindividual mares.However,it
also be due to failure of the CL to respond to PGF
has been associated withreduced oestradiol concen-
or failure of PGFto reach the CL.Treatment is by
trationsintheperipheralcirculation and a shorter
the injection of a luteolytic dose of PGFa ora syn-
intervalfromluteolysistoovulation(Nelsonetal
theticanalogue.Theintervalbetweentreatment and
1985).There is no suggestion that aberrant morpho-
ovulationvariesconsiderablydependingupon the
logical abnormalitiesinfollicular development are
sizeoffollicles at thetime of treatment.Therefore,
involved.
it is advisable always toexaminemares usingultra-
status of folliculogenesis.
Prolonged luteal activity
The term'pseudopregnancy' is often used in the
Persistence of luteal activity in the non-pregnant
case of a mare that was bred and subsequently has a
mareis a major cause ofsubfertility.Traditionally
prolonged lutealperiodbut noconceptusisfound
the term ‘prolonged dioestrus'has been used 1o
when apregnancy examination isperformed.It is
describeaconditionwherethe CLpersistsbeyond
ihenassumed thiat anembryowaspresentatthe
its normal cyclical life span of 15-16 days,resulting
time ofmaternalrecognition ofpregnancy butwas
in themaintenance ofelevated circulating progester-
subsequently lost prior to the time of pregnancy
oneconcentrationsforlongcrthanexpected.Ginther
examination.With the capability to diagnose preg-
(1990)has suggested that the term‘prolonged luteal
nancy prior to the time ofmaternalrecognition
activity’should be used,as‘persistent dioestrus
ofpregnancy,using the higher-quality ultrasound
implies that the CLpersists,whereas it is possible
machines currenily available,the true incidence of
thatothersareformedsequentiallyfromdioestrous
pseudopregnancy shouldbereadily discernible.True
ovulations.In mares,although progesterone inhib-
pseudopregnancy occurs if there is early embryonic
itsfollicular development,it doesnot shut it down
death after 15 daysof gestation withpersistence of
completely.Therefore,mares continue to develop
the corpus luteum verum resulting in a prolonged
large follicles during dioestrus.Ulsually,these folli-
luteal phase.The cervix remains tightly closed and
cles undergo atresia. However, occasionally, a large
the uterus is toned and tubular.Itis diagnosed
follicle will ovulate during dioestrus.These occur in
based onan early posirive pregnancy examination,
upto20%ofoestrouscyclesinThoroughbredmares
followedbyanegativepregnancyexamination on
(less frequentlyin someotherbreedsand ponies)
ultrasound examination during a maintained luteal
and arenotaccompanied by oestrus;thecervixwill
phase.
remain pale in colour,dry and tighuly closed.lf a
Sonetimes a mare that has foaled and is nursing
dioestrousovulation occurslateinthelutealphase,
herfoal willfailto exhibitnormaloestrouscycles,
when PGF,is released from the uterus and lyses
referred to as lactational anoestrus.Affected mares
the original CL,hemore recent CL is at too early a
mayhave anormalpostpartum oestrus after 6-12
stage torespond tothePGFlt then continuesto
daysbutfailtoreturntooestrusattheendofthe
develop,produces progesterone, and prolongs the
first dioestrus.Alternatively they may not even have
dioestrous period.
a normalfoal heatThis seems to bemore com-
True persistenceof the CL occurs in approximately
monwithmares thatfoalfaroutside thenormal physio-
20% of ovulations.These marespresent great diffi-
logical foaling/breeding season. It also appears to
culty to the stud manager as they can be assumed
berelated tonutritionin thatmares ingoodbody
587
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
condition are less likely to experience lactational
hypoplasia and testicular feminization. With any of
anoestrus than aremares in poorbody condition.
thieseabnormalities,thereisno treatment and the
The ovaries resemble those of a mare in deep winter
mare is sterite.
anoestrus,i.e.small and inactive.The condition can
lastforseveralmonths.Originallyitwas thought to
Multiple ovulation and twinning
phinreleasebutthisisnowindoubt.Affectedmares
Double ovulationsoccur inup to30%of oestrous
shouldbeteasedandexaminedweellyperrectum
cycles,thefrequencydependinguponthebreedand
to assess their ovarian status.
type of the mare (e.g. T'horoughbreds have a higher
Treatment options include early weaning of the
rate than ponies).Accurate detection of such ovula-
foalordailyoraladministrationofadopamine
tions isimportant as twinning ishighly undesirable:
antagonist such as domperidone.Twice-daily injec-
first because it often results in abortion (Fig.26.5)
tions of 0.04mg(10ml) of a synthetic GnRHI ana-
andsecond because,even ifboth fetuses survive
logue (buserelin;Receptal) have been found to
andarecarriedtoterm,manyaredysmature,result-
inducethedevelopmentofafolliclewithin7-14
inginahighneonatalmortalityrateanddystocia;
days of commencing therapy.However,treatment is
a potentially serious impact on the future fertility
expensive,the pregnancy rate at the induced oestrus
ofthe dam isvery likely.A further complication is
is reduced and the mare may return to anoestrus fol-
that if embryonic/fetal death occurs after the forma-
lowing the induced ovulation.
tion of the endometrial cups(seeCh.3),theselatter
Small and inactive ovaries arenormally found
inmaresin deep anoestrus,prepubertalmaresand
asif pregnancy had been maintained,resulting in
pregnant maresin thelast thirdofgestationwhen,
pseudopregnancy. Studies using transrectal ultra-
curiously,the fetalgonads arelarger than the dam's
ssound imaginghave shown that themarehas an
ovaries.Mares subject to severe malnutrition,mares embryo reduction mechanism (Ginther 1989b) so
ofadvancedage,mares treated withanabolicsteroids
thatthereisawidedisparitybetweenthenunbet
andmareswith chromosomalalterationsleadingto
ofdouble ovulations and twin births.Most embryo
gonadal dysgenesismayhave abnormally small and
reduction occurs after fixation at day 17(see Ch.3)
inactive ovaries.
occurswhenthe embryos arefixed in the same horn
andisgreatestwhen theconceptusesareofunequal
size.A deprivation hypothesis has been suggested
Geneticabnormalities
(Ginther1989a)
Genetic abnorinalitiesmustbeconsideredina
Rectalpalpation alone can be misleading in
mare that fails to cycle.Although not common,
detectinga double ovulation,particularlywhen the
many types of sex chromosome anomaly have been
two follicles are on thesame ovary.The use of ultra-
describedin the horse(see Ch.4).Theincidence of
sound examination of the ovaries,which shouuld
chromosomal abnormalitiesisdifficultto assessbut
mustbesuspectedinmaidenmareswithverysmall
（<1cm),inactive ovaries and an immature tubular
genital tractonicewinter anoestrushasbeenelimi-
nated as a cause ofacyclicity.However, some eneti-
cally normalyoungfilliesin training can be acyclic
andthustheymustbegivenmore time tomature
reproductively. A thorough history and physical
examinationarenecessary.Dependingon thepartic
ulargeneticabnormality,thereproductivetract can
berudimentary,juvenileorambiguous.Karyotyping
must be performed before making a final diagnosis.
Oneofthemorecommonkaryotypicabnormalities
found is the 63,xO (Turner's syndrome) genotype.
OtherchromosomeabnormalitiesincludeXXmale
Fig.26.5Aborted twin fetus.
pseudohermaphroditism,XY sex reversal,ovarian
588
Chapter
26
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
routinely beperformed in conjunction with a thor
ough transrectal palpation, usually allows detection
ofa doubleovulation.Sometimes the ovulatory area
can appear indistinct for the first 24 hours; in these
cases the mare should bere-examined 2 days later
more than one CL (Fig. 26.6).
Multiple ovulation in the mare should not be
regarded as a reason for withholding breeding.
Instead,pregnancy rates are improved afier twin
ovulation.Although accurateinterpretation ofthe
ultrasound image of earlypregnancies in themare
and the technique of crushing a conceptus are skills
that require experience, the advent of B-mode ultra
sound imaging has provided a method of more
readily managing a twin pregnancy in the mare
(Fig.26.7).
Approaches to dealing with twins depends on
the stage of gestation at the time of detection:
·If the initial examination of the mare occurs
before fixation (day 15/16) the rwin emhryos are
Fig.26.7Twin conceptuses situated in the same horn at
16 days of gestation.
reduced to a singleton by themanual destruc
tion of one, either by pressure with the trans-
ducer or by the use of the hand (Fig. 26.s). One
of the vesicles is isolated and crushed using the
tips of the fingers and thumb, the fingers against
the palm of the hand or pressure using the trans-
ducer. During the mobility phase, the conceptus
vesicles can be separated gently using the trans-
ducer to enable the procedure to be imaged.
Alternatively,because the vesicles are still in the
mobility phase,if thevesicles are situated next
toeach other the mare can be rechecled in a
short time and in many cases thevesicles will
have moved apart, facilitating isolation of a sin-
glevesicle.When the conceptusvesicles are of
Fig.26.6 Multiple (2) corpcra lutea (arrows),leading to twin
dissimilar sizes, the smaller one should be rup-
pregnancy.
tured.This is easier at days 14-16when they are
589
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
·As twin pregnancy is allowed to progress further
in gestation, the management options are reduced
and sucessrates become lower. Managenent
options include dietary energy restriction, surgical
removalofonevesicle,intracardiacinjectionofone
fetus, transvaginal ultrasound-guided needle punc-
ture'and craniocervical dislocation. Transvaginal
ultrasound-guided needle puncture is successful
in approximately one third of cases, while cran-
iocervical dislocation is successful approximately
two thirds of the time. Craniocervical dislocation
is performed via a standing flank laparotomy at
70-90 days gestation. One of the fetuses is identi-
fied by direct palpation of the uterus through the
flankincision and the neck is dislocatedmanually
Fig.26.8 Ultrasonographic appearance after crushing one of
(Wolfsdorfet al 2005).
two twinvesicles.
Failure toestablishand maintain
pregnancy
Pregnancy failure is a source of major economic
14-20mm indiameter than days 11-13when
loss to ihe horse industry. Embryonic death occurs
they are 6-1lmm in diameter. The disadvantage
of this method is thatit is more expensive,in that
40 days of gestation in horses. Abortion is defined
all mares are scanned before the time ofreturn
as expulsion of the fetus before it is capable of life
to oestrus.In addition,if ovulations that occur
outside the womb, whereas a stillbirth is expulsion
more than 3 days apart have noi heen detected, a
ofadead fetus thatwould liavebeenicapable of life
mistaken diaguosis of a single pregnancy may be
outside the womb.
made if the second vesicle is too small to detect.
With experience, this technique is highly effec-
tive, with success rates approaching 90%, and it
Embryonic death
is our method of choice. Analysis of data over
Fertilizalion rates are normally high in horses,
several breeding seasonshas shown that there is
although differencesmay exist between normal and
no increased incidence of mid-to late-term abor-
subfertile mares. Pregnancy losses are greatest dur-
tion in nares that have had one of twin concep-
ing the embryonic period, estimated to be as high as
ttses crushed,
24% in mares (as reviewed in Ball 1988).The period of
·If initial examination is done after fixation but
greatest embryonic death in subfertile mares occurs
before day 30,and if both conceptuses are in one
in the interval before pregnancy can be detected
horm, one option is to terminate the pregnancy
with ulrasound (approximately day 11), particularly
using PGF.Alternatively, transvaginal ultra-
at the time the embryo enters the uterus. Between
sound-guided allantocentesis of one vesicle can
days 14 and 40, estimates of the rate of embryonic
be attempted. Management of twin pregnancies
death vary between 8% and 17%.Predicting embry-
after this period is complicated by the formation
onic loss canbe difficult.Examination by transrectal
of endometrial cups at approximately day 35 of
ultrasonography provides the best means to pre-
gestation. Endometrial cups remain functional
dict and deteci embryonic loss. Because pregnancy
until around days 100-150 of gestation in the
is often diagnosed at an early stage, it is important
presence or absence of a viable fetus, Therefore,
to inform owners that not all pregnancies detected
if twin pregnancies are not successfully managed
with ultrasound will survive, even when apparently
before the cups are formed, or both embryos die
normal.Embryonic vesicles found to be smaller
after day 35, the mare usually will not return to a
than expected for their age are considered to be
fertile oestrus for a prolonged period of time.
at increased risk,while oversized vesicles are not
590
Chapter
261
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
(Ginther et al 1985). Embryonic loss may occur
significantlyfewercells and poorermorphologywere
betweendays1land15post-ovulationwithout
observed in embryos from oldmares(Carnevale etal
anyultrasonographicindication ofitsimpending
1993). In a subsequent study (Carnevale & Ginther
occurrence.Lateringestation,however,indications
1995),oocyte transfer was used to compare fertil
ofimpendinglossmaybeobservedand includea
ityofoocytesfromyoungmaresandoldmaresand
speckled orgranular appearance oftheconceptus,
more embryonicvesiclesresulted from young than
mobilityofthevesicleafterthenormaltimeoffix-
old mares.Significantly fewer oocytes or embryos
ation,fluid surrounding thevesicle,absence ofa
wererecovered frommares20years of age or older
heartbeat, decreased volume of the conceptus,dis-
than from mares 10 years of age or less, suggest-
ruption ofconceptus membranesoroedema of the
ingfailure ofovulationor oviductalpickupofthe
endometrial folds(Gintheret al 1985).
oocyte.Consequently,fewer oocytes had the poten-
In many species, genetic abnormalities play a
tial forfertilizationandembryodevelopmentinthe
significant role in pregnancy loss.Chromosomal
older mares(Carnevaleetal 1993).Otherresearch-
abnormalities have been identified in normal-
ers have similarly found a lower pregnancyrate and
appearing equine embryos (Rambags et al 2005),
an increased incidence ofearly embryonicdeath
andan increased incidence ofembryoniclosshas
aftertransferofembryosfromsubfertilemareswhen
been associatedwithcertain familylines or stal-
compared to those obtained from maiden mares
lions.Many chromosomalabnormalitiesmay notbe
(Iuliano&Squires1986,Vogelsang&Vogelsang
inherited but may arise during formation and aging
1989).
of gametes and result in aninability of the resulting
Oviductal pathology may result in either embry-
zygote to develop into a viable embryo.Aging gam-
onic loss or fertilization failure.Lterine pathology
etesmaybeincreasedwhenmatingisnotclosely
may affecthistotropheproduction,which theearly
timed toovulation.The incidenceof embryonic
embryorelieson,andresult inretardedembryonic
loss ishigherwheninsemination occurs after ovula-
development.
tion andincreasesastheinterval fromovulationto
Progesterone is essential for the maintenance of
insemination lengthens(Koskinen etal 1990).
pregnancy. The only source of progesterone during
A critical period occurs at 14-16 days of gesta-
theembryonicperiodistheprimarycorpus luteum
tionwhen theconcepiusisneededtoinhibit lute-
verum(CL).Onthe assumption that luteal insuffi
olysis.Factors ofconceptusorigininhibittherelease
ciency isimportant in earlyembryonic death,many
ofPGFfrom the endometrium and areessential
mares aregiven exogenousprogesterone orproges-
formaintenanceofluteal function（Stout&Allen
togens.in an attempt to prevent it from occurring
2002).Unrestricted conceptus mobility is essen-
However, the rationale for this widespread prac-
tial for pregnancy maintenance and prevention of
ticeis highly questionable.Although primary luteal
luteolysis (Sharp et al 1989).Anything that inter-
insufficiency as a cause of early embryonic death has
feres with embryonic mobilirysuch astranslumi-
been reported (Bergfelt et al 1992), lile evidence
naladhesionsorendometrialcysts,orwithuterine
existstoindicatethatprimarylutealinsufficiencyisa
contractions,themain propulsive force stimulating
major cause ofembryonicloss.Progesterone supple-
embryomovement,mayresultinembryonicloss
mentationhasbeenreviewed byAllen (1993),who
Extremes of age,either young or old,negatively
is sceptical of any benefit.Nevertheless,withdrawal
affectfertility.The highrate ofembryoniclossin
of supplementary progesterone therapy duringmid-
yearling mares has been attributed to immaturity,
gestation may leave the clinician open to criticism if
inadequate nutrition orphysical stress(Mitchell&
the mare subsequently aborts.Progesterone therapy
Allen 1975). Older mares have a lower pregnancy
is appropriate in mares that have uterine oedema
rate and a higher loss rate compared with younger
and an indistinct CL at the time offirst examina-
mares (Ball et al 1989).The effect of advanced age.
tion for pregnancy (15 days). These pregnancies are
however,is difficulttoseparatefromacquired sub-
usuallylostwithinafew daysbutsomecanbesuc-
fertility and isconfoundedby theeffectofparity
cessfully'saved by exogenous progesterone and the
since the two aregenerally correlated.
pregnancy maintained to term.
The effect of age on fertility, at least in part, orii-
Secondaryluteal insufficiency,resultingfrom uter-
nates in the oocyte.When embryoswerecollected
inepathologyorunrelatedinflammatoryconditions
from the oviducts ofyoung mares and old mares,
isamorelilkely cause ofembryonic loss(Daels etal
591
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
1989,Stabenfeldt& Hughes 1987).Inflammatory
Some specificinfectious diseases have been asso-
conditions with associated PGFrelease,even soon
ciatedwith embryonicloss.Forexample,contagious
afterovulationandespeciallybeforeendoimetrial
equinemetfitis(CEM),a transmissiblevenereal dis-
cup formation,warrant attention.PGF,inhibitors
ease caused by Taylorella equigenitalis,commonly
are effectivein blocking PGFrelease but must be
results in embryonic loss after initialinfection
administered soon after the inciting cause (Daels
(Timoney&Powell 1988).Asymptomaticcarriersof
botli sexes allowpersistence within the horse popu-
istration ofprogestogens.Exogenous progestogens
lation. Carrier mares,which may or may not have
can maintain pregnancy even after luteal activity
shown signs ofprevious endometritis,harbour the
iscompromised(Daelsetal1989)andshouldbe
organisms in the vestibular area, particularly the cli-
continued until placental progestins are capable of
toral fossa and sinuses.To testa mare for CEM,the
maintaining pregnanty. Supplemental progester-
medial clitoral sinuses (Fig.26.9) should beswabbed
one,however,hasnotimprovedpregnancy rates in
and then seededonAmiescharcoalmedium tobe
normal mares receiving embryos (luliano& Squires
1986).
tic laboratory.Informationregardingcontrolproce-
Many dosage regimens do not effectively elevate
duresforCEM and the othervenereal pathogensare
ormaintain plasma progestogen levels.Progesterone
ingovernmentalorbreedassociationguidelines and
in oil (100 mg, i.m.) or alirenogest (2.2mg/50kg,
regulations.
p.o.;Regumate) given daily, or a long-acting formu-
Marereproductiveloss syndrome,aproblemasso-
lation of progesterone (BioRelease P4,BET Pharm)
ciated with Eastern Tent caterpillars in Kentucky,
givenweeklyhavebeenshown tobeabletomain-
is another specific syndrome associatedwith early
tain pregnancy in ovariectomized mares and are
embryonic death,Although much remains to be
therefore considered adequate. A number of syn-
learnedaboutthesyndrome,itappearsthatinges
thetic progestogens, including medroxyprogester-
tion ofthe setae ofthe caterpillars is involved.
one,rgestometandmegestrolcetatewereunable
Reproductivelosses occur in thefirstand lasttri-
to maintain pregnancy(Mckinnon etal2000).To
mester [Riddle 2003). Non-reproductive syndromes
ensure pregnancymaintenance,effective exogenous
associatedwiththediseaseincludepericarditisand
progestogentherapy shouldbecontinued through
endophthalmitis.
thefirst4monthsofgestation,untiltheplacenta can
beconsideredtoprovide adequateprogestogensfor
pregnancy support.Ifusingaltrenogest,plasmapro
gesteronecanbemeasuredbecause altrenogest does
not cross react with the antiserum. when plasma
progesterone is above 2ng/ml, the altrenogest can
be discontinued.If the uterine environment is nor-
mal, progesterone therapy is probably not needed
(Stabenfeldi&Hughes1987);however,thedifficulty
lies in determining if theuterine environment isnor-
malfromtheviewpointoftheconceptus.Viability
ofa pregnancy should be reafirmed when long-
term progestogen therapy is practised.Retention of
aconceptus afterfetal deathmayresultfromcontin-
uedtreatment.
Endometritis,often the result ofa delay in uter
ineclearance,is an importantcauseofembryonic
loss in mares (Woods et al 1987) and usually causes
loss before maternal recognition of pregnancy.Once
pregnancy is established, endometritis is a less fre
quent cause of embryonic loss (Ricketts 2003), pro-
vided anatomical defects are corrected.Endometritis
Fig.26.9Swabbing thecentral clitoral sinusfcrCEM
iscovered inmore detail below.
organism.
592
Chapter
261
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
Mares normallyresume cyclicalovarianactivity
is important to distinguish infectious from non-
veryshortly afterpariuritionso that they are some-
infectious causes.Vaginal discharge,premature lac-
times bred as early as 7-10 days post-partum (at
tation andcolicinpregnantmaresmayindicatean
the foal heat).There is conflicting evidence about
impendingorrecent abortion.
thelevelofembryonicdeathiffertilizationoccurs
When abortion occurs,themare should beiso
atthis time,with some studies showinga higher
lated,a historyobtained andthefetus sent toan
rate or no effect.An advantage of breeding at the
approved laboratory for necropsy.lf a veterinary
first oestrus post-partum is that the foaling date
surgeon wishes to perform a post-mortem exami-
will be approximately 1 month earlier the next year.
nation,small but representative samples of liver,
Therefore.thelater a mare foals the more pressure
lung,thymus,spleen and chorioallantois(two sam-
there is tobreed on thefoal heat.Pregnancyrates are
ples,one ofwhich is from the cervical star,which
clearly influenced by the selection criteria format
ishe irregular, star-shaped avillous area ofthe
ing at the foal heat.Some studies have found that,
chorion thatliesovertheinternalosofthecervix
even though pregnancy rates may be lower, preg-
(Fig.26.10)（see Ch.3) should be sent in forma-
nancy losses are no greater after foal-heat breeding
lin for histological examination. In addition,fro-
than after later breedings (Woods et al 1987). The
zen samples of freshfetal liver and lung should be
presenceofintrauterinefluidorovulationpriorto
storedinadeepfreeze at-208°Cshouldviralisola-
9 days post-partum are correlated with lower preg-
tion investigationbe required ata laterstage.Paired
nancy rates and a greater risk of embryonic loss;
serum samples from the mare and close compan-
thereforeanultrasoundexaminationofmaresprior
ions should also be taken for serological investiga-
tofoal-heatbreedingwill helptodifferentiateihose
tion.Swabsfromfetal heartorliverandthecervical
mares that are good candidates for breeding from
poleof thechorion areused to screenforbacterial
thoseinwhichbreedingshouldbeposiponed.
infection.
Maternal stress due to severe pain,malnutrition
The fetus and fetal membranes (amnion,cho
and transport hasbeen implicated as a cause ofearly
rioallantois and umbilical cord)must be carefully
embryonicdeath.Nutritional stress,eitherfrommal-
examinedforihe presence ofabnormalities and
nutrition (van Niekerk 1965) or poor quality pro-
areas of discoloration(Fig.26.11).Placental evalu
teininheration(vanNiekerk&vanNiekerk1998)
ation inthefield has been described(Cottrillet al
hasbeen associatedwith anincreased incidence of
1991,Schlafer2004)and a detailed description of
pregnancy loss.A good nuuritional programme is
abortion in marescan befound in Acland (1993).
clearly advisablefor pregnant mares. Other stresses,
Many'countrieshaveregulations orcodes ofprac-
such as haulingforlongperiodsareoftensuggested
tice for the general approach to the management
as causing embryonic loss.However, controlled
ofan aborting mare and these should always be
studies failed to substantiate this belief（Baucus
followed.
etal1990)andrecentworkfailedtodemonstrateany
difference in pregnancy rates between transported
and non-transported mares.The common practice
of transportingmares tostud formating andreturn-
inghomethesamedayshouldnotbedetrimental
to their fertility,aslong as thetransport is safe and
comforiable.Far from being avoided,regular exer
cise is important during pregnancy although during
the latter half forced exercise should be decreased.
Rectalpalpation andultrasound examinations are
safeprocedureswhenperformedcorrecilyand there
isnoindication that ultrasound examination isdet-
rimental to theembryo(Vogelsangetal 1989).
Abortion
An overall abortion rate of 10% after 60 days of ges-
Fig.26.10Cervicalstaron chorionicsurface
tation is usually cited for the horse.In practice,it
593
Part
51
Subfertilityand infertility
(over80cm totallength)hasbeen associatedwith
excessivecordforsion.This twisting causes increased
resistancetobloodflowinbothdirectionsandthe
resultingthrombosis andpoorplacentalperfusion
can lead tofetal death and abortion of an autolysed
fetus.Decreased cord length can cause premature
tearingoffetalmembranes,leadingtofetal asphyxia.
Twistingandvascularcompromisereportedlycon-
stitutethecommonestsinglecauseofobservednon-
infectious abortionin the UlK(Smithet al 2003)
In mares,the interdigitating microvilli are con
nected byanunidentifiedelectron-densematerial.
Placentalseparation involves dissolutionofthis
Fig.26.11 Placentitis on chorionic surface;note the
substance.Causes of premature placental sepa-
discoloured area.
ration are largely unknown,although maternal
stress and endophyte-contaminated tallfescuehave
been implicated.When placental separation occurs
shortly before parturition,the thickened placenta
Non-infectiouscausesofabortion
oftendoesnotrupturethroughthecervicalstarand
andstillbirth
the allantochorion bulges out of the vulva ('redbag
Historically,twins have been the single most impor-
delivery) (Fig.26.13).The foal can become hypoxic,
tant cause of abortion in thoroughbreds.However,
resulting inneonatal maladjustment syndrome.
they are now much less common because of the
Normalequinepregnancyis situatedprimarilyin
widespread use of ultrasonography.The diagnosis of
a uterine horn.On occasions,the pregnancy devel-
twin pregnancy can be made even if only one fetus
ops in the uterine body.In this condition almost the
is found,as examination oftheplacentareveals an
entire chorionic surfaceof theplacenta contained
area devoid of villi where the two placentas (Fig.
withintheuterinebodyiswithoutvilliwhilethat
26.12)were in contaci.Twins should still besubmit-
containedwithin thehornsiscoveredwithan exces
ted to a diagnosticlaboratory as twin pregnancies
sivenumber ofvilli.Theproportion of theplacenta
are equally susceptible to equine herpesvirus (EHV)
corresponding to the two uterine horns is small,
infection.
and thefetus is situated entirelywithin theuterine
In mares,theumbilical cord istwisted,usuallyin
body.The fetus is frequentlyaborted completely
a clockwise spiral.Thenormal lengthranges from
containedwithin itsplacenta;itsgrowthhasbeen
36-83cm （mean 55cm).Increased cord length
retarded.The abortion occurswhen thenutritional
Fig.26.12Twinplacentas,notice avillous areaswhere
Fig.26.13Premature separation of theplacenta,commonly
placentas were in contact.
called'red bag'.
594
Chapter
26
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
demandsofthefetus exceedtheabilityofthepla-
can recrudesce in latent carriers. Stressing pregnant
centa to meet them.
maresmay thereforetrigger abortion.
Fetal abnormalities may alsoresult in abortion,
Abortionsmay occurfromthe5thmonth toterm,
although many arecarried toterim.Severe devel
butmost commonlyoccur from 8-9monthsto
opmentalanomalies involving the central nervous
term.Infection of the fetus occurs by migrating leu-
system or development of body cavities have been
kocytes and/orinfectionofumbilicalbloodvessels.
reported in aborted fetuses(seeCh.4).
Primary target organs in the fetus are the respira
Tall fescue grass is widely used in the usA in
tory tract and liver.Premonitory signs ofabortion
pastures.Much ofit isinfested with an endophyte
arefew.Typically there is a suddenabortion without
(Neotyphodiunn,formerly Acrenioniu coenophialum)
milk or udder development.The feus is delivered
that has dopamine agonist activity.Fescue infected
in afreshconditionoftenstillenclosedinitsmem
withthisendophyteactuallyperformsbetter than
branes.Rarely,some foals survive for up to 7days,
noninfected fescue in pastures,hence its wide-
but they are weak, jaundiced and have a marked
spread distribution.However,when mares graze
leukopenia.
this fescue during gestation, abortion, stillbirth,
Diagnosis ofabortion is by histopathology of the
prolonged gestation,dystocia,thickened placenta,
fetus.Fetallesionsinclude serouspleuralandperi
agalactia,increased mare mortality and weak foals
toneal fluid,jaundice ofthemucous andplacental
result.Abnorimal cyclicity,lower conception rates
menbranes,enlarged spleen,perirenal oedema,hae-
andincreasedearlyembryonicdeath are alsoseenin
mares grazing on infected fescue. Treatment of preg-
the oralmucosa and conjunctiva,focal hepatic necro-
nantmares is aimedateitherremoving themares
siswith intranuclearinclusionbodies inliver and
from the fescue at 300 days of gestation,which
lung,and a necrotic and friable thymus.Specimens
will prevent problems at parturition,or treating
for submissionto the diagnostic laboratory should
affected mareswith a dopamine antagonist such as
include lung, liver and thymus, both frozen and in
domperidone.
forinalin.Virusisolation ispossible from lung,liver
andthymus samples that havebeen submitted in
Infectiouscausesofabortion
viral transport medium.Fluorescent antibody tests
can be performed on frozen sections of liver and lung.
Equine herpesvirus.Equineherpesvirus(EHIV)is the
Diagnosismay alsobeconfirmedbyvirusisolation
singlemost importantinfectiouscauseofequine
orpolymerasechainreaction.LInfortunately,thereis
abortion.Abortion is primarilycaused by EHV-1
notesttodetectlatentcarriers.Serologyof themare
and,on occasion,EHV-4.EHV-1 is alsO capable
isofnovalueintiediagnosisofabortionbecause
ofcausingrespiratory disease(most noticeablein
of the time period that hasusually lapsed between
foals and yearlings),paralysis,neonatal foal dis-
maternal infection or viraemia and abortion.
ease and uveitis/hypopyon.EHV-4 normally causes
The focus ofcontrolmeasures varies by coun
respiratory disease but occasionally has caused
try.Inmost countries control is achieved through
abortion in single mares.Transmission is by the
vaccination programmes.Both modified live and
respiratory route.Primary replication of the virus
killed vaccines are available.Controlled studies
is in the mucosal epithelium,followed by a lym-
have showed thatboth areeffective,both liavefail-
phocyte-associated viraemia.The virus persists in
ures. Recommendations are to vaccinate pregnant
the pregnant mare for long periods with the major-
mares with three doses given at5,7and9months
ity of aborlions (90%) occurring within 60 days
of gestation.
post-infection;however,therangefrominfection to
Even with
vaccination programmes,because
abortion is 14-120 days.
immunityis notpermanentandrecrudescencein
Most mares of breeding age are clinically immune
carriers may occur,management is important in
torespiratory disease but not to abortigenic infec-
disease control.Groups of-mixed ages and repro-
tion.Spread ofEHV-1 throughaherd mostcom-
ductivestatus aremostatriskfrom virus abortion;
monly occurs without clinical signs.Immunity is
thus weanlings,yearlings and other horses should
short after natural infection(3-4 months)and indi-
be kept away from pregnant mares.The pregnant
vidualsmaybere-infectedrepeatedly.Additionally
the virus can persist in the trigeminal ganglia and
tion,and maintained in isolation.All new arrivals
595
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
should be isolated for 21 days.First-foaling mares
mares that were in the 7-llth month ofgestation.
shouldbekept away from older mares.If mares are
All mares became seropositive.Clinical signs would
removed from a group, do not reintroduce them.All
have gone unobserved but forthe experimental pro-
abortions and stillbirths should be investigated and
tocol,which included twice-daily monitoring of
themareisolatedpendingtheresults.Newly arrived
body temperature andweighingoffeedremaining
animals shouldneverbemixedwith pregnantmares
at the end of the day.A slight febrile response and
ona farm.
mildanorexia wasdetected.Of theexposed mares,
Equineviral arteritis.Equine viral arteritis(EVA)is a
10 of14pregnant mares aborted.
contagiousviral disease of horsesfirst identified in
Clinical signs of EVA are very variable, and typi-
1953.AnEVAoutbreakwas identifiedforthefirst
callythere are noclinical signsother than abortion
time in theLKin1993.Some outbreaks of the dis-
in mares.The classic clinical signs are an influenza-
easearenot associatedwith abortionswhileother
like illness with pyrexia for1-5 days,depression,a
outbreaks are associated with significant pregnancy
nasal discharge, conjunctivitis,anorexia,a focal dr-
losses.Outbreakshavebeenattributedto theuseof
matitis andoedema of thelimbs,ventral abdomen,
freshcooledsemenfrom a carrierstallion.Although
scrotum,prepuceandperiorbitalregions.Abortion
naturally occuirringabortionfromEVAisnotcom-
may occur during,or shortlyafter,an acuteillness
monitoesccuroradicallymetiesnl
orsubclinical infection.Themajority of abortions
ters. Some breeds (e.g. Standardbreds) have a high
occur 23-57 days following exposure,or 6-29 days
incidence of seropositiveindividuals and disease
following the onset of fever in the mare.Foals can
is almostneverseen.Otherbreedsare quite naive
be born infected and die within 72 hours, appear-
and clinical signs(i.e.abortion)aremore common.
ing normal when born or born ill, then developing
There may be some differences in pathogenicity
respiratory signs orenteritis.
between strains ofthevirus.
A definitive diagnosis, based on clinical signs
ThetwoimportantroutesofEVAtransmission are
alone,is not possible because of their variable
venereal from a stallionwith infected semen,and
nature.Acute EVA can be confirmed byvirus isola-
aerosol via the respiratory secretions of an acutely
tion from nasopharyngeal swabs, heparinized blood
infected horse. Close or direct coniact is required
samples,andurine and semen samples.Serological
for aerosol transmission to occur. After an aver-
evidence of EVA exposure can be found by taking an
age incubation period of7 days,EVA is excreted in
initial serum sample assoon aspossibleafterclini-
allbodily secretions,including respiratory secre-
cal onset,followed byaconvalescent sample10-14
tions andurine for up to 21 days (possibly longer
dayslatertodetectariseintheEVAantibodytitre.
in urine).After infection,mares clear the infection
Diagnosis ofabortionduetoEVAis largelydepen-
and develop imnunity.However,the virus may per-
dent on virus isolation from the placenta or fetal
sist indefinitely in the accessory sex glands in stal-
tissues;there are no pathognomonic grosslesions.
lions. Stallions then become asymptomatic carriers
After abortion, fetal tissues to collect for labora-
and remain so foryears,shedding thevirus in the
tory diagnosis are: lung,liver,placenta and fetal flu-
semen.There is no evidence that mares,geldings
ids.If EVA is the cause of the abornion,it is fairly
orfoalsthatacquiretheinfectionbecomecarri
easytoisolate.MaresinfectedwithEVAwillusually
ers.Interestingly,marked changes in semen quality
abort partially autolysed fetuses,in contrast tofresh
installionsexperimentallyinfectedwithEVA have
fetuses aborted by maresinfectedwith EHV.
been described (Neu et al 1992）.At present, there
Sincevirtually all acutelyinfectedhorsesrecover
isnoeffectivetreatmentforachronicallyinfected
uneventfully after EVA, any treatment is symp-
stallion.
tomatic.In the UiK,the Code of Practice considers
Venereal transmission isbelieved tobethemajor
conirolmeasures forEVA and providesexcellent
causeofwidespread disseminationofthevirus.In
guidance intheeventofan outbreak.A modified
breeds that permit the use of artificial insemina-
live-virus vaccine is available in North America,
tion,theviruscanbetransmitted through theuseof
whereas a killed vaccine (Artervac,Fort Dodge
fresh,chilled or frozen semen.Ina controlled study
Animal Health)is available in theUK.In the USA,
(Cole et al 1986), seronegative mares were bred to
useofthe vaccine,althoughregulated by thevar-
carrier stallions. The mares were then transported
ious state governments,is becoming more widely
to another location and housed with seronegative
practised because ofrecent outbreaks.There is some
596
Chapter
1261
Infertilityand subfertilityin themare
reluctancetovaccinate because,once vaccinated,a
inhorses.A large number of bacterial species that
stallioncannot bedistinguishedbyserologyfrom a
gain access tothe placenta cancause abortion in
naturally infected animal.However,virus isolation
the mare. The ascending pathway via the cervix is
from the semen can distinguish carriers fromvac-
theprimary routeofinfection.Rarely,bacteriamay
cinates.lt must be remembered thatcertain coun-
be in the uterus at the time of conception or arrive
trieswill not accept theimportation of seropositive
haematogenously. Bacteria that spread rapidly
animals or their semen.Ifan animalis tobevac-
through the allantochorion often infect thefetus,
cinated,a blood sample for serology should be
causing acutebacterial septicaemia.More chronic
takenprior tovaccination.A second blood sample
ascendinginfectionsareoften localizedaroundthe
shouldbe taken10 days after the secondvaccina-
cervical star and cause a focal or local placentitis
tion to ensure a serologicalresponse tovaccination.
(Fig.26.14).The placentitis often leads to placen-
Many studs in the UK are requiring confirmation
tal insufficiency with abortion of a growth-retarded
that mares are seronegativelo EVA prior to arrival
fetusorthebirthofadysmaturefoal.Theplacenta
at stud.Vaccination of stallions has been widely
isoften thiclened and coveredwith exudate and
adopted in theUK
the fetus septicaemic.Bacteria thatcause placentits
Othermeasures of control includekeeping about
aresimilarto theorganismsthatcauseendometri-
90m between a shedding stallion and other horses;
tis (see below). They are often opportunist patho-
orbetween a marebred to a sheddingstallion and
gens that can be isolated from the caudal genital
other mares.Mares canbe bred to a shedding stal-
tract of normal mares. Normally there are premoni-
lion as long as they are vaccinated at least 21 days
torysignsofaninpending abortion,suchi asudder
priortobreedingorarekeptisolatedfromother
enlargement,mammary secretions and relaxation
seronegative horses for amonth after breeding.
of thevulva.
Leptospirosis.Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease
Earlydiagnosisiscritical tobeabletobegineffec
withworldwidedistribution.Thepredominant sero-
tivetreatmentthatcanresult inthe survivalofa
var affecting horses varies by country andregion.
healthy foal.The ability to diagnose placentitis in
Leptospirainterrogans serogroupPomona serovarken-
utero,before clinical signs ofpremature lactation
newicki hasbeen reported tobemostoften impli-
or vaginal discharge are observed,will inprove the
cated in equine abortion in Kentucky.L.kirschineri
chancesofsuccessful treatment.Althoughitcannot
serogroup Grippotyphosa serovar grippotyphiosa has
berecommended to examine all mares routinely at
also been reported.Theraccoon is the maintenance
intervalsforplacentalabnormalities,mareswith a
hostforgrippotyphosabut themaintenancehostfor
history.of problems or at high risk may beperiodi-
kenmewickihasnot beenidentified
callyexaminedforsignsofplacental disease.
Favourable conditions are moist,warm environ
Reefetal(1996)have described the assessment
ments.Invasion occurs through mucous meim-
of fetal well being in utero using transcutaneous
branes,soft moist slin,etc.Bacteraemia occurs after
an incubationperiodof4-10 days.Pathogenicsero-
vars localize in the kidneys or genital tract.Clinical
signs in themareare often unobserved.Abortions
occur from 6months to term.Grosslesions of the
fetus vary andmayincludeicterus anda swollen
liver and/or kidneys.Placental lesions are common.
Diagnosis is by identification of the organisms and
by serology of themare.No vaccine is currently
available.Controlisachieved by sanitation,hygiene
andcontrolofwildlife.Somereportsindicatethat
potassium penicillin may be useful in pregnant
mares withrising titres.Human studies indicate that
intravenouspenicillin,nhighdoses,maybearea
sonabletreatment.
Bacterial/fungal abortion (placentitis). Placentitis is
Fig.26.14Ascending placentitis:note discoloured,thickened
area at cervical pole.
a leading cause of abortion and neonatal disease
597
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
ultrasonography. The uterus is examined at mul-
tiplesites,attempting tocover all four quadrants.
Fetal heartrate,the diameterofthefetal aorta,fetal
activity,maximum depthoffetal fluids,uterine-pla
cental contact and uterine-placental thicknesshave
beenfound tobe related to the pregnancy outcome.
Significant uteroplacental thickening is consistent
withplacentitis,whileanechoicspacesbetweenthe
uterus and placenta suggest placental separation.
While observed abnormalities are good indicators
ofplacental disease,thelackofabnormal signs on
transcutaneous examination doesnot mean that
placental disease does not exist.Focal areas ofpla-
centitis may go undetected.
Most cases of placentitis stem from the spread of
bacteria through the cervix, infecting the chorioal-
lantoisintheregionofthecervicalstarandspread
ingfrom there.Renaudinetal(1999)have examined
the uteroplacental unit near the cervical os per rec-
tum,near the area where most cases ofplacenti-
tis would beexpected to originate.Measurements
of thecombined thickness of the uterus and pla-
Fig.26.15Ultrasonographicimage of the combineduterus
centa at the ventral portion of the uterus,near the
and placenta,near theinternal cervical os.Theplacenta
and uterus are separatedby ahyperechoic exudate.
cervicalos,are obtained.The norimal thickness of
the uteroplacental unit is dependent on gestational
age (8mm at 270-300 days gestation, 10mm at
evidence that itmay be more effective than progesier-
300-330 days,12mm at>330 days).Multiplemea-
one.Pentoxifylline(4g p.o.,b.i.d.) hasbeen recom-
surementsshouldbetakenandthemeanvalue
mended for its anti-endotoxiceffects in cases of
obtained because a single value may be mislead-
placentitis.
ing,especially if the image is taken at an oblique
A specific cause of placentitis,found primarily in
angle.Separation of theplacenta from theuterus or
Kentucky and the surrounding area,has been identi-
the presence ofan exudate is alsoan indication of a
fied as anocardioform organism,Crossiella equiThis
problem(Fig.26.15).
diseaseischaracterized by an area ofplacentitiswith
Ifplacentitis is diagnosed in utero,treatment
a tanmucoidexudatelocatedatthebaseofauterine
shouldbeinitiatedimmediately
Parturition
horn,near the body of theplacenta.
should not be induced.The longer the fetus is car-
Aspergillus spp. are the most common cause of
ried in utero,the better chance it has to reach a
mycotic placentitis and abortion in the mare. Other
levelofmaturitythatwillallowittosurviveafter
fungi such as Mucor sp.have been reported.Much
birth.lfa vaginal discharge ispresenta culture and
lesscommon isplacentitis duetoCandida sp.infec-
sensitivity may bebeneficial in choosing an appro-
tion.Fungal disease can have a similar pathogenesis
priate antibiotic.While results of the culture are
tobacterial abortionwithinflammationof thecho-
pending, or if no discharge is present, broad-spec-
rion beginning at the cervical pole.Infection may
trum antibiotics should be administered.Because
also originate from the respiratory tract,through
sulfa-trimethoprim can cross the placenta,is
the circulatory system to theuterus and placenta.
administered orallyand antibioticsneed tobe
Typicalgrosslesionsoftheplacentaincludenecrotic
administered fora prolonged periodoftime;it
areas that are difficult to distinguish from bacterial
is themost commonly usedantibiotic.Treatment
lesions.Thechorionic surfacemaybe dry,thick and
also includes progestogen supplementation and
leathery.There may belesions on the fetus,espe
pentoxifylline.The oralprogestogen altrenogest
cially the skin.Fungal elements are easily demon-
(0.88mg/kg)is usuallyused,notonlybecause of
strableinsmears andculturesifthey areresponsible
easeofadministration,but becausethereis some
forthe abortion.
598
Chapter
261
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
Endometritis
haveareducedpregnancyrateduetoahostileenvi
ronmentfortheearlydevelopingconceptus.
Endometritis,an acute or chronic inflammatory
process involving theendometrium,hasbeenrecog-
Venerealendometritis
nized formany years as a major cause of infertility
inbrood mares.This subfertilityis due toa hostile
In addition to opportunist pathogens,some bac
environment for thedevelopingconceptusand,in
teria, e.g.Taylorella equigenitalis (CEM organism),
some cases,the endometritiscauses earlyregression
Klebsiella pneumonine (capsular types 1,2and 5)
of the CL.Endometritisfrequently occurs as a resuli
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (some strains),may
ofmicrobial infection butcani alsobe due to non-
bevenereally transinittedby asymptomaticcarri-
infectious causes.
ers of either sex. Mating or gynaecological exami-
The underlying aetiology of the specific cause of
nation may result in their transfer into the uterus.
endometritisdetermines the type oftreatment to
Stallions may harbour the organisms over the
beused,and thefollowingclassification system for
entire surface of thepenis and inthe distalure-
equine endometritis is useful:
thra. Control is by routine screening of swabs
venereal infection
taken before mating by laboraiories experienced
in the isolation and identification of these spe-
·chronicinfectiousendometritis
cific organisms.Anaerobic bacteria have been iso-
persistent mating-induced endometritis (PMIE),
lated from themare'suterus,withPrevotellafragilis
alsoreferred toasdelayeduterineclearance.
themostfrequent（Ricketis &Mackintosh1987).
ltis generallyassumed that theuterinelumenof
Further workisneededtoassesstheimportanceof
thenormalfertilemareisbacteriologicallysterileor
anaerobesinendometritis.
may have a temporary,non-residentmicroflora.This
Diagnosis.Before the breeding season,swabs should
isdespitethefactthatthemare'sreproductivetract
betakenfrom theclitoral fossa,clitoral sinuses(only
is often contaminatedwithbacteria from the act
themedial sinusmay be obvious)and thevestibule.
ofcoitus,foaling and veterinary procedures.Mares
Theperineal area of themare should notbecleaned
with a defective vulvar conformation can also aspi-
except for the removal of gross contamination of the
rate air,bacteria and debris into thevagina that can
vulvawith faeces usinga drypaper towel.Aprotec
developintoendometritis.
tive disposable glove should be worn by the veteri-
Thebacterial speciesthatcausebacterialendometri-
nary surgeon on the hand used to evert the ventral
tis are numerous and can be classified as follows:
commissuire ofthe vulva and expose the clitoris.
(1)contaminants and commensals:(2)opportun-
The swabs should beplaced in transport medium,
ist, causing an acute endometritis; and (3) venere-
clearly labelledwith themare'snameandsent toan
allytransmitted.Normally,thevestibularandclitoral
approved laboratory It is important to penetrate the
area hasa harmless and constantly fluctuatingbac-
clitoral sinus,and thereforealarge swabtip should
terial population.ln association with benign sap-
notbeused.Swabsarecultured aerobicallyonblood
rophytic organisms,opportuinistic organisms such
and MacConkey's agar to screen for the presence of
as Streptococcus zooepidenicus, Escherichia coli and
K.pneumoniae and P.aeruginosa.Microaerophilic
Staphylococcus spp.canbe found.The stallion's penis
culture on chocolate blood agar (with and without
is colonized by similar organisms.S.zooepidemicus is
streptomycin) must also be done for the detection
themostcommonlyisolatedbacierialspeciesfrom
of CEM ifnot in a CEM-free country.In addition,
acute endometritis,particularly in theinitial stages.
in stallions,multiple swabs mustbe taken from the
E.coli is the next most common isolate.The uterus
urethrabefore and after ejaculation,penile sheath,
responds to these bacteria with a rapid influx of nel-
semen and urethral fossa and/or sinus. In the UK,
trophils(Pycock&Allen1990).Normally,these neu
this screening has been successful in virtually erad
trophils phagocytose and lill lhe bacteria rapidly
icating CEM andvastly reducing the incidence of
(<24hours).Theinflammatoryby-products arethen
venereal disease.
mechanicallyevacuated andtheendometritisresolves
Treatment.Any mare that is suspected of havinga
itselfexceptwhen themare suffersfrompneumova-
venereal infection must not be bred.In the case of
gina orisasusceptiblemareSusceptiblemares have
clitoralorvestibularinfections,topical treatmentis
a delayinuterineclearance andtheinfammatoryby-
used.This involves thorough cleaning with chlor-
products accumulate as intrauterinefluid.Suchmares
hexidine surgical scrubfollowed by the application
599
Part
5
Subfertilityandinfertility
of0.2%nitrofurazoneointment forT.equigenitalis,
0.3% gentamicin cream for K.pneumoniae or sil-
ver nitrate and gentanicin cream for P.aeruginosa.
These pathogens, particularly P aeruginosa, are dif
ficultto eliminate from the clitoris,hence clitoral
sinusectomyorclitorectomymayhavetobeused in
refractory cases.A broth culture containing a mix-
tureofgrowingorganismspreparedfromthenor-
mal clitoral flora can suppress venereal pathogens
in some cases.Evidence for the successful elimi-
nation of infeciion is based on three negative sets
ofclitoralandendometrialswabs,takenatweekly
intervals.
Fig. 26.16Negative' endometrial cytology: numerous
Chronicinfectious endometritis
endometrial cells,noneutrophils.
Chronicinfectiousendometritisis found mostfre-
quently inoldermaresthathavehadseveral foals.
Such mares have compromised uterine defence
mechanisms that allowthenormalvestibular and
vaginal flora to colonize the uterus, thus inducing
a chronic endometritis.A diagnosis of endometritis
can bemade bycollection of samples during oestrus
forbacteriologicalcultureandcytologicalexamina-
tion.The veterinarian must verify that the mare is
not pregnant before passing a swab through the cer-
vix.Theideal techniqueshouldensurethat thesam-
plesare obtained from theuterinelumen only.It is
important to ensure that the method of swabbing
does not introduce bacteria into a previously nor-
maluterus.Aguardedswab ispassed into theuter-
inelumen and the swabtipis exposedonlywhen it
Fig.26.17Positive'endometrialcytology:numerous
neutrophils.
isintheuterinelumen.Aswabforcytological exam-
ination shouldalsobetaken.
Swabs for culture should be plated on blood
and MacConkey's agar, and incubated at 37°C for
If a pathogen is present in the uterus, the mare's
48hours.Cultures should be examined at 24 and
immune system will mouni a response and neutro-
48 hours.An air-dried smear is made by gently roll-
phils will usually be observed in a cytology sam-
ing the other swab on a microscope slide.The smear
ple.If the cytology sample is‘negative',meaning
is then stained with a rapid modified Wright's stain
thattherearesufficient endometrialcellsiomakea
suchasDiff-Kwik(AmericanHospitalSupplies).The
diagnosis and there are no or rare neutrophils, then
stained smear should be examined for the presence
bacteria thatresult from theculture taken aremost
of inflammatory and endometrial cells (Fig.26.16),
probablycontaminantsinadvertentlypicked up dur-
the latter confirming that a satisfactory sample was
ing theprocedure.However,insomecasesapositive
obtained.A uterine cytology provides critical infor-
culturewith anegative cytology warrants treatment
mation that assists in interpretation of culture
(LeBlancet al2007)
results.Diagnosis of endomeiritis is based on the
In Table 26.3,the possible outcomes are outlined.
presence of significant numbers ofneutrophils in
First, if the cytology isositive, then the culture
the smear(Fig.26.17).Mares that have more than
should be submitted to the laboratory to identify
5neutrophils per high-power field (x400)on a
the pathogen and determine is antibiotic sensitiv-
cytology smearshouldbeconsideredto have active
ity.If a pathogen is not identified (i.e‘no growth'),
endometritis.
yet the cytology is positive,various explanations
600
Chapter
1261
Infertilityandsubfertilityin themare
Table 26.3Possibleoutcomesofendometrial culture
and cytologyexamination
Positive
Negative
cytology
cytology
Positiveculture
Pathogenidentified
Falsepositive
(contaminant)?
Treat based on
Don't treat?
results
Treat?
Re-check?
Negative culture
Re-culture?
Don't treat
Treat?
exist.The mare may berecovering from a previ-
ous infection and,although residual inflamma-
tion is evident, the pathogen has been eliminated.
Alternatively, some other cause ofnon-infectious
inflammationmaybepresent.Then again,themare
Fig.26.18Uterine 0edemaanda small amount of fluidin the
may have a uterine infectionbut a sample handling
uterine lumen,typical of early to mid-oestrus.
orlaboratory errorkilled thepathogen,resultingin
a negative culture result. It has also been suggested
that anaerobicbacteria will result in a positivecytol
before mating is sterile and containsnoneutrophils
ogy but fail toyield results with standard aerobic
(Pycock & Newcombe 1996）.However, freefluid
culture techniques (Ricketts & Mackintosh 1987).
in the lumen is awarning sign that the mare may
In the case of a positive cylology and negative cul-
have problems with delayed uterine clearance (see
ture, onemust decide,based on history and other
PMIE,below).The amount of fluid that should be
findings,whether to repeat the culture and cytology
considered significant is not clear.The significance
procedure or treat themare.If treatment is consid-
dependstosomeextentonwhenduringoestrusthe
ered,modalitiessuchasuterinelavageraher than
fluidisobserved;fluid detectedearlyin oestrusmay
antibioticinfusion,may be preferable.It has also
have disappearedwhen themare isfurther advanced
been suggested that the type of bacteria influences
in oestrus and the cervix relaxes more.Small vol-
the exudate produced by the endomeirium,which
umes of intrauterine fluid during oestrus do not
in turn affects the ability to obtain a representative
affect pregnancy rates,in contrast to mares with
cytology sample (LeBlanc et al 2007).
larger [>2 cm depth) collections of fluid (Pycock &
In some cases,an endometrial biopsy may bea
Newcombe1996).In mares thatare susceptible to
useful diagnosticaid.Thistopicis covered in more
endometritisthereisanaccumulationofmorefluid
detail below,underUlterusFor detailedreviewsof
than in non-susceptible mares.
theclinicalapplicationandpathological findings.
Generally if there is more than I cm of fluid dur-
readers shouldconsult Kenney&Doig(1986).
ingoestrussomeattemptshouldbemadetoremove
Ultrasonography is indispensable in the diagno-
this before breedingusingoxytocin treatment.
sis of endometritis.Since the first description of the
if the volume is above 2cm (Fig. 26.19), the fluid
identificationofthecollectionofsmallvolumes of
should be investigated for the presence of inflam-
intrauterinefluidusingulurasound,whichcouldnot
matory cells and bacteria.Intrauterine fluid during
be palpated per rectum(Ginther &Pierson1984),
dioestrusisindicativeofinflammationandassociated
general awareness of the frequency of this abnor-
withsubfertilityduetoearlyembryonicdeath anda
mality has increased.Endometrial secretions and
shortened luteal phase(Newcombe1997).
theformation ofthe smallvolumeoffreefluid
Transrectal ulurasonography provides a rapid,reli
may be associated withthe samemechanismthat
ablemethod of assessment of theuterus.In a study
causes normal oestral oedema (Fig. 26.18). In many
involving ultrasonographic examination, cytological
cases,the uterine luminal fluid that accumulates
andbacteriological samplingoftheuterus in 3S0
601
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
inations may be used to nionitor the response to
therapy; however, every time the cervix is breached
there is therfsk of introducing more bacteria.
Recently, immunomodulators have been sug-
gested as useful treatment adjuncts for endometri-
tis.Available products ise a Mycobacteriun cell wall
extract or Propionibacter preparations.Although the
exact mechanism by which fertility is improved is
UTERIS
not yet clear,here is some evidence that,in some
mares, treatment is helpful (Rogan et al 2007).
In addition to the antibiotic therapy, repeated
treatment with PGF,increases the frequency of the
follicular phases, thus allowing intrauterine therapy
tobeused more readily. It alsoreduces the duration
of the luteal phase where progesterone increases the
susceptibility to infection. Predisposing causes to
echronic endometritis,such as defectivevulvar or
Fig.26.19 Excessivevolume ofuterine fluid in the fumer of
cervical conformation, should also be attended to.
the uterine body,which is indicative of encometritis
Fungal infections. Mvcotic endometritis is not as
common as that of bacieriological origin, but rec-
ognition of a fungus asthe causal agent is impor
brood mares before mating (Pycock & Newcombe
tant, since commonly used intrauterine antibiotic
1996) itwas concluded that,if nofree fluid is detected
therapy is ineffective. In cases of fuingal endometri-
during oestrus, then acute endonetritis as detected in
tis, ares may have a history ofnormal or abnormal
cytology is absent in 99% of cases.
The most favoured approach to treatment has
they may have had a recent abortion or a fetal
been the infusion ofvarious antibiotics into thie
membrane retention, or there may be a hisiory of
uterine lumen during oestrus. The intrauterine
repeated intrauterine antibiotic therapy. Yeasts more
route is preferable to systemic therapy as most acute
frequently cause endometritis than moulds; Candida
endometritis cases arelocalized. Systemic trcatment
albicans is the most common isolate.
alone,or in combination with local applicationi,is
Thie diagnosis is based upon the presence of fun-
suitable in a few circumstances.Ideally, the choice
gal elements and inflammatory cells in endometrial
ofantibioticfor local treatment should bebased
smears. Yeasts can often be identified following stain-
on in vitro antibiotic sensitivity tests. However,
ing with Diff-Kwik using a magnification of x400.
in many cases this is not possible and a broad-
Fungal elements are more readily identified in endo-
spectrum antibiotic or combination of antibiotics
metrial biopsies following staining with Gomori's
should be used that is effective against the mixed
methenamine silver or periodic-acid-Schiff (PAS).
aerobic and anaerobie infections that commonly
Successful culture ofendometrial smears for fuingi
occur While 35-40ml is a sufficient volume to
can be difficult because the organisms may be pres-
cover the entire endometrial surfare in most mares,
ent in low numbers, and furthermore they require a
a larger volume (up to 100ml) may be better in
long incubation period.
older, pluriparous mares to ensure distribution
These infections are very difficult to treat, partic-
throughout the uterus. Larger volumes will flow
ularly if they are chronic or deep-seated infections,
baclk out through the cervix and be lost. The num-
and tend to recur. Intrauterine lavage with 2-3 litres
beroftreatmentsrequireddependsonindividual
ofwarm saline, followed by antimycotic prepara
circumstances and the incilting paihogen, but a sin-
tions such as tamed povidone-iodine (1-2% solution
gle treatment may be effective or daily infusions for
daily for 5 days),nystatin(200000-500000units
3-5days during oestrus workwell in most cases,
daily for 5 days) or clotrimazole (400-600mg every
especially if combined with oxytocin.The success
other day for 12days) hiasbeen usedwith limited
of treatment can be monitored using ultrasonog-
success.Lufeneron,an insect growth inhibitor,has
raphy to identify the presence of intrauterine fluid.
been reportedly used with some success (Hess et
Repeated endormetrial swab/smearorbiopsy exam
al2002). Uterine irrigation with vinegar or dilute
602
Chapter
26
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
acetic acid has reportedlybeen suiccessful,presum-
globulins, opsonins and the functional ability of
ably by altering theuterinepH.
neutrophils in the uterusof susceptiblemares have
The prognosis for the subsequent fertility of mares
not confirmed the presence of an impaired immune
with myroticendometritisispoor.If thereisnosuc-
response(seeihereviewbyAllen&Pycock1989).
cessineliminatingtheyeastorfungalinfectionafter
Reduced physical drainage may contribute to an
threeattempts,theownermustbeadvisedofthe
increased susceptibility to uterineinfection(Evans
unlikely chance of success. lt is suggested that a nor-
etal 1986).The physicalability of theuterus to
malhealthyuterus can eliminatemycoticinfection;
eliminatebacteria,inflammatory debris and fluid
this means that even if themycotic infection is suc-
isnowknown tobethecritical factor inuterine
cessfully ireated themare must be treated as a sus-
defence.It is a logical conclusion that any impair-
ceptible mare.
ment of thisfunction,i.e.defective myometrial con-
tractility,rendersamare susceptible topersistent
endometritis(Troedsson&Liu 1991,Troedssonet
Persistentmating-inducedendometritis
al1993,LeBlancetal1994).Thereason susceptible
Persistent mating-induced endometritis
（PMIE)
mareshavethisdefectivecontractilityisnotknown.
associatedwithdelayeduterineclearancehasbeen
Regulation ofmusclecontractionby thesystemmay
shown tobeasignificant causeofreproductivefail-
be impaired (Liu et al 1997).The resulting fluid
ure in mares. At coitus, semen, along with micro-
accumulation could be due tofailure to drain via
organisms and debris, is deposited direcily into
thecervixortodecreasedreabsorptionbylymphatic
the mare'suterus. Spermatozoa induce an inflam-
vessels.Lymphatic drainage could play an impor-
matory responsein theuterinelumen (Kotilainen
tant role in the persistence of post-breeding inflam-
elal1994,Troedssonetal2001),whichis not dif
mation,anditis interestingthat lymphaticlacunae
ferent for live or dead spermatozoa (Katila 2001).
(lymph stasis) is a common finding in endometrial
In most mares,this transient endometritis resolves
biopsies talen from susceptible mares (Kenney&
spontaneously within 24-72 hours so that the envi-
Doig1986,LeBlanc et al 1995).
ronmentoftheuterinelumeniscompatible with
Detectionofthesusceptiblemarecanbedifficult,as
the establishment ofpregnancy.It is important not
theremay onlybesubtlechanges in theuterine envi-
toregard this endometritis asapathological condi-
ronment,notreadily detected by current diagnostic
tion.Ratherit isaphysiological reaction that aids in
procedures.Manymaresshownosignsofinflamma-
removing excess sperm and debris from the uterus
tionbeforematingbuttheinevitableendometri
beforetheembryodescendsfrom theuterinetube
tis that follows mating persists.while theresponse
intotheuterinelumen5.5daysafter fertilization.
tobacterial challengeorsemen challengehasbeen
However,if the endometritispersistsafter day4or5
used in research studies,history isperhaps the most
useful indicator of a susceptible mare in practice.
embryonic survival,the premature release of PGF
Demonstration of clearance failure using scintigra-
results in luteolysis,a rapid decline of progester
phy orcharcoalclearance hasbeen usedtomakean
oneand anearlyreturntooestrus.Thesemaresare
accuratediagnosis(LeBlancetal 1994)butis also
referred to as susceptible and they develop a persis-
difficult to apply in practice.Transrectal ultrasonog-
tent endometritis(Allen&Pycock1988)
raphy to detect uterine luminal fluid after breeding
Resistantmares can eliminate induced infection
has proved useful in identifying mares with a clear-
without treatment,while susceptiblemares cannot
ance problem, and is the most useful technique in
(Hlughes &Loy 1969). In general, reduced resis-
practice.The presence of free intraluminal fluid prior
tance to endometritis is associated with advancing
to breeding strongly suggests susceptibility to persis-
age and multiparity,although it has been reported
tentendometritis(Pycock&Newcombe1996).
that some maiden mares may also be'susceptible
Varioustreatmentsareavailabletoenhanceuterine
（Malschitzly etal2006).Susceptibility toendo-
clearance andreducethe effects ofPmIE,including
metritis is not an absolute state,since failure of
ecbolics,uterinelavage and intrauterine antibiotics.
uterine defencemechanismsneedonly slowthe
The success ofsuch treatments can be influenced
process of eliminating infection. There is a wide
by anumber offactors such astime of treaiment
range of susceptibility to endometritis,and mares
in relation to ovulation, time oftreatment inrela-
cannotbeneatlycategorizedinto'resistant'or'sus-
tion tomating,and othier medications that maybe
administered concurrently.
603
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Uterine activity is greater during oestrus, when
beaffected,at least temporarily,byuse ofcloprost
the concentration of progesterone is low, than when
enol,a prostaglandin analogue,in the early post-
progesterone concentrations are elevated (Cross&
ovulatory-period. Numerous studies have shown
Ginther1987).Myometrial activity andtheincrease
thatmares treated in thepostovulatoryperiod had
in intrauterinepressureafter exogenous oxytocin are
lower concentrations ofprogesterone during the
inverselyrelated to the concentration ofprogester-
ensuing early to mid-dioestrus;however,luteal
one(Gutjahretal2000).Moreover,reduceduterine
functionseemstobeabletorecoverbytheendof
clearance is observed under theinfluence of proges-
dioestrus.Theeventualeffecton theestablishment
terone(Evans el al 1986,1987).Theinhibition of
ofpregnancyisnotclearbut warrantsconsideration
myornetrialactivityby elevated progesteronemay
whenprescribingtreatment.Furtherwork is needed
necessitate modifications in treatment protocols
toclarify theeffect ofprostaglandinsor analogues
inthepostovulatoryperiod.Itispreferabletotreat
administered in the early postovulatory period
mareswithuterineclearanceproblemsprior toovu-
on the establishment of pregnancy. Nevertheless,
lationrather than after.Whencomparingtheeffects
reportstodateindicatethatthetimeof treatmentin
of 10 or 251U oxytocin on intrauterine pressure,
relation to ovulation,as well as the dose andnum-
although both were effective pre-ovulation, only
ber of treatments, should be considered when using
the high dose increased pressure post-ovulation
prostaglandinor analoguesforimprovinguterine
(Gutjahret al 2000).Consequently,when usingoxy-
clearance.While either oxytocin or prostaglandin
tocinafterovulationthedoseshouldbeincreasedto
analogues are effective and safe in the preovulatory
enhance uterine clearance.Assuming tlhat good qual-
period,prostaglandin analogues are best avoided
ity semenisused,matingaproblem mare earlierr
afterovulation.
example48ratherthan24hoursbeforeovulation,
Recently,a long-acting analogue of oxytocin,
may bebeneficial,thus allowing a longer period for
carbetocin (Reprocine,Vetoquinol),has become
treatmenttoimproveuterineclearancebeforepro-
availableandmay beuseful in situationswhere
gesterone begins lo rise.
amore prolongeduterine contraction is desired.
Oxytocin has been shown to be more effective
Preliminaryworkhasshownittobesafeand effec-
than PGFor its analogues,in the short term,for
tive at inducing uterine clearance.Two intramus-
enhancing uterine clearance (LeBlanc 1997）.Yet,
cular injections of 0.14mg carbetocin are given 12
becauseoftherelativelyshorthalf-lifeofoxytocin
and 24 hours after brecding in mares with marked
(Paccamonti elal1999),drugswithalongercourse
ulerine oedema or free fluid before breeding or in
ofaction have been sought.Although the increase
mareswithmore than2cm uterinefluid 12hours
inuterine activity afteradministration of PGFana-
after breeding.
logues,e.g. cloprostenol, does not begin as early as
Anotherfactortoconsiderinthepharmacological
afteroxytocin,theincreaseinactivitypersistsmuch
treatmentofdelayeduterineclearanceistheconcur-
longer.
rent useofother pharmaceuticals such as tranquil-
Animportant factor to consider when using pros-
lizers or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents.The
taglandin analoguesfortreatmentof delayeduterine
uterotonic effectseen after oxytocin adininistration
clearanceis thetime ofadministration in relation
is due both to a direct effect on themyometrium
toovulation.Although itis widely acceptedthat
andalsoindirectlyviaareleaseofprostaglandin
theequineCLisresistant totheluteolyticeffectof
(Paccamontietal 1999).Non-steroidalanti-inflam-
prostaglandin until 5 or6 days post-ovulation,the
matory drugs,such as phenylbutazone,can decrease
resistance of the early CL to prostaglandin is not
uterine clearance by interfering with endogenous
absolute.In early reports examining the timing of
prostaglandin release.Phenylbutazone was found to
prostaglandin administration,two of fivemares
inhibituterineclearancebut,when marespretreated
treatedwithPGF3 days after ovulation responded
withphenylbutazonewerethen treatedwithoxyto-
by returninglooestrus within 2days(Oxender
cin,clearance ofradiocolloid from the uterus was
etal 1975).Furthermore,recent work has shown
restored tothat seen in controlmarestreatedwith
repeated small doses ofprostaglandin to be more
only oxytocin(Cadario etal 1995).Although inhi-
effective than a single larger dose in inducinglute-
bition of endogenous PGF, by non-steroidal anti-
olysis and a return to oestrus（lrvineetal2002).
An additional concern is evidence that,even
uterineclearanceproblein,theeffectcanbeoverrid
whenluteolysisdoesnotensueluteal functionmay
denwith the appropriateuse ofexogenous oxytocin
604
Chapter
261
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
around the time of mating, extra attention should
be paid to uterine clearance and appropriate therapy
institutedwhenneeded.
Theuseofsedatives ortranquillizersmayalsoaffect
uterine clearance.Acepromazine decreases uterine
activity(Gibbs & Troedsson 1995）. Consequently, a
mare being treated with acepromazine for lamini-
tis,for example,should bemonitored closely after
Fig.26.20A large-bore catheterwith inflatablecuff used for
breeding for delayed uterine clearance. Xylazine
uterine lavage.
and detomidine increase uterine activity (Gibbs &
Troedsson 1995,De Lille et al 2000).These actions
may affect the response to oxytocin treatment. Some
studiesindicate that mares withdelayeduterine
The salineisinfused by gravityflow1 litre ata time
clearancehavedifferentpatternsofuterine activity
andthewashingsareinspected toprovideimmedi-
andrespondtoexogenousdrugs in a differentman-
ateinformationconcerningthenature oftheuterine
ner from normal mares（DeLilleetal2000,von-
contents (Fig.26.21),The lavage should be repeated
Reitzenstein et al 2002).When sedation is required
until the fluid that is recovered is clear.In most
inamarewhereuterine clearanceis aconcern,xyla-
cases,the fluid is evenly distributed in both horns,
zineor detomidine ispreferred over acepromazine,
making transrectalmassage oftheuterus unnec
becauiseoftheirenhancementratherthaninhibition
essary.Ifarectal examination is performedwhile
ofuterinemotility andclearance.
the catheter is in the uterus, care must be taken
The successful management of susceptible mares
to avoid contaminating the catheter.The fluid can
may also includeuterine lavage and/or intrauterine
berecovered in thesame containerfrom which it
antibioticinfusion.Regardless,the emphasis should
was infused,thereby preventing air being aspirated
be on treatment in relation to breeding and not
intothe uterus via thecatheter.Measuremeni of the
ovulation.Toooften,in thepast,vetrinarianshave
recovered fluid and ultrasonographic examination
waiteduntil ovulation beforetreatingthesemares.
of the uterus should be performed afterflushing to
By then,there has usually been a large accumulation
ensure thatall thefluid hasbeenrecovered.Thisis
offluid and the bacteria are in a logarithinicphase
necessarybecause you are dealing with a mare with
of growth,
an impaired ability to drain the uterus spontane-
Recognition of the importance of the mechani-
ously.For this reason theprocess is usually com-
calevacuation ofuterine contenis accounted for
bined with oxytocin treatment.Ideally these mares
the introduction of large-volume uterine lavage.
Thetechniqueinvolvestheinfusion andretrievalof
2-3 litres of warm, sterile physiological (buffered)
saline or lactated Ringer's solution into the uterus
via acatheter that hasbeenretainedwithin the cer-
vix via an inflatable cuff. The most convenient is a
large-bore(30French)(S0cm) autoclavable equine
embryo flushing catheter (Fig.26.20).The cuff is
useful as it effectively seals the internal cervical os.
The catheter should only beinserted afterthorough
cleansing of theperineum.The rationale for such an
approach is:
·the removal of accumulated uterine fluid and
inflammatory debris thatmay interferewith neu-
trophil function and the efficacy of antibiotics
·stimulation of uterine contractility
Fig.26.21Increasing gradesof opacityof fluid recovered
recruitment offreshneutrophils throughmechan-
after uterine lavage.
ical irritationof theendometrium.
605
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
will be bred only once but,if repeatedmatings are
ofintrauterine fluidwill vary in individual mares
necessary,lterine lavage shouldbeperformed after
ranging froma few millilitres to over a litre in
eachmating.Whileinmany casesuterinelavage is
extreme cases.All too often owners assume that
performed at 24 hours post-mating, there is some
thefertilityofthesemaresiscomparabletothat
evidencethatearlylavage at6-8hourspost-mating
of young maiden mares. One of the most impor
is beneficial inproblem mares(Knutti et al 2000).
tant aspects of breeding the old maiden mare is to
Large-volume lavage is beneficial in many cases,
makethe ownerawarethat thereisahighpossibil-
particularlyinthemarewitharelativelylarge(above
ity that she will be a problem.These mares must
2cm depth) accumulation of fluid after breeding.
be considered highly susceptible and managed
The process is time-consuming and there is the pos-
accordingly.
sibility of furthercontamination of the uterusby pas-
Management protocol useful in the highly susceptible
sage ofa drainage tube.None thelesswhere thereis
mare.A marethatfrom pastexperience/history is
morethan2cmofuterinefluidoramareisknown
known to produce a large amount (several centi-
tobehighlysusceptible,therisks areoutweighed by
metresdepth)ofluminal fluid after matingshould
thebenefitof treatment(Knuttiet al 1997)
be managed using the following protocol. Overall
Ithas been shown that salinelavage andutero-
management of such mares must be excellent prior
tonicdrugsare as effective as antibiotics ineliminat-
tobreeding.Good hygiene at foalingis essential and
ingbacteriafrom theuterus(Troedsson et al 1995).
allmaresshouldbethoroughly examinedpost-par-
However,this was an experimental study in whicha
tumfor thepresenceof trauma thatmightcompro-
single bacterial species was infusedinto the uterus,
misethephysical barriers touterinecontamination.
and lavagewas within12 hours of mating.Clinically
Gynaecological examinations, particularly of the
there is a mixed bacterial flora,and lavage cannot
vagina,should beperformed asasepticallyaspos-
always beperformedwithin 12oreven 24 hours.
sible.Thorough digitalexamination ofthecervix
This is why many practitioners continue to use intra-
can ideniify fibrosis,lacerations or adhesions that
uterine antibiotics aspart of the treatment protocol.
may need treatment before breeding.Since air in the
Itis particularly important to recognize and
vagina can causeirritation ofthemucosa it should
manage appropriately the older maiden mare, as
he expelled by applying downward pressure with
inmany cases thesemares are susceptible topost-
thehand through therectal wall.Attention should
breeding endometritis even ihough they have
be paid to hygiene at mating by using a tail ban-
neverbeenbredbefore.Oftenisportorwarmblood
dageandwashingthemare'svulva andperineal area
mares arenot considered for breedinguntil they
with cleanwater(ideallyfrom a spraynozzle,which
arein their teens and these older maidenmares
avoids the need forbuckets).Breeding should occur
can bevery difficult toget infoal.Manyof them
at the optimal time,and the number ofmatings
have some common characteristics.Endometrial
should be minimized.This means that these mares
biopsy samples reveal glandular degenerative
needvery close monitoring of the oestrous period
changes and stromal fibrosis (endometriosis) as
by rectal palpation and ulurasonography.The use of
an inevitableconsequence of aging despite thefact
hCGor other ovulation inducing agents is strongly
thai they have not been bred(Ricketts &Alonso
recommendedinsuchmaresinanattempttoensure
1991).Infacl,somefeel thatendometriosis isworse
they are mated only once.Prediction ofovulation
ina mare that has never been pregnant than in a
can alsobemade easierbynot breeding thesemares
tooearly in the year,i.e.before they have begun to
every season.Another common characteristic of
cycleregularly.If feasible, theuse ofartificial insemi
these mares is uterine fluid accumulation.Often,
nationcanbehelpful toreduce(but noteliminate)
an oldermaidenmarehasanabnormallytight
theinevitablepost-breeding endometritis.
cervix thatfails torelaxproperlyduringoestrusso
Management involves thefollowingpoints:
that fluid is unable to drain and accumulates in the
·A singlebreeding must be arranged 1-2(or even
uterine lumen (Pycock 1993).In many cases this
fluid is negative for bacterial growth andpresence
3)daysbeforethe anticipated timeofovulation
of neutrophils. Once the mare is bred, the fluid
·Llltrasound examinationoftheuterus 4-12hours
accumulation will be aggravated due topoor lym-
after mating is performed 1o assess the amount
phaticdrainage andimpairedmyometrial contrac-
and echogenicity of any intrauterine fluid
tion compounded by the tight cervix.The amount
·Uterinelavage isperformed4-8hpost-mating
606
Chapter
26
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
Oxytocin(1oIu beforeovulation,but increaseto
20-25IUlpost-ovulation) should begiven after
lavageand approximatelyevery 4hours after
untileveningandrepeated heiiextmorning,by
either theintravenous orintramuscularroute.In
mares with lymphatic stasis,the slower release
ofprostaglandin(cloprostenol 500μg i.m.) may
beuseful in addition to oxytocin.The clopros-
tenol shouldbegiven some2-4hours afterthe
oxytocin injection but should not be used after
ovulation.
The mare is re-examined the following day and oxy-
tocin treatment is repeatedif fluid is still present.If
fluid accumulation persists an infusion of antibiot-
ics or another lavage procedurefollowed by antibi-
oticinfusion,may beperformed.Evaluation of the
uterus post-breeding isa crucial time to assess all
mares, and too many clinicians fail to do this.
Viralinfectiousdisease
Equine coital exanthema (ECE) is a relatively
benign venereal disease in both sexes caused by
equine herpesvirus type 3(Studdert 1974）.It is
spread by contact and there have been reports of its
transfer during gynaecological examination. Once
infected,horses remain carriers for life.Thevirus
canremain dormantuntilconditions favour its
recrudescenceandproliferation,with thedevelop-
Fig.26.22Equine herpesvirus(EHV)3lesionsin the perineal
ment of the characteristic clinical signs. Normally,
areaofamare.
following coitus, signs develop after an incubation
periodof 4-7 days.Multiplevesicles appear on the
vulvar mucosa and perineum,resulting in a short
be avoided while active lesions are present to pre-
period of local irritation. These ruprure, leaving
vent transmission of the disease.Affected mares
smallulcers3-10mm in diameterthat arepainful
can be artificially inseminated during the sympto-
to the touch (Fig.26.22).In the absence ofinfec
matic stage ofthe disease orwaitfor 6weeksafter
tion with opportunist pathogens,healingoccursin
completehealingofECE-associated lesionsbefore
10-14 days,when it ceases tobecontagious.There
natural service.
ispermanentlossofpigmentationatthesiteof the
healed lesions. Pregnancy rates are not reduced;
Protozoalinfections
however thereis often reluctance toallow mating
because of pain associated with the lesions. In the
Trypanosoma equiperdum causes a venereal dis-
stallion,the vesicles develop on the shaft ofthe
ease called dourine, which is currently prevalent
penis andtheprepuce;if they are severe,hemay be
inAfrica,the Middle East and Ceniral and South
reluctanttobreed
America;it has been eradicated from Europe and
Similarly tootherherpesvirus-induceddiseases,
North America.The incubation period is 1-4 weeks
lifelong infection is the rule. Recrudescence after
andthe disease has an extremely protracted course
stimuli such as stress,systemicdisease or irauma
that can extend over a period of weeks or months.
to thie genital area can occur.No specific treatment
It affects horses,mules and donkeys ofeither sex.
other than disinfection of pustules and ulcers to pre-
The initial sign is a non-painful swelling of the
vent secondary bacterial infections during the acute
external genitalia of both stallions and mares;
phase is recommended.Natural service should
nares show a vaginal dischiargeandstallions havea
607
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
paraphimosis.Someweeks later,depigmented areas
vulva shouldbe perpendiculartothe ground
andurticaria-likeraisedplaques 2-10cm in diam-
(estimate theslope ofthe vulva in relation to
eter appear over the body surface.The disease is
the verticaFaxis, it should not be greater than
characterizedbya lowmorbiditybutahighmor-
10°-the greater the divergence, the worse the
tality of50-75%.
conformation),and the vulvar labia should
Diagnosis ofdourineismadefrom theclinical
forma tighi seal(perform a'windsucker'test-
signs,particularly the skin plaques,together with
gentlypartthe labia and listen foran inrush of air)
demonstration of the trypanosome in the discharges
（Fig.26.24).Absence(natural or acquired)of a
and in the skin lesions.A complement fixation test
normal perineal conformation can facilitate the
is also available. Treatment using quinapyramine
enty of air (pneumovagina,also called‘wind-
sulphate has been attempted,but stallions that
sucking’),faeces and potential pathogens into the
recovermaybecomecarriers.Therefore,strict screen-
reproductive tract,which jeopardize the mare's
ingusinga complementfixationtest,with slaughter
fertility.Theinitialvaginitis may lead to cervici
ofpositive and affected animals,aswell as theinsti-
tis and acute endometritis,resulting in subfertil-
tutionof quarantineprogrammes,should be used to
ity.Furthermore, the pneumovagina may lead to a
control this disease.
urovagina(urine poolingwithin the vagina) when
the vestibule and urethral opening are displaced
cranially. The more severe conformational abnor-
Infertility classified by anatomical
malities aremorelikely toresult in failure ofthe
location
vulvarsealand to increasedfaecalcontamination,
since the vulva forms a shelf on which faeces may
collecl.
To maintain fertility,the uerus must be protected
Severe loss of body condition,as experienced by
from the externalenvironment.Three barriers
somepregnantmaresnotadequatelysupplemented
exist toprotect the uterus.Thefirst and most exter-
during the winter,resulis in a sunken anus and an
nal is formed by the vulvar labia.The second,and
increased slope of the vulva.An apparently normal
arguably most important,isthevaginalvestibular
perineal conformation noted in mares in good body
sphincter,and the third and last is thecervix.Poor
conditionmaybecomelessthanadequateiflossof
perineal conformation is a common cause ofinfer-
body weight is extreme, especially in late gestation
tility and should notbe ignoredin the examination
as theheavyuterus pullsthereproductivetracicra-
ofamarewithchronicendometritis,failuretocon-
nially andventrally.Contammination ofthevagina
ceive or abortion due to placentitis.lf a deficiency
with faeces during mid to late gestation may lead
is noted,surgical correction is usually necessary to
to ascending bacterial placentitis,one ofthe lead
restore normal function.
ingcauses ofabortion and neonatal septicaemia in
Vulvaandperineum
thieLISA
Aging of the mare associated with repeated foal-
The integrityof thevulvar lips andtheir anatomi-
ing can cause stretching and loss of tone of the
calrelationwiththeperineal areaandanus arean
perinealmusclesthatprovidetheabilityofhie
essentialcomponentofamare'sfertilitybecause
vulva toform abarrier loexternalcontamination
they providet
the first barrier to contamina-
and entry ofair into the vagina.This condition
tionbetweentheexternalenvironment and
is additionally aggravated when a mare is injured
the uterus. The endocrine patterns associated
during foaling,resulting in loss of vulvar tone and
with each stage of the oestrous cycle and preg-
apposition of the labia. Mares undergoing epi-
nancy can influencethedisposition ofthevulva,
siotomy may also have permanent damage to vul-
affecting vulvar length and tone. The vulva
var structures.
should have at least 75%ofits length below
Caslick（1937）firstpointed outtheimportance
the brim of the pelvis (the brim of the pelvis is
of this condition in relation to genital infection.
easilyfelt using the index andsecondfin-
Somebreedsmaybe morepredisposed than oth-
gers placed on either side of the vulva to locate
ers. Defective vulvar conformation can be congeni-
the pubic bones -three-quarters of the vulva
tal,whichisveryrare,r acquired,which is dueo
should be below the fingers)(Fig. 26.23). The
(1)vulvar stretching following repeated foalings. (2)
608
Chapter
1261
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
Fig.26.23 Location of the brim of the pelvis.(A) Gcod conformation.(B) Pcor conformation.(C) Severey sloping vulva.
be expelled confirms the diagnosis. Cytological and
histological examination oftheendometrium may
demonstrate significant numbers of neutrophils
indicative of an endometritis. Rarely, eosinophils are
alsofound inassociationwithpneumovagina.
Caslick'svulvoplasty
This is the most common surgical procedure per-
formed in stud farm practice.Surgical closure of
the dorsal part of the vulvar labia is intended to
correct poor perineal conformation.By decreas-
ing the length of the vulvar cleft, enty of air and
potential pathogens into the vagina is decreased in
Fig.26.24 Parling he vulvar labia(winidsucker' tesi) to test
a mare otherwise susceptible to pneumovagina, fae
integrity of vaginal-vestibular sphincter.
cal contamination and associated conplications.
This procedure,however,is overused in mares in
injury to perineal tissue or (3) poor bodily condi-
which such intervention is not warranted.A mare
tion (old, thin mares).
with successive Caslick vulvoplasties can experience
Older multiparous nares are more commonly
considerable loss of vulvar tissue, thus paradoxically
affected with pneumovagina.However,young mares
generating an abnormal perineal conformation.
that are in work and have lintle body fat and/or poor
The operation should bereserved formareswiha
vulvar conforination can develop pneumovagina. In
true vulvar defect rather than being carried out just
some mares, pneumovagina may only occur during
because the mare has ovulated after matingor has
Oestrus when the perineal tissues are more relaxed.
failed to hecome pregnant.
A'Caslick index'has been described in an attempt
Another indirect complication associated with the
todeterminewhich maresrequire treatment(Pascoe
Caslickvulvoplasty is theincreased incidence ofvul
1979) but its use is not widespread.Rectal palpation
var lacerations and dystocias in mares inwhich the
ofaballoonedvagina or uterusfromwhich aircan
vulva was not'opened'before foaling.Regardless of
609
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
the originating cause, Caslick's operation is tised to
gauge of the suture material should not be too thick
correct first-degree perineal laceration, where only
as this encourages faecal material to attach to the
the perineal skin and vulvar mucosa are affected.
sutures. Skinstaplers can be used but we have not
For repair of second-degree (laceration of deeper
found them any quicker than conventional suture
techniques and it is harder to obtain a good seal.
erations(adefectresultingin communication of the
Antibiotics are not given, but tetanus prophylaxis is
ventral rectum with the dorsal vagina), more elab-
needed if the mare is not vaccinated.
orate reconstructive surgery is required (Trotter &
The aim of the operation is toreduce the vulvar
McKinnon 1988) (see Ch. 17).As a rule,any post-
aperture and so prevent pneumovagina and faecal
partum corrective surgery of the perineal body and
contamination of thevestibule.The time of suture
vulva should be delayed until inflammation and
removal is not crucial, and is normally done approxi-
cedeima of the involved tissues is no longer present.
mately2weeks after surgery.However,thevulvamust
Mares with third-degree rectovestibular laceration
be re-opened by performing an episiotomy before
invariably develop endometritis,but endometrial
the next foaling, otherwise major injury can result.
biopsy of mares affected with third-degree lacera-
Mares thatrequirenaturalmatingsubsequentlymay
tions have shown a rapid endometrial response to
also need to have the Caslick's openied if the size of
the surgical repair of the laceration;mares can be
the vulva has been greatly reduced.If not, the vulva
then artificially inseminated as early as 2 weeks after
may tear and/or injury to the stallion's penis may
occur. The episiotomy wound should be repaired
Procedure. The mare should be suitably restrained
soon after foaling or mating to prevent pneumova-
and her vulva thoroughly cleaned and dried. The
gina.If there has been severe trauma to the vulva
level of the floor of the pelvis is determined, which
at foaling,it may be necessary to wait for thie tissue
allowsyou to ascertain thelevel to whichi thie dor-
swelling to subside before attempting repair.
salcommissure of the vulva must be sutured.
If repeated episiotomy followed by closure is not
Beginning at this level, the mucocutaneous junc-
done very carefully, there can be considerable loss
tion of the vulva is infiltrated with local anaesthetic
through a 2l-gauge 1 inch (2.5 cm) needle. It is
for the mare.
important to use sufficient local anaesthetic, and in
many cases at least 20ml will be needed. The dis-
Neoplasia
tension induced by the volume of local anaesthetic
helps to evert the mucocutaneous junction. Both
Melanoma is the most common disease affecting
sides of the vulva are infiltrated in a stepwise fash-
the vulva, affecting S0-100% of adult grey horses,
ion proceeding dorsally up to the dorsal commis-
and less frequently, aging horses of other colours.
sure, being sure that enough is placed right at the
Common sites for melanoma include the anus,
dorsal extent of the vulva. For mares operated on
perineum and vulva. There is no effective treatment
previously it is important to infiltrate deeply. Using
available for treating melanomas; however, oral
rat-toothed forceps and scissors a very thin (no more
treatment with cimetidine (a histamine H, antag-
than 4mm) strip of mucosa should be removed
onist) has been reported with variable success to
from the anaesthetized area.For older mares that
result in partial or complete regression of melano-
have had the operation performed several times,
cytic nodules (Coetz et al 1990).
more radical dissection may be necessary before
Occurrence of squamous cell carcinoma is less
healthy (bleeding) tissue is reached.In some cases,
common than melanomas. Squamous cell carci
where there is not much vulvar mucosa remaining.
noma of the vulva is observed more commonly in
it is best just to debride the junction with a scalpel
the lower latitudes,whiere solar radiation is more
blade to induce slight haemorrhage and not actu-
intense. Lesions may be removed by standard surgi-
ally to remove any further tissue.An alternative
cal techniques,laser surgery or cryosurgery. lesions
method that avoids removal of tissue is to incise the
will recur if not adequately resected.
vulvar labia at the mucocutaneous junction with a
scalpel, to a depth of a few millimetres,in a plane
Clitoris
parallel to the labia. The exposed submucosal tis-
sues are sutured together using simple interrupted
The clitoris is enclosed in the clitoral fossa in the
or continuous sutures, or a locking pattern. The
ventral part of thevulva but isrhythmically exposed
610
Chapter
261
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
（winking)following urination or teasing as a result fuid is uneventful.Rarely, failure of proper fusion
ofcontractionsofthevulvarconstrictormuscle.The
ofthemillerian ductsmayresultin thepresenceof
clitoris has several sinuses inwhich isfoundanat-
dorsoventralbandsoffibroustissueintheanterior
ural simegma.Whereas thelateral sinuses are shal-
vagina and fornix.They do not interfere with fertility
low,themediansinusesaredeepenoughto allow
and are easilybroken downmanually.
the growth ofbacteria.The anatomy of the clito-
Listening foran inrush ofair into the vagina when
risinthemarehasbecomeparticularlyimportant
the vulvar labia are gently parted can test the ade-
because the clitoris is an important reservoir for the
quacyofthevaginovestibularfold asaphysical barrier
bacterium Taylorella equigenitalis in mares affected
to external contaminants.Apositive test(noticeable
with CEM. The disease is higlily contagious and
sound ofairrushinginto thevagina)indicates that
the organism can beharboured in the clitoral fossa
thevestibular fold is notproperly restricting the
and sinuses(especially themedian sinuses)forpro-
vagina properfrom theoutside environment.
longed periods.
lmproper functioning ofthe firstbarrier(vulva)
Even in CEM-free areas,it is important to keep
and second barrier (vaginovestibular fold) may
inmind that theclitoralsinusesmay function as a
lead totheconsiantorfrequententryofairintothe
nidus for uterineinfections,especially those iatro-
vagina.The conditioncan be exacerbatedduring
genically induced during diagnostic procedures of
oestrus,whentheperinealbodyismorerelaxed than
the reproductive tract or artificial insemination.
inother stagesoftheoestrouscycle.Accumulation of
Carefulasepsisoftheperinealandvulvararea,
small amountsofafrothyfluid inthecranialvagina
including the clitoral fossa,with amild disinfectant
areindicativeofpneunovagina,aswell as thepres-
beforeanyinvasiveproceduresareperformedmin-
ence ofair in the uterus(pneumouterus)seen as
imizes the risk of introducing potential pathogens
hyperechoicparticlesbetween the endometrial folds
into theuterus.
during ultrasonographic examination.
Congenital anomalies of the extermal genitalia are
In mares with severe alteration of the perineal
seen in intersex animals,which may have underde-
conformation, vulvar closure using Caslick's vul-
velopedvulvarlabia associatedwithan abnormally
voplasty may not correct the problem and surgical
enlarged clioris.Treating prepubertal mares with
reconstruction oftheperineal body(perineoplasty)
anabolicsteroidsmaylead toenlargementofthe cli-
is recommended.
torisresulting in a partially and permanently exte-
riorized clitoris.
Urovagina
Thiscondition,alsoknown asvesicovaginalreflux
Vagina
orurinepooling,refers to thepresenceofurine in
Thevestibuleisthearea that separatesihevulva and
thecranial vagina and possiblyin theuterus.As with
clitorisfrom thevaginaproper.Atthecranial bor-
pneumovagina,mares with marginalperineal con-
der of thevestibule,whereit meets thevagina,lies
formationmaybepredisposedtoaccumulateurine
the vaginovestibular fold or sphincter.This folded
intothevagina duringoestruswhen reproductive
mucous membrane acts as the second,and most
organs and the perineal body are relaxed.Transient
important（Hinrichs etal 1988)pliysical barrier
urinepooling.whichissometimesfoundinpostpar-
betweentheuterus andtheexternalenvironment.
tum mares,usuallyresolves after uterineinvolution
In young horses, the hymen is usually a weak mem-
has occurred. In older mares with splanchnoptosis,
branous extension of the vaginovestibular fold.
the reflux of urine into the genital tract may be per
Occasionally,apersistent hymenmaybepresent in
manent. Clinical signs can include urine dripping
a maiden mare.Usually,a manual examination of
from the vulva, urine scalding and a history of fail
the vagina will be enough to rupture the persistent
ure to conceive. Diagnosis is easiest using a specu-
hymen.Somemareswith a persistent hymen may
lum examination during oestrus to detect urine in
accumulatefluid inthevaginaproper and uterus
the cranialvagina.Urovagina can cause vaginitis,
(mucometra).Sometimes the hymen may be so
cervicitis and endometritis,whichultimately result
tough that it can only be ruptured using a guarded
ininfertility.Theconditionissurgically correctedby
scalpel bladeorscissors.Thesmallincisioncanthen
vaginoplasty(perhaps more correctly termed caudal
be enlarged using the fingers and hand. Once the
relocation of the transversefold,as surgical inter-
persistent hymen is disrupted,evacuation of the
vention isin thevestibule)（Monin 1972),urethral
611
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
extension (Hughes &Loy 1969)or perineal resec
formed after weaning.Surgical correction of the
tion(Pouret1982)
anatomical defect(described in Ch.17)is necessary
to restore fertifity.
Varicose veins
During estrus, and especially during prenancy, vri
Breeding trauma
coseveinsmaydevelopinoldermares.Varicoseveins
Vaginal lacerationsmay occur duringnatural service
can be present in any partof thevagina,however they
whenthestallionis disproportionatelylarger than
are often found in thevaginovestibulararea.Bleeding
themare.Thelocation ofavaginal lacerationresult-
may occur after natural service or spontaneously dur-
ing from mating is important to consider in deci-
ing mid-to late gestation. Occasionally,a persistent
sions regarding treatment andprognosis.Based on
haemorrhage will result in considerable blood loss;
thelocationofthetearinrelation totheperitoneal
however,thecondition usually subsideswiththe end
reflection,a vaginal tearmay communicate with the
of pregnancy. Cautery or ligation ofvaricose veins is peritoneal cavity,probably resulting in peritonitis,
warranted if haemorrhage is persistent or frequent.
or be retroperitoneal. Treatment includes broad-
spectrum antibiotics, anti-inflammatory agents and
telanus prophylaxis.Peritoneal lavagemay be ben-
Neoplasias
eficial ifthetearcomniunicateswiththeperitoneal
Vaginalneoplasias are not common in mares.
cavity.A breeding roll positioned under the mares
Leiomyomas and squamous cell carcinomas have
tail anddorsal tothestallion'speniswill prevent the
been reported.
stallionfromintroducingthefull lengthofhispenis
intothevagina andconsequentlyhelptopreventing
mated-induced trauma.
Rectovaginalfistulas
Duringparturition the foal's footmay be directed
Cervix
toward the dorsal vagina/ventral rectum and, if
unattended, a third-degree perineal laceration will
The cervix is another often-overlooked possible
follow.However,ifthedystociaiscorrected intime,
causeofinfertility.Thecervixisthelastofthethiree
the damage may be limited to a first- or second-
physical barriers protectingtheuterus from the exter-
degree rectovaginal laceration or fistula.The con-
nalenvironment.Cyclichormonal changes dictate
the tonicity ofthe cervix.Anatomically,the cervix
dition is most often seen in young,primiparous
mares, although the overall occurrence is less than
isa thick-walled sphincter.Expansion and contrac-
0.1%ofall foalings.Fortreatment inthe acute situ
tion arepossiblebecauseofthe actionof thelongi-
tudinaland circular smooth muscle,which is rich
ation,you shouldrealize that it is difficult to esti
matetheamountofdevitalizedtissue.Eventhough
inelasticfibres.Adistinctivefeatureoftheequine
cervix is its dilatability, and the absence of the rigid,
theedges ofthewoundmaylookfresh and clean,
annularconstrictingrings seen in ruminants.During
much more tissue is damaged and bruised.This is
anoestrus the cervix is flaccid,dry and may be par-
why immediaterepairisnotperformed,unlessyou
are present within 2hours of the injury,and even
tially open.High concentrations ofprogesterone
then most clinicians advise delaying surgery.
during dioestrus or pregnancy cause the cervix to
First aid treatment should include:
be tubular,firm and tightly closed.These changes
arereadilypalpable perrectum.Moreove,avaginal
debridement ofnon-viable tissue
examination during oestrus will reveal the cervix to
provision of haemostasis and general cleaning of
be positioned low upon theventral floor of the cra-
the area
nialvagina andrelaxed，easilydilaied oropenand
·parenteralbroad-spectrum antibiotics for5 days
allowing access to the uterus.The cervix must relax
·NSAIDs and tetanusprophylaxis
during oestrusto allow intrauterine ejaculation and
drainage of uterine fluid. During dioestrus or preg-
daily cleaning
nancy a vaginal examination will reveal a tightly
·monitoring of uterine involution.
closed cervical os, pale and positioned high,up
Elective surgery is performed after at least 10weeks
off thefloorof thevagina.In older mares orthose
and,if the foal survives,the operation isbest per-
withfibroticchangesduetocervical trauma,failure
612
Chapter
26
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
ofcervical relaxation can result in delayed uterine
the cervix should beexamined digitally after a dif
clearance or PMIE.Artificial insemination has been
ficult foaling or dystocia, especially if a fetotomy
used successfully in mares with an abnormallynar-
procedure is involved,the extent and severity of a
rowcervix.Failure torelaxcanbetreatedwithlocal
cervical laceration is best evaluated once the cervi
application of PGE and/or manual dilation.Mares
cal lesion is healed.The competency of the cervix
withafibrosed cervix that become pregnant do not
should beevaluated duringdioestrus,orwhen the
normallyhave any difficulties at foaling.Failure of
mare is under the influence of exogenous progesto-
the cervix to close during dioestrus can lead to per-
gens,thus verifying its ability to close tightly.The
sistentendometritis and failuretoconceive,orearly
cervix canalso be damaged by irritant chemicals,
embryonic death.Failure to maintain closure during
such as povidone iodine. Adhesions of the cervix can
pregnancy can lead to gestational failure.Both suir-
bebroken down manually,but this must be done
gery and exogenous progesterone have been tried in
daily to prevent recurrence.If severe,adhesions may
anattempttoencourageclosureofthecervix
contributetothedevelopmentofpyometra.Older,
Assessment of the cervix must form a part of the
multiparousmaresmaybepredisposed tocervical
routine prebreeding examination of amare,either
lacerations(Milleretal 1996)
directly using a speculum pervagina and/or by dig-
Transluminaladhesions andanatomicaldefecis
ital exploration,preferably during dioestrus when
are oftenmore easily diagnosed by digital examina-
itismore tightly closed under the influence of
tion of the cervix than by vaginoscopy.If severe,cer-
progesterone.
vical lacerations may need surgicalrepair to restore
normal cervical shape and function.Because surgi
Cervicitis
cal correction is difficult and not always rewarding.
abiopsy oftheuterus should belaken to assess the
Inflammation of thecervixoften accompaniesvagi-
mare's potential to maintain a pregnancy before sur-
nitis orendometritis.Cervicitisis mostcommonly
gicalcorrectionofacervical lacerationisattempted.
seen in the postpartum period, especially when
Post-breeding repair of cervical lacerations has
therehasbeen a dystocia.Severe cervicitis associated
been documented (Foss et al 1994). Since many
with metritis may be also seen in mares infected
casesofcervical lacerations areonlydetected atthe
with organisms such asTaylorellaequigenitalis that
prebreeding examination or at the time ofartifi
cause a copious purulent discharge (Katz et al 2000).
cial insemination,post-breedingrepairispreferable
Infusion ofcertainchemicalssuchaschlorhiexidine
since it avoids a4-6-week healing period,resulting
or strong iodine solutions into the uterus to treat
in a reasonable chance ofpregnancy.Developmental
endometritismaybeirritatingnotonlytotheendo-
abnormalities of the cervix have been described;
meirium,but also to the cervix andvaginal mucosa.
these include aplasia anda doublecervix.
If such solutions are to be used,vaginal speculum
examinationsbetweentreatments arewarranted to
assess thecondition of thecervix.
Cervical polyps or cysts
Occasionally,pedunculated,cyst-like structures are
Trauma
found onvisual or manual examination of thecer-
vix.They are either attached to the cervical os or
Although cervical lacerations may occur during
emanatefromthecervicallumenandprotrudeinto
natural service,these lesions are usually small and
thevagina oruterinebody.Although ofunknown
resolve without major consequences. Occasionally,
cause, they do appear to be associated with infer-
maiden mares are found in oestrus with a tiglhtly
tility and removal,either by laser or ligation，is
closed cervix,which may suffer laceration during
recommended.
natural service,especiallyif thestallionisdispropor
tionallylargerthan themareorthemarewasnot in
full physiologicalandbehavioural oestrus.However,
Uterus
these tearsare usually small andhealwithouufur-
Ventralsacculations
ther treatment.Most serious lacerations occur during
parturition. They may occur during normal parturi-
Aside from changes associated with pregnancy
tion or can be iatrogenic during intervention to cor-
other pathological conditions may cause focal
rectadystociabymutationorfetotoimy.Although
enlargemenisin theveniralportionoftheuterus.
613
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
These uterine changes are usually associated with
increased embryonic loss fail to account for the effect
increasedageandparityandareinvariablyfound
of advancingage.When confounding effects such
at the base of either orboth uterine horns,where
as parity and-age are eliminated the assumption of
pregnancies are usually established.These enlarge-
cysts causing infertilityisnot supported.When con-
mentsmaybemistakenfora pregnancy,especiallyi
founding factors were accounted for in the analy-
inexperienced clinicians do not use ultrasonography
sis of nearly 300 mares,endometrial cysts did not
toback up their palpation findings.Mechanisms
haveastatisticallysignificanteffect on establishing
contributing to formation of ventral uterine enlarge-
or maintaining pregnancy, although the time of ini-
ments havebeen identified,includingbut not lim-
tial pregnancy diagnosis was not striculy controlled
itedtoendometrial atrophy,focalmyometrialatonia
in that study (Eilts et al 1995). Another report by a
and lymphaticlacunae（Kenney&Ganjan 1975）.
Furthermore,in older and multiparous mares,the
time of pregnancy diagnosis similarly found no dif
uterusmaytiltventrally inrelationto thepelvic
ference in pregnancy loss between mareswithcysts
brim (uterine splanchnoptosis).Mares with ven-
versus thosewithout,although mareswithendome-
tralsacculations and uterine splanchnoptosis have
trialcyststendedtohavealowerday40pregnancy
ahigherincidenceofdelayeduterineclearancethan
rate.There appeared tobeaquantitative effect of
normal mares(LeBlancetal 1998).
cystsonfertilitybecause aneffect wasnotevident
until a mare had numerous cysts, or the cysts were
Endometrial cysts
very large.However, even then the effect of endome
trialcysison fertiliry wasmuchlessthanthat seen
Endometrial cysts (Fig.26.25) are often cited as a
with delayed uterine clearance orintrauterine fluid
cause of infertility;however,a cause and effect rela-
accumulation.A quantitativeeffect ofendometrial
tionship has not been clearly established.Rather
cystscould bedueto interferencewithembryonic
than beingviewed as a cause ofinfertility,endo-
mobility.Itiswell known that the equineembryo
metrial cysts should be considered as an indication
undergoes a period of mobility after entering the
ofunderlying pathological changes in the uterus.
uterus, finally becoming fixed in place at approxi-
Endometrial cysts areof lymphatic origin,and their
mately 16-17 daysgestation.If mobility is restricted
occurrence may be associated with a disruption of
lymphaticfunction.The proportion of mareswith
tocontactasufficientportionoftheendometrium,
endometrial cysts increases withage.Mares over 11
maternal recognition of pregnancy may not occur,
yearsofage aremore thanfour times aslikely tohave
resultingin luteolysis and embryonicloss.
endometrial cysts as younger mares and a majority
Endometrialcysts arebest diagnosedwithultra-
ofmaresover17years ofagewill have endome-
sonography. Cysts can be identified as hypoechoic,
trial cysts (Eilts et al 1995).Reports that associate
immovable structures with a clearborder in the
endometrial cysts with a lower pregnancy rate or
lumen of the uterus （Fig.26.26),as opposed to
intraluminal fluid,which is movableandhas a less
distinct shape orborder.Endometrial cysts areusu-
ally rnultiple and are most comimonly found located
at the base of the uterine horns. Cysts may change
in size and number during the oestrous cycle and
pregnancy
Endometrial cysts can complicate early preg-
nancy diagnosis.Often an endometrial cyst can
be similar in size and appearance to an early con-
ceptus. Cysts that appear spherical can often be
shown tohaveamoreirregularshapeiftheultra-
soundprobecanbereorientedinrelationtothe
cyst.To make early pregnancy diagnosis easier and
morereliable,thesizeandlocation ofendometrial
cysts should be recorded either using a diagram
or by storing ultrasonographic images during a
transection
prebreeding examination.Differentiationisbased
614
Chapter
261
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
Fig.26.26Endometrial cyst;observed onultrasonographic
Fig.26.27 Endometrial cysts can appearmuch like a
examinalion.
conceptus duringultrasonographic examination.
not only on previous cyst mapping but also on
it is relatively thick and hyperechoic compared
the early mobility of the conceptus,the presence
withthetwinvesicleshown inFigure26.28B.This
ofspecular reflections,the conceptus's spherical
would confirm thatatleastonestructureis a cyst.
appearance and growth rate. Some cysts can be
Reassessmentoftheirregularstructurewillconfirm
very difficult to distinguish from pregnancies (Fig.
that thefluidiscontainedanddoesnotextendupor
26.27), and pregnancy examination may need
downthehorn,aswouldbefoundwithfreefluid.
toberepeatedorconfirmationdelayedin some
Theappearanceofan embryo around22-24daysof
mareswith endometrial cysts.
pregnancy provides a definitive diagnosis.Thorough
Often,there is an opportunity to scan the mare
identification of cysts at the beginning of thie breed-
before, or immediately after, breeding, but this is
ing season minimizes the chance of false-positive
not always possible.In that case,itmay beimpossible
pregnancy diagnosis.
to be certain whether there are twin unilateral ves-
Inmostcasesofendometrialcysts,notreatmentis
icles of approximately 20 and 16days,or a single
necessary,other than recording their size and loca-
pregnancy and a 19mm cyst,ora cyst with adjacent
tion for future reference during pregnancy exami-
freefluid,ora19mmconceptuswith adjacent free
nation.However,if the cysts are sufficientin size or
fluid.ln these cases,it isvital to study theultrasono-
number that they pose a potential threat to embry
graphic image carefully. When one looks closely at
onic migration, treatment can be aimed at facilitating
thewall betweenthetwostruicturesinFigure26.28A
establishment of pregnancy by providing exogenous
615
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
Uterineadhesions
RIADRN
Severe infecuous or chemically-induced (following
intrauterine infusion of irritating chemicals) endo-
metritismay inducetheformation oftransluminal
adhesions in the uterus (Fig.26.29). LIterine adhe-
sionsaremostfrequentlydiagnosedonendoscopic
examinations of the uterus.lt has been suggested
thattheincidencemay begreater than was previ-
ouslythought(Stone etal 1991).Multipleadhesions
adversely affect fertility by causing fluid acumula-
tion,resulting in mucometra or pyometra,or by
affectingthemobilityoftheconceptus.Severe adhe-
sionscancompletelyobstructoneorbothofthe
uterine horns. It is possible to remove the obstruc-
tion endoscopically by either cautery or laser tech-
Fig.26.28(A)An endometrial cyst and(B)a conceptus.
niques,startingat the thin membranous parts of the
obstruction.Itisimportantnot to‘burn'toodeeply
inthe uterine wall,as in these cases more severe
progestogen.If a mare is found at the beginning of
damagetotheuterinewallmightoccur.Afterremov
thebreeding season with a largenumberof cysts,itis
ing the obstruction, the uterus should be flushed to
generally best to continue to attempt to get themare
remove any debris and the mare should be treated
in foal that season.Progestogen,usuallyin the form
with PGFIn addition to an assessment of an
ofaltrenogest (0.044mg/kg p.o.,daily),can maintain
endometrialbiopsy,theprognosisforfuturebreeding
pregnancy even when the signal formaternal recog-
alsodependson theseverityoftheobstructionand
nition of pregnancy is lacking and can be used in an
towhatextent theobstruictioncouldberemoved
attempttocircumventtheinterferencewithembry
onicmobility caused by the cysts.If the mare fails
tobecomepregnant,someformof treatmentshould
Uterine foreignbodies
be attempted andan endometrial biopsy should be
Uterine foreign bodies (e.g.fetal remnants),which
taken tohelpdeterminethelikelihoodofhercarrying
may actasanidus for theestablishment ofchronic
a foal to term.The cysts maybe removed surgically.
endometritis,have been documented (Ginther &
Laser surgery is an ideal method if the equipment
is available.Ligationand transectionofthestalkof
pedunculated cysts is an alternative.Merelypunctur-
ing and draining the cyst or incising itswall will not
providelong-term remission.Chemical curettage has
equivocal results; the cysts may disappear but scar tis-
suemay form.Thermocautery,in conjunction with
endoscopy involving looping and subsequent burn-
ing of cysts,is possible.Wounds after cautery appear
to heal very quickly, usually within 4-6 weeks.
Becauseendoscopy shouldbe donewhilethemare
isin dioestrus when thecervixisrelativelyclosed,
PGFshould be given after cauterization and the
uterus shouldbelavagedwith saline.
Most uterine cysts involve the endometrium but
occasionally an extraluminal uterine cyst lyingexter-
nal to theendometrium canbeidentifiedon ultra-
soundexamination.Itslocation shouldbeverified
byidentificationoftheuterinelumen.Extraluminal
Fig.26.29Severe uterine adhesions thatwereformedas a
cysts usually have no adverse effects on fertility.
result of intrauterineiodineinfusion.
616
Chapter
261
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
Pierson 1984) but are uncommon.In one case,the
Procedure. The perineal area sliould be thoroughly
mare had a history of failure to conceive and short
cleaned for an aseptic procedure. The biopsy instru-
interoestrous intervals following a dystocia.Ultra-
ment is held in a closed position and passed man-
sound examinationrevealed hyperechoicfetal bone,
ually through the cervix. Once the instrument is
part of the scapula (Fig. 26.30), which was removed
placedinto theuterus,thehandiswithdrawnfrom
manually via the cervix. The mare conceived after
the vagina and placed in the rechuim and the tip of
the instrument is identified.The instrument is then
ment for the endometritis. Other foreign bodies that
opened and the uterusispressed through thejaws
have been reported include straws following arti-
of the biopsy instrument and a small portion of an
ficial insemination and the tips of uterine swabs.
endometrial fold is obtained by closing the biopsy
forceps (Fig. 26.31).
Generally, a biopsy specimen is taken from a site
Biopsy
at thebase ofone of the uterine horns.When pro-
curing abiopsy,care should be taken that the tissue
Before committing to the expense of laser sur-
isnotobtained fromasitenear theinternal cervical
gery for removal of cysts or other reconstructive
Os. Clands are less dense near the cervix, making a
urogenital surgery, an endometrial biopsy is usu-
biopsy obtainedfrom that area lessrepresentative of
ally recommended. An endometrial biopsy is also
the uterus and more difficult to interpret. Moreover,
usually considered to be a routine part of a com-
if the cervix is accidentally biopsied,adhesions can
plete breeding soundness examination. Because an
result.
endametrial biopsy can aid in predicting a mare's
It has long been considered that a single biopsy
chances of carrying a foal to tern, the informa-
is representative of the entire uterus;however, stud
tion provided by a biopsy should be considered
ieshave shown that variation by as much as an
before purchase or undertaking reproductive sur-
entire category may exist between sites (Dybdal et al
gery such as repair of a cervical tear. Biopsies in
1991). Therefore, a thorough examination by palpa-
some cases provide information that is useful in
tion and ultrasonography should be performed first
the diagnosis ofinfertility and may providea basis
to determine if any areas of the uterus appear to be
for treatment. l must be realized,however that
abnorimalIf an abnormal area isdetected,biopsies
an endometrial biopsy alone is not the only, nor
should beobtained from both the‘abnormaland
usually ihe most important,piece ofinformation
the'normal'areas.Repeated or multiple biopsies do
and must be taken in context with other inforima-
not significantly affect fertility. A mare may become
tionobtainedfromthehistory and reproductive
pregnant when bred just a few days after a biopsy
examination.
specimen is taken (Watson & Sertich 1992).
Biopsies may be talen at any time during theyear
or during any stage of the oestrous cycle, because
the mare's cervix is easily dilated. Some recommend
taking abiopsy during dioestrus for diagnostic pur-
poses because the endomeurium is under the influ-
ence of progesterone and the glands have achieved
maximum coiling. Others recommend taking a
biopsy during oestrus when the cervix is relaxed and
the biopsy instrument is most easily passed into the
uterus.Either way,it is important to relay all perti-
nent history, including the stage during which the
biopsy was taken, to the pathologist reading the
biopsy. Periglandular fibrosis may appear worse
in biopsies taken during anoestrus because of the
sparseness of glands. In addition, biopsies taken
during anoestrus or transition may have evidence of
Fig.26.30 Hyperechoic fetal bone visible on transrectal
increased inflammation because the cervix has been
ultrasonographic examination of theuterine body.
in arelaxed statefor aprolonged period as aresult of
617
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
H
Fig.26.31Uterinebiopsy.(A)Uterine biopsyinstrument.(B)Biopsy tissuebeing removedafterprocurement and placed in
Bouin's solution for fixation.
the absence of progesterone. Thorough descriptions
not known, although it is presumed by many to be
ofthepathological changeshavebeenpublished
duetorepeatedinsultstotheuterus.They aremore
andcanbereviewedbut,inmost cases,apathologist
commonly seenin oldermares(Ricketts&Alonso
associatedwiththeservicethatprocessesthesample
1991).Dilated lymphatics areoften an indication of
will read thebiopsy.Evenso,if thepractitioner can
auterine clearance problem.However, delayed clear-
reviewthebiopsyslideitcanbehelpful indevelop-
anceismorereliably diagnosed by ultrasonographic
ingrecommendationsforthefuturemanagementof
examination in the postmating period.
the mare.
Although biopsy can reveal the presence of an
Endometrial biopsies are classified into four cat-
inflammatory condition, oiher methods (such as
egories （I,IIA,IIB, I) based on Kenney & Doig
examination of perineal conformation)must be
(1986).A marewith a categoryIbiopsy has an
employedtorevealwhy theconditionispresent and
essentiallynormalendometrium.Thelikelihoodof
aculture isneeded to identifytheparticularpatho-
her becoming pregnant and carrying a foal to term,
estimated at 80-90%,depends more on broodmare
revealthedegree of success of treatment.
management than on the mare's inherent ferility.
MareswithacategoryIllbiopsyhave severepath
Endometriosis
ological changes in the endometrium and an esti-
mated10%chanceofcarryinga foal toterm,even
Endometriosis has been referred in the past as
withgoodhreedingmanagement.Mostmareswill
chronicinfiltrative endometritis andcurrentlyrefers
beclassified asa category llA or IIB,with an esti-
tothepresenceoffibrosisinthestromal andperi
mated 50-80% and 10-50%chance,respectively,
glandularcompartments.Thedegreeofendometri
ofcarryingafoal toterm,reflectinga combination
osisiscloselyassociatedwith theabilityofamare
ofmanagement practices and the mare's inherent
10 establish and maintain a healthy pregnancy
fertility.
until term.Parity andage contribute to degenera
A completehistopathological descriptionis usu-
tivechanges occurringin the endometrium of mares
allyprovided bythe pathologist.However,ofprmary
(Ricketts&Alonso1991).
concern to the practitioner is the severity anddistri-
Fibroticchanges may be seen around the endo
bution of inflammation and degenerative changes
metrialglandsandinassociationwiththebase-
including periglandular fibrosis,angiosis and lym-
ment membrane in the stratum compactum.The
phatic lacunae. Degenerative changes carry a worse
amountandpattern ofdistributionofthefibrotic
prognosis than inflammatory changes because they
tissuehasbeen descriptivelyclassified as:slight,one
are consicdered to be permanent and progressive.
tothree layers ofperiglandular fibrosis;moderale,
No treatment for these conditions hasbeen iden-
four to 10 layers; severe, more than 10 layers of peri-
tified.The cause of such degenerative conditions is
glandular fibrosis(Kenney 1978).Cysticglandular
618
Chapter
26
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
dilatationisanothermanifestation ofendometri-
constricted,tortuous or irregular cervix.In some
osis.Periglandular fibrosis,glandular epithelial
cases,the fluid accumulates in the absence of cervi-
hypertrophy or inadequate lymphatic drainage may
cal lesions,presumablybecause of an impaired abil-
leadtodilatationoftheendometrialglands.
ity toeliminatetheexudate.
Other degenerative alterations in the endome-
Unlike cows,mareswith pyometra donotnec-
triumthatleadto endometriosisincludelymphatic
essarilyhave apersistent CL and many may cycle
lacunae and angiosis (Ricketts & Alonso 1991,
nornally (see p.417). When the endometrium is
Gruninger et al 199s).Lymphaticlacunae are his-
severely damaged,resultingin extensiveloss of sur
topathological indications oflymphangiectasia.
face epithelium,severe endometrialfibrosis and
Angiosis (vascular pathologies) is associated with
glandular atrophy, a prolonged lunteal phase, pre-
aging andparity,especiallyinuteri withvental sac
sumably due to interference wit the synthesis or
culations andassociated venouscongestion,which
release of PGF,may be observed.
are pathogenic factors for angiosis (Gruninger et al
Themarewith pyometraseldom shows overt signs
199s).There are no treatments for these anaiomi-
of systemic disease even when there is up to 60 litres
cal andvascular degenerativechangesinthe uterus.
ofexudatein the uterinelumen.Very occasion-
Mares withlymphaticlacunae and disseminated
ally there is weight loss,depression and anorexia.
uterine angiosis are atriskofinfertility caused by
Pyometra has been classified into Iwo categories
delayed uterine clearance and PMIE (Ricketts &
in mares: open and closed (Hughes et al 1979). In
Alonso 1991, Gruninger et al 1998).
a case of closed pyometra,the fluid accumulates
Pregnancy loss attributed to endometrial fibrosisis
because ofa closed cervix.In open pyometra, thecer-
more commonly manifested during the embryonic
vixremainsopenbutpurulentmaterial accumulates
period, postulated as due to a decreased ability to
because ofimpaireduterine clearance.A vulvar dis-
produce histotrophe, required by the embryo for
charge is often observed in open pyometra, espe-
nutritional sustenance.Abortion during the early
ciallyatoestrus,whichmayvaryinconsistencyfrom
fetalperiod may occur,however,ifuterine fibro-
waterytocream-like.
sis interferes with implantation of the placenta.
Microcotyledonaryatlachmentsbegintodevelop
betweenS0and 120 daysofgestation(Bracher
minalfluidwithmoderateechogenicityisseen in
etal1990).Ultrastructuralevaluationoftheplacenta
the uterus.Pregnancy must beruled out alongwith
in mares with chronic degenerative endometritis
rare conditions such as mucometra and pneumo-
(endometriosis)has shown a delay in microcoty-
uterus.Because ofthelack ofsystemicillness,most
ledondevelopmentandareductioninthenum-
mareswithpyometra arebroughttotheveterinar-
ber ofmicrocotyledons andvilliper surface area
ian's attention at an advanced stage; degenerative
(Bracher et al 1991). Endometrial atrophy may not
changes such as endometrial atrophy may preclude
result in abortion but can influence fetal growth.
mares from returning to normal fertility after treat-
Fetalweightsinmareswithdegenerativeendometri-
ment.Abiopsyoftheuterusshouldbeexamined
tis werelower than in normal mares(Bracher etal
beforetreatment to determine theprognosis for
1991).Evidenceofendometrial atrophymaybe evi-
potentialfertility
dent upon inspection of the placenta after delivery
The aim of treating pyometra is to expel the purulent
(Asbury1988).
materialfrom theuterus.Intheabsenceofsystemic
illness or an unsightly vulvar discharge,treatment of
chronic pyometra may not be indicated, although
Pyometra
some mares can show signs of discomfort during
Pyometra isan accumulation of largequantities of
exercise.Many cases can be significantly improved
purulent exudatein theuterus,causingits distension
byrepeatedlarge-volumelavagewithseverallitresof
(Hlughes et al1979). It must bedistinguished from
warm saline via a wide-bore tube such as a nasogas-
thesmaller,intermittent accumulations offluid that
trictube.Initially,PGFcan beused toinduce luteo-
can be detected by ultrasonography in acute endo-
lysis of the CLif present,which shouldallow the
metritis.Pyometra occurs becauseofinterference
cervixtorelaxsufficientlyfordigitalexploration for
withnatural drainageoffluidfromtheuterus,which
thepresence ofany adhesions.PGE may also help
maybedue tocervicaladhesionsor anabnormally
relax thecervix.Followingrepeated large-volume
619
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
lavageandoxytocinto achievedrainage ofexudate,
to the uterus.The mechanism(s)accounting for
appropriate antibiotics, based on culture and sensi-
this phenomgnon (selective transport of fertilized
tivity should be infused.If a cervical lesion is iden-
vs unfertilized oocytes) has not yet been fully elu-
tified,itmustbecorrected toreduce thechanceof
cidated but appears toinvolvesecretionofPGE
recurrenceofthe pyometra.Monitoringtheuterus
A healthy uterine tube is responsive to embryonic
byacombinationofrectalpalpauionandultrasound
signals,resulting in proper timing of tubal trans
providesinformation on theresponse to treatment
por.Diagnosis ofpathologies in the uterine tubes
Even if successfully treated,the mare must be con-
isdifficultand often found only in postmortem
sidered a susceptible mareif sheis 1obebred,and
examinations.
managed accordingly.
Postmortem examinationofreproductivetracts
In non-responsive cases hysterectomy can be per-
foundthat salpingitiswasnot uncommoninmares;
formed followingdrainage of theexudate from the
37%hadinfundibulitis,21%hadampullitisand9%
uterus,although greatcarehastobeakentoprevent
had isthmitis(Vandeplassche&Henry1977）. In that
contamination of theperitoneal cavity.
study,50%ofmareswereolderthan15yearsoldand
85%werell years oldormore.The infundibuluum
Neoplasias
was generally found adhered to the uterus,meso-
varium or ovary.Theincidenceof adhesions on the
Lterine neoplasias are not commonin mares.
rightsidewas significantlyhigherthanon theleftside
Leiomyomas,often referred toas fibroids, are benign
(Vandeplassche&Henry 1977）.Although evidence
mesenchymal neoplasias derived from smooth
of salpingitis could be detected in problem breeding
muscle andareoften associated with thepresence
mares,theincidencewasno differentfrom thatnoted
offibrous tissue.Leiomyomaisthemostcommon
innormal,fertile mares(Ball etal 1997)
neoplasia affectingtheuteriofmaresand,if small,
Oviductal obstructions are less common in the
does not necessarily cause reproductive failure.
marethan in thecow,although masses ofcollagen
Leiomyosarcoma,lymphosarcoma andadenocarci-
have been found in the oviducts of young maiden
noma are rare malignant neoplasias affecting mares.
mares and pregnant mares and were observed
Neoplasia affectingthe equineuterus isusually
more often inmares over7 years old(Liu et al
discovered when palpation per rectum, and trans-
1990).Postmortem analysis ofuterine tubes has
rectalultrasonography,are performed in brood
suggested that tubal patency is not a major prob-
mares during the breeding season.If the presence
lem inmares.An examination of7o0postmortem
ofauterine neoplasia is suspected,uterine endos-
specimens,primarilyfromnares over1lyearsold
copy shouldbeperformed and a biopsy of the lis-
found that almost all oviducts were patent, although
sue taken forfinal diagnosis.Surgical excision ofa
over40%had adhesions involvingthe infundibula
neoplasia is indicated when extensive haemorrhage
(Vandeplassche&Henry1977).Onlyoneuterine
and endometritis are present,orwhen the presence
tubewas found tobeoccludedwhen1248pairs
oftheneoplasiawouldbeincompatiblewithestab-
ofuterine tubes were flushed post-mortem(David
lishing a pregnancy. Prognosis for future ferility is
1975,Vandeplassche&Henry1977).Basedonthese
reduced,but pregnancyhasbeenreported inmares
findings,diagnostic procedures to determine the
withpartialhysterectomy(Santschi&Slone1994).
patencyofuterine tubeinmareswithunexplained
Adhesions involving the serosal surface of the
infertility are not warranted.
uterus may occur following caesarian section or
Mostuterinetubeabnormalitiesand periovar-
uterine tears. No effective treatment, other than
ian structures diagnosed ante-mortem areremnants
attempted surgical excision,exists once they are
of embryological structures. Cysts lying within the
formed.Therefore, steps should be taken to mini
ovarianstromaneartheovulationfossaof theovary
mize the likelihood of their formation, including
arisefroin thesurfaceepitheliumandareoftenseen
daily palpation of the uterus after caesarean section.
in older mares during examination of the ovary.
They areknown as‘retention'‘inclusion'or‘fossa’
Uterinetubes
cysts and generally have no adverse effect upon fer-
The function of theuterine tubes and the tubal
tility (Fig.26.32A).They are termed ovarian cysts by
environmentare essentialfor normal fertility.
some authors, which may account for the diagnosis
Mares areunniqueinthatunfertilized oocytesare
of‘cystic ovaries'in the mare.Sometimes'cystic ova-
retained in theuterinetubes andnot transported
ries'arefalsely diagnosedbecause of:
620
Chapter
26
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
vernal transition,in which a single follicle or mul-
generally affect fertility. Occasionally, large cysts
tiple large ones persist without ovulating
may be palpated or imaged with ultrasonography
·fossa cysts, normally only a few millimetres in
andmaybeconfused with follicles.However,the
diameter and not usually as large as those in Figure
lack of change in size or appearance of these struc-
26.32B.Caremust be taken notto confusethem
tures isusually diagnostic.
withanormalovarywithseveralsmallfollicles
（Fig.26.32C)or conceptuses.Carefulexamination
Ovaries
allowsaccurateidentificationoftheirposition.lt
Thepresenceofanenlargedovaryinamaremaybe
ispossiblethat sometimes.particularlyif they are
normal or may be an indication of ovarian pathol-
large and numerous as can occur in older mares,
ogy. Consideration of the various possibilities and
they could impede thereleaseof the oocytefrom
careful diagnosticprocedures arenecessaryto avoid
theovulation fossa.Smallnoduleslocatedwithin
surgical removal of normal ovaries.A thorough his-
the loose connective tissue covering of the ovary
tory,including changes in behaviour,oestrous cycle
(adrenocortical nodules)havealsobeenidentified
characteristics,sexualbehaviourandlastobserved
periovariancysts,which arefairlycommon.They
oestrus,is important to consider.Utrasonography,
arenot endocrinologically active,donot usually
palpation andhormonalassaysareallhelpful in
interferewith theprocessofovulation and donot
arriving at an accurate diagnosis. In some mares,
DSL
DSL
DSL
millimetresin diamerer.(B)Ultrasonographic image of the normal ovaryofa 17-year-old mare showing largeretention cyst.
(C)Ultrasonographicimageofthenormal ovaryofa16-year-oldmarewithsevensmall fcllicles.
621
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
sequential examinations are beneficial in determin-
ingchanges in the size ofovaries orvarious struc
tureson anovary.Variousfactorssuchas season and
pregnancy status must be taken into consideration
when interpreting a finding of ovarian enlargement.
Large ovaries may be normal during the transitional
periodsin the spring andautumn and are expected
during certain stages of gestation.
Discovery of an enlarged ovary may be an inciden-
talfinding duringa normal reproductiveexamina-
tion or may be stimulated by specific clinical signs.
Behavioural changes or signs of colic in a mare war-
rant examination of the reproductive tract,with spe-
cialattention totheovaries.Mareswithahistory of
infertility areoftensuspectedofhaving abnormali
tiesof the ovaries and deserve a thorough examina-
tion before surgical removal of an enlarged ovary.
Fig.26.33Anovulatory follicle:note free-floating echogenic
Non-neoplasticovarian enlargement
spots in the antrum.
Anovulatoryfolliclesaremostcommonlyobserved
in mares near the end of the breeding season as
they go through the autumn transition.Their sig
el al 1993). Some aged mares, particularly over
nificance is that the oocyte is not released but
20 years of age,fail to ovulate despite showing
remains within the large unruptured haemorrhagic
oestrous behaviour.
follicle.These follicles grow to an unusually large
During certain periods of gestation, ovarian
size（70-100mm)yetfailto ovulate.Instead,they
enlargement is normal and should be expected.
fillwithbloodanddevelopa‘gelatinousconsis-
Ovarian enlargementis associatedwith increased
tency'Athick(comparedwithanormal follicle)
follicular activity and subsequent ovulation (sec-
wall commonly forms. Ulltrasonographically, free-
ondaryCLs)oranovulatoryluteinization(accessory
floating echogenicspotsin the antrum of thie fol-
CLs). An increase in follicular growth begins before
licle are observedthatincrease innumber as the
day 20 of gestation.New CLs form around day 40 of
follicle grows (Fig.26.33).When the follicle stops
gestation.Multiple corporahaemorrhagica and hae-
growing,the contents become organized,with an
morrhagicfolliclesarecommonlyfoundfrom day
echogenic appearance and fibrin strands.They
40-60.Mares bred early in the season have greater
become firmer and then regress over time, usually
follicularactivity during thefirst 4months of gesta-
disappearing within a month. Formation of luteal
tion than mares bred after July.
tissue around the periphery of the anovulatory fol-
During the spring as mares undergo transition
licle is usuallyminimal ina true‘autumnal folli-
fromwinteranoestrustothenormalovulatorysea-
cle'that occurs at the end of the season.The cause
sontheyundergoperiodsofprolongedanovulatory
ofanovulatory follicles is unknown,although
follicular development.Theseperiodsarecharacter-
they are hypothesized tobe due to changes in
izedbythedevelopment ofnumerous follicles,at
thehormonal status ofthemare thatoccurwith
times quite large,on ither,orusually both, ovaries.
autumn transition.This doesnotexplain theocca-
The follicles may persist for varying lengths of time,
sionaloccurrenceofanovulatory folliclesduring
and then regress and new follicles develop. This
the breeding season,however.Anovulatory folli-
period lasts for a variable time depending on the
cles,although unusual during the ovulatory sea-
individual mare, photoperiod and other undeter-
son,aremore often seen in older mares and may
mined factors. The ovaries can be quite large during
beassociatedwith ovariansenility.Theirresponse
this time and may mistakenly be called cystic (Fig.
toprostaglandin is variable.While there is no
26.34).No treatment is necessary, although a com-
true menopause in mares, an age-related ovula-
bination of progesterone and oestrogen, as previ-
tionfailurehasbeendocumented(Vanderwall
ously discussed,is often used to suppress follicular
622
Chapter
26
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
haveamoresolid appearance,sometimeswithfibrin
strands.A trait that is at times useful in differentiat-
ing a haematoma from a granulosa cell tumour is
theresponsiveness to prostaglandin.Haematomas
that are at least 5-6 days old often respond to pros-
taglandin by decreasingin sizebecause of the lute-
olyticeffectandthemarewillreturntooestrus.
Granulosa cell tumours do not respond to prosta
glandin treatment with any changein size,shape or
ultrasonographic appearance.with haematomas,
becausethefolliclewall stillundergoesluteinization
despitethepresence ofthehaematoma,cyclicity
remainsunaltered,thus,normalfertilityisnotcom
promised.However,the enlargement of the ovary
duetothepresenceofahaematomamaypersistfor
several oestrous cycles even though thelife span of
Fig.26.34 Transiticnal cvary:note numerous follicles.
the luteal tissueis normal.Because this structure is
apostovulatory phenomenon,theoocyte is released
and themare may become pregnant if she ismated.
tion andnormal cyclicity.Thetransitionperiod ends
with thefirstovulationoftheseason,after which
Ovarianabscess
follicular activity andovarian sizereturntowithin
normal limits.
Ovarian abscesses areoftenattributed toprocedures
An ovarian haematoma forms as haemorrhage
involvingpunctureoftheovary,suchasbiopsyorfol
occursintothepreviousfollicularlumenafterovu-
licleaspiration.As assistedreproductive techniques
became more successful and therefore more popu-
lation.Onoccasion,thishaemorrhage canbe exces
sive,possibly due to an anticoagulant in follicular
lar,the incidence ofovarian abscesseswas thought
fluid.Haematomas can bevery large,up to20cm
likely to increase. However,ihis has not proved to
indiameterormore（Fig.26.35).They are able10
be the case. Moreover,not all ovarian abscesses can
produceprogesterone and do not affect the oestrous
beattributed to iatrogeniccauses.Ovarian abscesses
cycle.Although the ovulation fossa is still present,
havebeen reported in mares that have had no such
palpatingitcanbedifficultif thehaematoma isvery
procedures performed on them (Ramirez et al
large The ultrasonographic appearance can vary,
1998).In these cases they are probably due tothe
causing confusion with a granulosa cell tumour.
haematogenous spread of bacteria or may be associ
Large fluid-filled cavities maybeobserved,orit may
ated with strongyle migration.
Affected mares may be febrile and anorexic with
anelevatedwhitebloodcount.Onultrasonographic
examination,the enlarged ovary typicallyhas a thick
walled,fluid-filled structure.The fluid is usually
hyperechoic.Medical management with long-term
antibiotic therapy has been successful in treating
these cases. Surgical removal of the affected ovary is
an alternative treatment but care must be taken that
the abscess does not rupturein the abdominal cavity.
Neoplasia
Granulosa thecalcell tumours are the most com-
mon tumours of thereproductive tract in mares.
They arebenign sex-cord tumours that canbe seen
in a mare of any age. They have been reported in
Fig.26.35Ovarianhaematoma.
foals, aged mares and pregnant mares.Although
623
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
both the granulosa and the theca interna cell layers
competein thelater stages ofpregnancy,and the
maybeinvolved,thegranulosa cell layer is the one
problemsmayrecurafterbirth ofthefoal.There
mostcommonlyaffected.
may be sontepermanentconformational changes
Behavioural changes are commonly observed
due tothe pregnancy thatcould detract from the
in mares with granulosa cell tumours.Behaviour
mare's showing potential.
may be stallion-like, persistent oestrus or persistent
In the case of a granulosa thecal cell tumour,on
anoestrus, depending upon the steroid production of
palpation per rectum the affected ovary is enlarged
the tumour. In other cases of granulosa cell umours,
whilethecontralateralovaryistypicallysmalland
inactive. Atrophy of the contralateral ovary can be
be showing signs of abdominal discomfort, lame-
misleading during winter anoestrus when ovaries
ness,anaemia or other signs seeminglyunrelated to
are typically small and inactive.Atrophy of the con-
the reproductive system.Stallion-like behaviour is
tralateralovaryisnot an absolutefinding.Although
the mostcommonly reported behavioural change
unusual, granulosa celltumours have been reported
observed,possibly because the change from previ-
in pregnant mares and in cyclic mares with a func-
ousbehaviourisobvioustotheownerandcauses
tional contralateral ovary,or even in both ovaries
an increased challenge in handling the mare. In one
(McCue 1998).Theenlarged ovary may be smooth
report,of63mares diagnosedwith granulosa cell
orknobby,hard orsoftandmayfeel asif thereare
tumours 20 exhibited anoestrus,14were inpersis-
multiple follicles present.Typically, the ovulation
tentoestrusand29showedstallion-likebehaviour.
fossa on the enlarged ovary cannot be palpated,
Stallionbehaviouris usually associatedwith elevated
although,with anygreatly enlargedovary，thefossa
serum testosterone.However,persistentoestrus has
may bevery difficult topalpate（Fig.26.36)
not been correlated with elevated oestrogen.
Behavioural changes alonecanbemisleadingsince
many affectedmares donotshow anybehavioural
changes. Occasionally owners express the opinion
that their mare is difficult to handle or unmanage-
able when in oestrus, and request veterinary treat
ment.Frequently suchmares arerequired toperform
toahighlevelandinouropinionmostbehavioural
problems are not related to the reproductive system.
If examination during a reported period of abnormal
behaviourreveals marked follicular development,it
istemptingtodiagnose‘cysticovaries'asthecause
ofthebehavioural changes.Onother occasions,the
7
mare may even bein dioestrus when examined.In
anycase,ownerpressuretoperformanovariectomy
on suspicion ofagranulosa thecal celltumour should
be resisted,at least until the marehas been moni-
toredthroughoutseveralcyclestodeterminewhether
her behavioural problems are related to oestrus.
When it is thought thatthebehavioural prob-
lems are truly linked to oestrus,daily treatment
with progesterone or a synthetic progestogen
shouldprevent cyclicalovarian activity and oestrus.
Although rare in an unbred mare, there is a pos-
sibility ofan increased risk forendometritis in a
mare onlong-termprogesterone supplementation
andsheshould bemonitoredforthis.Inaddition,
the problems maywell recur following cessationof
treatment.Anotherpossibilityistomatethemare
and establish pregnancy. Possible disadvantages
Fig.26.36 Granulosa thecal cell tumour(GTCT).(A) Cut
surface.(B) Note multilocular appearance.
ofthis approachare that shecannot beshown or
624
Chapter
26
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthemare
Utrasonographic evaluation often shows he clas-
mares is approximately 45pg/ml and often more
sic multilocular appearance.However,sometimes
than 100pg/ml in mareswith stallion-likebehav-
the tumour may appear solid orwith larger cyst-like
iour.McCuereported thatonly54%ofmareswith
hypoechoic areas(Fig.26.37).Whileultrasonogra-
granulosa cell tumours had elevated testosterone,
phy is a useful adjunct, it may not yield a defini-
yet87%hadelevatedinhibin,leadingtothecon-
tive diagnosis in many cases.Theultrasonographic
clusion thatinhibinis abetter indicator ofthedis
image of granulosa cell tumours canbevery simi-
ease(McCue 1992）. Inhibin suppresses FSH,which
lartootherovarianabnormalities,especiallyovar-
leadsto a declineinfolliculargrowth,thus explain
ian haematomas.A variety of reported appearances
ing theprofound negativefeedbackeffect seenon
make diagnosisbased solely on ultrasonography
the contralateral ovary.
impossible in many instances.
Overall,the prognosis for life and reproductive
Mareswithgranulosacell tumours mayhaveele-
functioninamarewithagranulosacell tumour is
vatedconcentrationsofoestrogen or testosterone
good.Dependingonthetimeofyearwhentheovary
but progesterone is almost always less than 1ng/
isremoved,theindividual mare and thelength of
ml.Measurementofoestradiol isof limitedvalue.
time the tumour has been present,resumption of
Although testosterone is oftenelevaled inmares
ovarian activity usually occurs 83-392 days post sur-
with granulosa cell tumours exhibiting stallion like
gery,with a mean of 209 days.If the intended use of
behaviour,testosterone is within normal limits in
the mare is solely as a brood mare,a reproductive
up to 50%of cases.Testosterone in normal cycling
examination,includinga uterinebiopsy,isrecom-
mended before surgery.
Teratomas,although uncommon,are the sec
ondmostcommon ovarian tumours.Theycontain
atleast two,if not all three germinal layers.Most
teratomasfound in mares arebenign.They usually
contain hair and may also contain bone,teeth and
neural tissue(Fig.26.38).Teratomas are usually an
incidental findingbecausemost aresmall and do
not ofien cause significant ovarian enlargement.
However,onoccasionlargeteratomasdevelopha
result in ovarian enlargement.Teratomas do not
affecttheoestrouscycle and thereforelackobvious
outward clinical signs.
Serous cystadenomas are neoplasias ofepithelial
origin usually found in older mares.These tumours
Fig.26.37Ultrasonographicappearance ofa granulosa thecal
Fig.26.38 Granulosa thecal ce tumour,whichsubsequently
celltumour.
resulted inovarian torsion.
625
Part
Subfertility and infertility
do not metastasize. Although they have been found
more serious affection than the same condition
in mares with high plasma lestosterone(I-linrichs
in catile. This hgs originated from the times when
et al 1989), behavioural changes are not character-
draught horses predominated in the horse popula-
istic. The contralateral ovary is not affected. It con-
tion, and RFM was invariably followed by serious
tinues to have normal activity and does not atrophy
sequelae; as a result,early manual removal was the
and affected mares continue to cycle. On the affected
rule. Complications include acute metritis, septicae
ovary, the ovulation fossa is not obliterated and can
mia, laminitis and even death. With prompt and
be palpated.
effective treatment these sequelae can be avoided.
Dysgerminomas are highly malignant tumours,
In many cases,uterine involution is delayed even if
also of germ cell origin.They metastasize rapidly 1o
thesemore serious complications do not develop.
ihe abdominal and thoracic cavities.They are con-
The riding horses and ponies of today are less likely
sidered thiecounterpart of thetesticularseminoma.
to suffer from thesecomplications,but RFM shiould
Because of their nature, they can affect other organ
be trealed as an emergency.
systems and cases have been reporied of associ-
The average time taken for the fetal membranes 1o
ated liypertrophie,pulmonary osteoarthropathy
be expelled is about 1 hour and should not exceed 2
(Vanderkolk et al 199s). Clinical signs on presenta-
hours, although there is debate among equine clini-
tion are therefore often unrelated to the reproduc-
cians about the latter.For example,Threlfall (1993)
in a review of the literature, reported a range from
30 minutes to 12 hours. Sevinga et al (2004a) used
3 hours in their study.RFM is one of the most com-
Ovarian torsion
mon peripartum problems in the mare.
Ovarian torsion,a condition not uncoinmon in
women, has been reported in a mare with a large
Incidence and aetiology
granulosa-theca cell neoplasia showing signs of
abdominal discomfort (Fig. 26.39)(Sedrish et al
The incidence is usually quoted in the range of
1997). Ovarian torsion may be suspected in mares
2-10.6%(Vandeplasscheet al 1971,Provencher et al
with known ovarian enlargement, if sudden signs of
1988, Threlfall,1993, Troedsson el al 1997); being
abdominal pain develop.
higher after dystocia.This may well be due to either
uterine trauma or uterine inertia.In equine dysto-
cias treated at the Ghent Veterinary School,there
Retained fetal membranes
was an incidence of 28% after fetotomy and50%
after caesarean operations; in the latter, the likeli-
hood of retention was doubled if the foal was alive
Retention of the fetal membranes (RFM) is prop-
at the beginning of the operation compared with if
erly regarded by veterinary surgeons as a potentially
it was dead (Vandeplassche et al 1972). The precise
cause of retained placenta remains unclear.The most
likely isuterine inertia dueto hormonal inbalance,
perhaps associated with electrolyte deficiencies or
imbalance. Oxytocin has an important role in post-
partum uterine contractions,and low levels of this
hormone in the circulation may result in abnormal
myometrial activity; this in turn leads to failure of
placental separation and relention of thefetal mem-
braes. In the Friesian breed in the Netherlands,an
incidence of 54% has been reported in one study
(Sevinga et al 2004a),which was linked to inbreed-
ing: between the years 1979 and 2000 an inbreeding
rate of the total population of 1.9% was reported
(Sevinga et al 2004b).A link with the ingestion
of tall fescue grass infected winh an endophyte
Fig.26.39 Ovarian teratoma.
Acremoninmcoenophialum hasbeenidentified inthe
626
Chapter
26|
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
USA,although ina small clusteroffourHighland
pony mares no link with any forage components
could befound(Hudson etal 2005).A possible link
with low serun calcium concentrations,butnot
hypomagnesaemia,was identified in Friesian mares
andpartiallyconfirmedbytheimprovedresponseto
oxytocin treatment if calcium and magnesium boro-
gluconate was administered concurrently (Sevinga
et al 2002b）.Hudson etal（2005),identified low
serum calcium concentrations in one oftheir four
mareswith RFM.
Vandeplasscheetal,(1972)emphasizedthebranch-
ing nature ofthe numerous chorionic microvilli,
whichinterdigitatestronglywiththecorrespond-
ing labyrinth of endometrial crypts. The microvilli
arebetier developed in theuterinehorns than in the
body and areconsiderably morebranched,aswell
as bigger,in the non-pregnant than in thepregnant
horn.Thislatter property ofthevilli,coupledwith
themore marked folding of the allantochorion and
endometrium,as well as the slower involution of
Fig.26.40Ponymare,6hours after foaling,wthretained
fetal membranes.
the non-pregnant horn,all combine to provide an
explanation ofthehigherincidenceofretention in
thenon-pregnant horn.Placentalpiecesfrom other
areas canberetained anditis important toexamine
avoidsmanipulation within theuterus,with therisk
the fetal membranes thoroughly to determine which
of introducing microorganisms. Oxytocin can be
portion hasbeenretained.
givenviatheintramuscularroute（20-401u),which
canberepeated after1hourif themembraneshave
Clinical signs
not been expelled.Alternatively,use slow intrave-
nousinfusionof5oiuoxytocinin1litreofphysio-
Themost obvious sign of RFM is the presence of a
logical saline over1 hour.Symptomsofcolicoften
variable portion of tissue protruding from the vulva; follow injections of oxytocin and commonly pre-
less commonly nothing is visible (Fig. 26.40). Either cede natural expulsion so that pain-relieving drugs
this means that no parts of the fetal membranes
and sedationmay be required.
havebeenexpelledor,moreprobably,thatportions
Onlyifthistreatmentfails andthemembranes
remain attached.
are almostdetachedbutretainedwithintheuterus
should one attempt gentlemanual removal.This
interference should be carried out with scrupu
Treatment
lous regard to asepsis, and no undue force should
Lnlikethecow(see Ch.22),treatment forremoval
beapplied,forevenmoderatetractionon theafter-
of RFM is urgent.Watson (1999) recommends that
birth may cause the uterus to become inverted and
it should commence after 3 hours.
prolapsed（see prolapse ofthe equine uterus in
Initially, the protruding membranes should be
Ch.18).In most cases of retention,some separation
tied in a knot to prevent them touching the hocks.
of the allantochorion has occurred and consequently
Asuterinecontractilityplaysanimportantroleinthe
a variable amount of the afterbirth hangs down
dehiscenceofthefetalmembranes,administration
from the vulva (Fig.26.40).The mare is effectively
ofoxytocin is recommended as a first,and most suc-
restrained and measures should be taken toprotect
cessful, method of treatment in up to 90% of cascs.
the operator from being kicked.The tail is bandaged
li isa goodrulenot towait longer than 6 hours
andheldtoonesidebytheattendantwhilethe
afterdeliveryofthefoal;thetimeintervalshould be
obstetricianthoroughly washestheperineumand
shorterin heavybreeds.This methodof treatment
rearofthemare.Withthehand and armprotected
627
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
bya cleanplastic sleeve,the extrudedmass,or failing
crypts.This treatment should be used in combina
thatthefreedpartlyingwithinievagina,isgrasped
tionwith exogenous oxytocin administration.
and twisted into a rope. The gloved hand anointed
Followingitstisein casesofplacentalretention in
with lubricantisgentlyinuroduced alongthe'rope'to
luinianpatients,bacterialcollagenase has been used
theareaofcircumferentialattachmentintheuterus.
with some success to treat RFMin cows(seeCh.22).
As the‘rope'isgently pulled and twisted,the tips of
Ithasbeen shown that,if collagenase is infusedinto
the fingers are pressed between the endometrium
theumbilicalcordvesselsofmareswithRFM(200000
andthechorion.Thevilli areeasilydetached,and
unitsin 1 litre of saline),themembranes are expelled
as theallantochorionisgraduallyfreedit istaken up
within 6hours(Haffneret al 1998)
by firther twisting of the detached mass.The allan-
After removal, it is always important to examine
tochorionicmembrane is gently separated from the
the membranes for completeness,confirming that
endometrium by moving oneof the handsbetween
all theallantochorionhasbeen removed.If neces-
them.The tightest attachment is usually at thetip of
sary, the uterus should be flushed and siphoned,
thehorn.Theprocessofseparation usuallygoes quite
using a stomach tube and funnel,to remove any
smoothly,andthecompletesacofallantochorion
fluid exudate remainingin the uterus.
can begradually detached from thepregnant horn.
Aftercare includes(depending on the severity of
There isa tendency for attachment to be firmer in
the case)regular general clinical examination,par-
the non-pregnant horn,and occasionally retention
ticularly the uterus (for involution and contents)
isconfinedto this horn.Ifit isfoundimpossibleto
and,ifindicated,flushingand siphoning theuterus
detachthe apicalportionsoftheallantochorionicsac
onceor twicedailyforafewdaysincombination
without tearing themembranes it is better to desist
withfurtherinjectionsofoxytocin.Therationalefor
uterinelavageistoremovebothdebris andbacteria
cessful outcomewill belilkely.Llnwantedside-effects
from the uterus.Warm, sterile physiological saline
of thismanual removal maybe serious haemorrhage
should beused in2-4litre flushes(until therecov-
invagination ofoneof thehorns and ahigherchance
ered fluid is clear).Vandeplassche and colleagues
ofretention ofmicrovilli in theendometrium
(1972) deprecate the use of any antiseptic solution
Vandeplassche and his colleagues (1971,1972) refer
torinsetheuterus after the expulsion ofthe after-
particularlytotheresidueofmicrovillithatispresent
birth,because this depresses phagocytosis. Special
intheendometriumevenafteranormalexpulsion
attention is paid to signs oflaminitis,and non-
oftheafterbirthandisvastlyincreasedwhenmanual
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are given when
removal is effected in a case of retention.During a
laminitis is a suspected complication.Tetanus anti-
difficult manualremovalonlythecentral branches
toxin isrecommended and,ifindicated,treatmet
ofthechorionicvilliareremovedwhilepractically
with antibiotics.Ifthereis ariskofthemare devel-
all themicrovilliarebroken off andretained;rupture
oping a toxic metritis,she should be treated with
ofendomeirialandsubendomeirialcapillariesmay
systemic and intrauterine antibiotics.The domi
also occur.The consequences of difficult removal
nant infective organism is oftenStreptococcuszooepi-
are increased puerperal exudate,containing much
lenicus initiallybutinfection with Gram-negative
tissue debris;endometritis and laminitis;uterine
bacteria such asEscherichiacolifrequenilydevelops.
spasm and delayed involution of the uterus.It is for
Theanibioticschosenshould havebroad-spectrum
thesereasons thatVandeplasscheandhiscolleagues
activity and should be effective against endotoxin-
(1971, 1972) prefer to treat severe equine retention
producing organisms. Cyclooxygenase inhibitors
by means ofintravenous drip administration of
such as flunixin meglumine should be given to
oxytocinratherthanbypersistencewithmanual
either treat or minimize the risk of development of
removal.
endotoxaemia.
A thirdmethod describedintheliterature,which
Providedtreatmentisbegunatthecorrecttime
may be successful under some circumstances,is the
and no secondary complications develop, the prog-
placementofsome10litresofwarm,sterilesaline
nosis fora case of retained placenta is good. Sevinga
inside the chorioallantoicmembrane.Stretching of
elal(2002a) found no difference between the repro-
the uterine wall stimulates uterine contractions,via
ductiveperformance ofFriesian mares that had suf-
endogenous oxytocin release,and may assist in the
fered fromRFM and those that had not,norwere
separationofthemicrovilli fromtheirendometrial
there any adverse effects of manualremoval.
628
Chapter
1261
Infertility and subfertility in the mare
References
Ginther Ol,Bergfelt DR 1990  Reprod Fertil 88: 119
Ginther OJ, Pierson RA 1984 Theriogenology 21: 503
Ginther OlBergfelt DR,Leith GS etal1985Theriogenology
Acland 1IM 1993 In:McKinnonAO,Voss JL [ed) Equine
24:73
reproduction.Lea &Febiger,Philadelphia,p 554
Coelz TE, Ogilvie GK, Keegan KG et al 1990 J Am Vet Med
Allen WR 1993 Equine Vet ] 25: 90
Ass0c196:449
AllenWE, Pycock JF 1988 Vet Rec122:489
Gruninger B,Scloon HA,Scoon D etal 1998 Comp
AllenWE, Pycuck IF 1989Vet Rec125:298
Pathol 119:293
Asbury AC 1988 In:Proceedings of the Society for
Gutjahr S,Paccamonti DL,Pycock JF et al 2000
Theriogenology (1988), p 306
Theriogenology 54: 447
Ball BA 1988Vei Clin NorthAm Equine Praci 4:263
1affner IC,Fecteau KA,HeidIP etal 1998Theriogenology
Ball BA, Lite TV Weber IA etal 1989 J Reprod Fertil 85: 187
49:711
BallBA,Brinsko SP,Schlafer D11 1997Pferdeheillkunde
Harrison LA, Squires EL, Nett TM et al 1990 I Anim Sci
13:548
68:690
Baucus KL,Ralston SL,Nockels CF et al I990 I Anim Sci
Hearn P 1999 In: Samper IC (ed) Equine breeding man-
68:345
agement and artificial insemination.WB Saunders,
BergfeltDR,WondsJA,Ginther O]1992|Reprod Fertil
Philadelphia
95:339
Hess MB,Parker NA,Purswell B]et al 2002 An Vet Med
Bracher V,Ma1hias S, Stocker M et al 1990 In:Proceedings
Assoc221:266
ofthe 2nd International Conference onVeterinary
Hlinrichs K,Cummings MR,Sertich PL et al 1988 |Am Vet
Perinaiology p 37
Med Assoc 193:72
Bracher V,Allen WR,McCladdery AJ et al 1991 In:
Hlinrichs K,Frazer GS,dcGannes RV ct al 1989 JAm Vet Med
Proceedings of an Intermarional Workshop: Disturbances
Assoc194:381
in EquineFetal Maturation:Comparative Aspects,p 34
Hurson NP,Prinre DPMayhew IGet al 2005 Vet Rec
Cadario ME.Thatcher MID.LeBlancMM 1995BiolReprod
157:85
Monographs 1:495
Hughes JP, Loy RG 1969 Proc Am Assoc Equine Praci 15: 289
Carnevale EM,Ginther OJ 1995 Hiol Reprod Monographs
Hughes JP, Stabenfeldt CH,Kindahl H et al 1979 J Reprod
1:209
Feril Suppl 27:321
Carnevale EM,Griffin PG, Cinther OJ 1993 Equine Vet
Hyland JH,Wright PI,Clarke 1]etal 1987] Reprod Feril
JSuppl15:31
Suppl35:211
Caslick EA 1937 Cormell Vet 27:178
IrvineCHG,McKeoughVL,Turner IEetal 2002EquineVe
ColeIR,Hall REGosser HS etal 1986IAmVet Med Assoc
34:191
189:769
Iuliano ME, Squires EL 1986 Theriogenology 26: 291
Cottrill CM, Jeffers-Lol, Ousey IC et al 1991 I Reprod Fertil
Katila T 2001 Anim Reprod Sci 68:267
Suppl 44: 591
Katz IB,Evans LE,HuttoDLet al 2000 | Am Vet Med Assoc
Cross DT, Giniher Oj 1987 Domes1 Anim Endocrinol 4: 271
216:1945
DaelsPFStabenfldGHKindahHtl 1989quineVe
Kenney RM 1978 J Am Vet Med Assoc 172: 241
Suppl8:29
Kenney RM, Doig PA 1986 In: Morrow DA (ed) Current
David IS 1975 | Reprod Fertil Suppl 23: 515
therapy in theriogenology, 2nd edn.WB Saunders,
De LilleAIAE, Silvers ML Cadario ME et al 2000 Reprod
Philadelpia,p 723
Fertil Suppl56:373
Kenney RM,GanjamVK 1975J Reprod Fertil Suppl 23:335
DybdalNO,Daels PE, Couto MAetal 1991 I Reprod Feril
Klump A,Aljarrah A Sansinena M et al 2003
Suppl 44:697
Pferdeheilkunde 19:609
Eilts BE,Scholl DT,Paccamonti DLetal 1995 Biol Reprod
Knuii B,Pycock JF Paccamonti D et al 1997 Pferdeheilkinde
Monographs 1 Equine Reproduction Vl,p 527
13:545
Evans Ml,Hamer M, Gason LM et al 1986 Theriogenology
Knuti B, Pycock JF, van der Weijden GC et al 2000 Equine
26:37
Vet Educ 12:267
Evans M), Hamer JM, Gason LM et al 1987 J Reprod Fertil
Koskinen E,Lindeberg H,Kuntsi H et al 1990 Zeutralbl
Suppl35:327
Veterinarmed A 37:77
Foss RR,WirthNR,KutzRR1994ProcAmAssoc Equine
KotilainenT,Huhtinen MKatilaT 1994 Theriogenology
Pract40:11
41:629
Genty LR,Thompson DLJ, Gentry GT] et al 2002  Anim Sci
LeBlancMM1997 Pferdeheilkunde13:483
80:2695
LeBlancMM.Neuwirth L,Asbury AC eial 1994 Equine Vet]
Gibbs HM,TroedssonMHT1995 Biol ReprodMonographs
26:109
1:489
LeBlanc M,Johnson RD, Calderwoor-Mays MB et al 1995
Ginther Oj 1989a Am J Vet Res 50:45
Biol Reprod Monographs 1: 501
Ginther OJ1989bEquine Vet)21:171
LeBlanc MM.Neuwirth L, Jones Let al 1998 Theriogenology
Ginther Oj 1990 Equine Vet J 22: 152
50:40
629
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
LeBlancMM,Magsig1,Stromberg AI2007Theriogenology
SantschiEM,SloneDE 19941AmVe1MedAssoc205:1180
68:403
Schlafer DH 2004 Proc Am Assoc Equine Pract 50:144
Liu IKM,Lantz KC,Schlafke Setal 1990 ProcAm Assnc
Schumarher J, Schumacher J,Blanchard T 1992 IAm Vet Med
Assor200:1336
Liu IKM.RakestrawP Coit Cet al 1997 Pferdeheilkunde
Sedrish SA,McClure JR,Pinio Cet al 1997 I Am Vet Med
13:557
Assor211:1152
Love CC 2003 Proc Soc Theriogenology G8
Sevinga M.Hesselink JW,Barkema HW2002a
McCue PM 1992Proc Am Assoc EquinePract 38:587
Theriogenology 57:923
McCue PM 1998Vet Clin North Am Equine Praci 14:505
SevingaM,Barkema HW,Hesselink JW 2002b
McKinnon AO,Vasey JR,LescunTB etal 1997 EquineVet」
Theriogenology 57: 941
29:153
Sevinga M,Barkema HW, Stryhn H et al 2004a
McKinnon AO,LescunTB,Walker JH eial 2000 EquineVe1 I
Theriogenology 61:851
32:83
Sevinga M,Vrijenboek T, Hesselinks IWet al 2004b I Anim
Malschitzky E,Trein CR,Bustamante Filho ICet al 2006
Sci 82:982
Pferdeheilkunde22:201
Sharp DC 1980 Vet Clin North Am Large Anim Pract 2: 207
Meyers Pl,Bowman T, Blodgett G et al 1997 Vet Rec
Sharp DC,Davis SD 1993 In:McKinnon AO,Voss JL(ed)
140:249
Equine reproduction.lea&FehigerPhiladelphia,p133
Miller CD,EmhertsonRM,Smith S 1996ProcAmAssoc
Sharp DC, McDowell KI. Weithenauer et al 1989 ) Reprod
Equine Pract 42: 154
Fertil Suppl 37:101
Mitchell D,AllenWR1975IReprod Feril Suppl 23:531
SnithKC,BlundenAS,Whitwell KE et al 2003 Equine Vet
MoninT1972ProcAmAssocEquine Prart 18:99
35:496
Nelson EM,Kiefer BLRoser JF et al 1985Theriogenology
Stabenfeldt GH-I,Hughes JP 1987 Comp Coni Educ Pract Vet
23:241
9:678
Neu SM,Timoney PI.Lowry SR1992 Theriogenology 37:407
Stone R,Bracher V,Mathias S 1991 Equine Vet Educ 3: 181
Newcombe IR1997Pferdeheillkunde13:545
StoutTAE,Allen WR2002Reproduction 123:261
Oxcnder WD, Noden PA,Bolenbaugh DL et al 1975 Am I Vet
Sluddert Mj 1974 Cornell Vet 64: 94
Res 36:1145
Threlfall WR 1993 In: McKinnon AO, Voss IL (ed) Equine
Paccamonti Dl, Pycock JF Taverne MAM et al 1999 Equine
reproduction.Lea &Febiger,Philadelphia,p 614
Vet]31:285
TimoneyPi,Powell DG1988IEquineVetSci 8:42
Palmer E, Driancourt MA 1981 In: Photoperiodism and
Troedsson MHT,LiuIKM 1991 J ReprodFertil Suppl 44:283
reproduction in vertebrates: international colloquiun,
TroedssonMHT,WistromAOGLiu IKM etal 1993J Reprod
Nouzilly,France,24-25 September, p 67
Fertil 99:299
Pasc0eRR1979J ReprodFertil Suppl 27:229
TroedssonMHT, Scoi1 MA,1iu 1KM1995Am J Vet Res
Pouret E] 1982 Equine Vet I14:249
56:468
Provencher R,Threfall WR,Murdick PWeral1988CanV
Trocdsson MHT. Spensley MS,Fahning L 1997 In:Robinson
129:903
NE (ed) Current therapy in equine medicine.
Pycock IF 1993In:Proceedings of JP Hughes Intermational
WB Saunders,Philadelphia p 560
Workshop on Equine Endomerritis,summarized byAllen
TroedssonMIrloset K,Alghamdi AM etal2001 Anim
WR 1992 Equine Vet J 25: 191
Reprod Sci 68:273
Pycock JE, Allen WE 1990 Equine Vet J 22: 422
Trotter GW,MckinnonAO1988Vet ClinNorth Am Equine
Pycock JE Newcombe JR1996Equine Pract 18:19
Pracl4:389
Pycock [E, Paccamonti D, Jonker H etal 1997
Vardeplassthe M,Henry M t977 ProcAm Assoc Equine
Pferdelieilkunde 13:553
Praci 23:123
Rambags BPB,Krijtenburg PJ. VanDrie HIF et al 2005 Mol
Vandeplassche M,SpincemailleJ,Bouiers R 1971 Equine Vet
Reprod Dev72:77
13:105
Ramirez S.Sedrish S,Paccamonti DL et al 1998 Vet Radiol
VandeplasscheM,Spincemaille J.Bouters R 1972 Equine Vet
ultrasound 39:165
J4:105,144
Reef VB,Vaala WE,Worth LT et al 1996Eqine Vet ] 28200
Vanderkolk JH,Geelen SNLIonker FH et al 199sVet Rec
Renaudin CD,TroedssonMHI,Gillis CL1999 EquineVet
143:172
Educ 11:75
Vanderwall DK,Woods GL,Weber IAetal 1993
Ricketts SW2003 Pferdeheilkunde 19:633
Theriogenology 40:13
Rickels SW,AlonsoS 1991Equine Vet|23:189
Van Niekerk CHI1965|SAfrVeiMed Assoc36:61
RicleisSW,MackintoshME1987」 Reprod Feril Suppl
VanNiekerkFE,vanNiekerkCH1998ISAfVetAssOC
35:343
69:150
RiddleWT 2003 In: Proceedings of the Society for
Vogelsang MM,Vogelsang SG,Lindsey BRet al 1989
Theriogenology, p 85
Theriogenology 32: 95
Rogan D,Fumuso E,Rodriguez Eci al 2007J EquineVet Sci
Vogelsang SG,VogelsangMM 1989 EquineVetJSuppl
27:112
630
Chapter
261
Infertilityandsubfertilityin themare
VonReiizensteinM,Callahan MA,Hansen PI etal 2002
Watson ED,SertichPL 1992IAm VetMedAss0c201:438
Theriogenology58:887
Wolfsdorf KE.RodgersonD,Holder R2005 ProcAmAssoc
Waller CA,Thompson J,Cartmill IA et al 2006
Equine Pract 5l:284
Theriogenology 6G6: 923
Woods Gl,Baker CB,BaldwinJL.et al 1987] Reprod Fertil
WatsonED1999 In:MairT,LoveS,SchumackerJ,Watson
Suppl 35:455
ED (ed) Equinemedicine surgery and reproduction.WB
Saunders,London,p295
631
27
Chapter
OlliPeltoniemi
and Bas Kemp
Infertility and subfertility in the gilt and sow
There are many different views on the level ofrepro-
Methods ofexamining the
ductiveperformanceexpectedofabreedinggiltor
sow.Forexample,itisgenerallyaccepted that asow
reproductive system of the individual
should have expressed standing oestrus before8
sub-fertile/infertilegilt/sow
days afterweaningherlitterIf shefailsto achieve
this level of reproductive performance, then she
Transrectalpalpation
can be classified as being subfertile, or possibly
infertile.
The method is easy and fairly quick to perform and
The owner or manager of a pig breeding unit
requiresno equipment,althoughitisnot applicable
will normally have setspecific target valuesforthe
togiltsbecauseof the small size of thepelviccanal,
requiredreproductiveperformance of the herd as a
which doesnotallow forinsertion of thehand.In
whole.If these arenotmet,then thoseresponsible
sows that have farrowed at least once, the method
for the herd will have an agreed policy forrespond-
canbeused,butwithcaution.Following removalof
ing tothesituation.The examplecited above,in
faecesfromthierectum,abundant amountsoflubri-
whichanindividualsowhasnotexpressedstand-
cants shouldbeused.If thereisbloodon theopera-
ingoestrusby 8daysafterweaning,orwherethe
tor'sglovedhandalanytimeduringtheprocedure
averagevaluefortheherdismorethanSdays,will
due to damage to therectal mucosa,then palpation
normally require intervention.Thismay involve
shouldbe stopped and thesowmust be examined
hormonal treatment or increasing the time to
using alternativemethods.
allow forthe individual(s)to recover from the
In diagnosing ovarian abnormalities,rectal pal-
'metabolic burden'caused by the preceding lac-
pationmaybeusedloobtainanoverallappre
tation, or culling of the animal(s). The choice
ciation ofthe finctional status ofthe ovary.ltis
should be based,where possiblc,on the probable
possibleto differentiaie cysticfrom normalphiysi-
cause of the delayin expressing oestrus,the likely
ologicalovaries,based on their overall size,and to
success of treatment and its cost-effectiveness.
determine the approximate size of individual cysts.
Advisors,such as the herd veterinarian,should
Inmost cases,itis difficult to differentiatebetween
provide the herd manager with agreed target val-
normal sizefolliclesclosetoovulation andcorpora
uesfor reproductive performance,themeasures
lutea（CLs)because of their similarity in size,num-
neededtoensure that they are achievedandthe
berspresentand texture.However,it maybepossible
actionsrequiredto correctthem should it fall
1o differentiate between small follicles and normal
below the agreed targets. The most important
physiological Cls,asthe size oftheformer maybe
targetsfor reproductive performance are shown in
lessthanhalfthatofthelatter.Theobviousdisad-
Table 27.1.
vantageofrectalpalpationisthatitcanonlybeused
632
Chapter
1271
Infertility and subfertility in the gilt and sow
Table 27.1 The most mportant parameters used to measure thereproductive performance of a sow herd,and their present
targetvalues
Parameter
Definition
Target
Weaning-to-oestrusinterval
Days from weaning tooestrus
5days
Farrowingrate
Percentageofmatedsowsthatfarrow
95%
Numberofpigletsweanedpersowperyear
Numberofweaned livepigletstheherdproduces
26
per year,divided by thenumber of sows
ina proportionofbreedingunits,sinceinmostcases
thefeedingstall designdoesnot allowforsowstobe
approached safelyfrombehind.
Rectalpalpation also needssubstantialexperience
since the chances foran incorrect diagnosis(e.g.dis
criminating preovulatory follicles from CLs) is a
risk.
Real-timeultrasound
Real-timeBmodeultrasonographyappearstobethe
mosteffectiveand accuratetoolin diagnosingovar-
ian and uterine abnormalities in the gilt and sow
Fig.27.1Positioning of the transducer probe cf the ultra-
（Kauffoldetal2004a,b;Kauffold&Althouse2007).
sound scanneron theflankof the sow for transcutanecus
In the transcutaneous exanination of the ovary and
scanning.
the uterus, a 3.5MHz sector probe is the optimal
frequency;however,thewidely used 5MHz linear
transducer probe will provide satisfactory images
19%:polycysticovarian degeneration,6%.These
for clinical purposes.When used transrectally,the
findings indicate that,although the individuals had
5MHzlinearprobeisveryeffectiveforthediagnosis
failed to conceive,the majority were undergoing
of ovarian disorders.
normal cyclical ovarian activity and,asfarasovarian
For transcutaneous examination,the probe is
functionwasconcerned,theyhad thereproductive
placed on theventralabdominalwall just above
potential to become pregnant if bred correctly.
the stifle joint and lateral to themammary glands
The relative frequency ofultrasound findings
(Fig.27.1).The probe is then directed towards the
can vary from one farm to another and assessing
oppositetuber coxae and then redirected cranially
thesemay help to identify the problem on the farm
until the urinary bladder is imaged.The ovaries and
andenabletheuseofsuccessfultreatmentstrale-
the uterus arelocated cranially and adjacent to the
gies.For example,ifultrasonography is used3 days
urinarybladder.Multiplesections ofasingleuterine
after weaningand the end of lactation,andahigh
hornmaybeseenin thesame imagebecauseof the
proportion of sows are identified as having CLs on
foldingof the uterine horn,whichcan be more than
their ovaries,thenit indicates that theyhavebeen
1 m in length.
inoestrusduringlactation.However,ifnoCLswere
Ovarian function was recently examined in a
identified on day 3butwere present on day 8after
study involving the use of transcutaneous ultra-
weaning, then the sow will have been in oestrus
sonography ofgilts and sowsthathadnotcon-
butit will nothave been detected.In the latter
ceivedafterbreeding(Kauffoldetal2004a,b).The
case,improved detection measures are required
following frequency of ovarian structures identi-
Thus the use of ultrasonography after weaning
fiedwas reported:CL,46%;folliclesof2-6mm in
may help to diagnose the cause of ihereproduc-
diameter, 28%; periovulatory findings (follicles of
tiveproblem and enable the correct treatment to be
7-8mm in diameter and corpora haemorrhagica)
implemented.
633
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
A
Fig.27.2(A)Ultrasound image and(B)photcgraph of an
ovarywithpreovulatory follicles7-9mmin size.
Anexampleofanovarywithpreovulatoryfollicles
isshown inFigure27.2.
Fig.27.3Real time ultrasonogram(A)and photographic
Real-time ultrasonography may also be used
image (3)of a 35-day-old fetus.Organogenesis has begun as
todeterminethetimingoftheonsetofpuberty
illustrated by the ceveloping ribs and eyes.
in gilts.The uterine horns increase in size and
Vaginoscopy
becomereadilyidentifiableaswell-definedcross-
sections a fewdaysprior tothe onsetofpuberty
The vaginoscope used for the examination of the
(Martinat-Botte2003).Thismethodwasdescribed
vaginaandcervixinthesowisusually400mm in
as having over 90% sensitivity and specificity
lengthand35mmindiameter,whichisconsiderably
andmaybeusedto verifywhether individual
narrower than thatusedin the dairycow.Although
gilis that have not been detected in oestrus have
vaginoscopyin the sowcan bequite difficult to per-
delayedpubertyorwhethierpubertyhasoccurred
form,itcanbeaveryvaluabletool todeterminethe
but oestrus has been missed.This is a useful diag-
source ofavulvar discharge.The sources of discharge
nostic tool in herds with a problem of apparent
can bethe urinary bladder,vagina,cervix or uterus.
delayedpuberty.
The sow or gilt should be adequately restrained,
The presence of embryos or fetuses can be reli-
thevulvawashed thoroughly anddisinfectedwith
ably determined from day 25 after matingonwards;
an iodine-based disinfectant.The vaginoscope is
before this stage the accuracy may not be good
insertedcarefullyusingadequateamountsoflubri-
(Maes et al 2006).A photograph and ultrasound
cant;excessive quantities may compromise the eval-
imageof a 35-day-old fetus are provided in Figure
uation ofsecretions.In addition to assessing the
27.3.
volume and quality ofsecretions,the colour and
634
Chapter
|271
Infertility and subfertility in the gilt and sow
appearance of the mucous membrane are evaluated.
sulphate(see Ch.3).In the modernhousingenvi
Purthermore,it is useful io examine the caudalpart
ronment (feeding stalls and a lying area),it is often
ofthecervixfor thedegreeofpatency(closed/half
easier to approacha sowfrombehind,particularly
closed/open)
when she is held in the feeding stalls.Therefore,
thetailvein orthesaphenousvein ofthehind
leg is often the easiest site for sampling.The tail
Post-slaughter examination of
veinrunslongitudinallyin theventralmidlineof
femalegenitals
the tail,whereas thesaphenousvein issituated on
Avery useful toolforthe accuratediagnosis of repro-
thecaudomedial surfaceof thehindleg,abovethe
ductive disease anddisordersisthepost-slaughter
hock joint{Fig.27.4).The tail vein,although eas-
gross pathological examination.The genital organs,
iertolocate,isinamoresensitivesiteandthesow
togetherwith theurinary tract andbladder,arecol-
willreact totheinsertion of theneedle.Theskin
lected from specified sows on the slaughter line at
covering the saphenous vein is less sensitive,and
blood sampling can often be performed without
the abattoir and submitted forpathologicalexam-
ination.To obtain representative samples,mate-
anyreactionfromthesow;however,adisadvantage
rial from asmany of the problem sows as possible
isthat itmaybedifficultto identify thevesselin
fat individuals.Ear vein and jugular vein may also
shouldbecollectedandexamined.Inadditionto
a gross pathological examination, further analy-
beused forblood sampling:however,bothrequire
substantialrestraint of the sow or giltusing arope
sesbased onhistologicalexamination andbacteri-
ologicalculturemaybeappropriate.However,the
snare;thecephalicveinof thefront legmaybeused
slaughter process may compromise the accuracy of
in gilts.
thebacteriologicalfindings and thereforetheresults
should beinterpretedwith caution.Itis important
thatpost-slaughter examinationisperformed soon
after thesowis diagnosed as havingreproductive dis-
case.Long intervalsbetween diagnosis and slaughter
may mask problems.
Microbiologicalexamination
Althoughconsideredbysometobeoflittlevalue,
we considermicrobiological examination of swabs
ofavulvardischargetobe avaluablemethodof
determining the origin of the discharge, as well as
providing useful information in relation to suc-
cessful treatment of such cases (Oravainen et al
2008).In order to collect samples, the vaginoscope
isfirstintroduced into thevagina,a guarded swab
isinseried intotheanteriorvagina anda sampleis
collected,which is thenplaced intransportmedium
andsubmitted tothemicrobiological laboratoryfor
culture.
Bloodsampling
Venous blood sampling of gilts and sows is a basic
clinical requirement in attempting toidentifypos-
sible infectious agents using serological tests,as
well asmeasuringreproductivehormones such as
progesteronetodetermineovariancyclicalstatus
Fig.27.4 sampling of thesowusing the saphenousvein of
the hindleg.
ortodiagnosepregnancybymeasuringOestrone
635
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
Evaluation of fertility indices using
disorders in pigs.Oftenit isquite difficult tolink
theactualmycojoxin contents foundinaparticu-
herd management programmes to
lar feed or bedding sample to the clinical signs
determine the causesofsubfertility
observed,because there are no guidelines for inter-
preting the significance ofquantitative laboratory
The analysis andevaluation ofherd fertilityindi
results.
ces recorded and calculated as part of a herd man-
Zearalenone is a classical oestrogenicmycotoxin
agementprogrammeareveryuseful inhelping10
thathasbeenassociatedwithclinicalreproductive
diagnose the causes of subfertility at a herd level.
symptoms in pigs.Zearalenone hasbeenreported
However,basicepidemiological and statisticalskills
l0causerepeat breeding, signs ofoestrus due tovul
are needed when interpreting these data, before
vovaginitis in prepubertal growing pigs,vaginal and
appropriate advice can be given. In addition, such
rectal prolapse,pseudopregnancy and oestrus signs
during pregnancy (Osweiler 2006). In field studies
data need to be interpreted with caution,because
of clinical cases,although some of these symptoms
thequantityofdata availableisoftenlimited and
thequalityisdependentontheaccuracyofdatacol-
werepresent,theauthors havebeenunabletodem-
lection and insertion into the database.Examples of
onstrate significantzearalenone contamination of
feed samples, since the observed values were only
theuse of such dataare asfollows.Ifahighpropor-
slightly above thedetectionlimit（Table27.2).Ina
days after weaning. this indicates that a lactational
recent study, zearalenone given orally at a dose of
anoestrus has occurred, and these sows were then
200μg/kgbodyweightcauseddisturbancesinthe
inseminated during their secondoestrus.Ifahigh
processofdevelopmentandmaturationofovarian
follicles (Zwierzchowski etal 2005).Furthermore,
proportion of sows have weaning-to-oestrus inter-
valsof between25and28 days,thisindicates that
although zearalenone contamination at levels of
the first oestrus after weaning was missed.Long
1500-2000μg/kgfeed(1.5-2ppm)hascaused some
intervals from weaning to oestrus in primiparous
signs ofvulvovaginitis in prepubertal gilts,higher
sows,followed by poor reproductive performance
concentrations of 20-60ppm are usually required
for clinical signs to appear. Female pigs are more
relatedtotheir second litter,is indicativeofpoor
management duringlactation.
susceptibleto zearalenone than adult males,who
are relatively tolerant to the toxin in terms of repro-
ductive function.However,young boars may expe-
Causes of sub-fertility/infertility
rience reduced libido,preputial enlargement and
decreased testicular size(Osweiler 2006).Normal
Mycotoxins
long-termreproductivefunctionshouldreturn after
removal of the toxin from thefeed.
Mycotoxins,which contaminate pig food, can
As well as zearalenone,we have observed sig-
impair fertility as well as causing abnormal devel-
nificant deoxynivanol (DON) and nivalenol con-
opment of pig fetuses.Not infrequently, they have
taminationinfoodsamples.TheseFusariun toxins
been suspected asbeingthe cause ofreproductive
may be ofclinical significance（Table 27.2),since
1999-2005)
Mycotoxin*
Range found in feed
Detection sensitivity
Methodused
samples(μg/kg)
(μg/kg)
Zearalenone
2-3
2
Fluidchromatography
Deoxynivalenol(DON)
27-2256
10
Gaschromatography-massspectrometry
Nivalenol (NIV)
85-181
30
Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
HT-2 toxin
2-45
20
Gas chromatography-massspectrometry
*Analysisforthefollowing toxinswasasocarrieout,buttheywerenotidentified（detectiansensitvityinbrackets）:ochratoxinA(OA,1ug/kg）
636
Chapter
27
Infertility and subfertility in the gilt and sow
they have been reported to cause loss of appetite
et al 2001). However, the end of the anoestrous
and vomiting in pigs and thus may indirectly cause
period andtheretuirn to cyclical ovarian activity is
reproductive disorders, since sows may lose body
dependent upon other environmental cues, such as
condition, impairing follicular growth. HT 2 toxins
may be present in food prepared from grain infected
In the domesticated environment, factors such as
with Fusarium spp.Trichothecene contamination of
increased availability of food and, in housed ani-
grain may thereforeincreaseprior toharvesting.Wet
mals, a comfortable microclimate hiavebeen added
weather during the growing season and increased
and thus the cues for seasonal breeding are absent.
moisture during storage are risk factors for the pres-
However,variable effects of decreasing daylight on
ence of thesemycotoxins in grain.
the breeding activities of the female domestic pig
Ergot alkaloids produced by the parasitic fungus
population are frequently observed in late summer
Claviceps purpurea may affect rye, oats and wheat.
and autumn.
They are most commonly associated with agalac-
Seasonal infertility may be avoided by improv-
lia in gilts and sows but may also cause low birth
ing the reproductive management of the herd.This
weight in piglets,low piglet survival and lowweight
includes the use of a relevant light programme,
gain in neonatal piglets (Oswciler 2006). Abortion
increasing feed intake in early pregnant females dur-
has not been associated with ergot toxins.
ing late summer and early autumn,and stimulating
giltsand sows by grouping them correctly accord
Seasonal infertility
ing to size and age. Furthermore, genetic selection,
reduced stocking density in summer-autunn, the
Seasonal infertility is defined as decreased fertility
use of cooling systems during lactation in a hot pro-
of the gilt and sow in summer and early autumn.
duction environment and gonadotrophin treatment
The signs of subfertility include reduced farrow-
ing rates,prolonged weaning-to-oestrus intervals
reduce seasonaleffects onfertility(Peltoniemi and
Virolainen 2006).
wild pigs, decreasing day length in late summer and
altumn would provide a physiological cue indicat-
Cystic ovarian disease
ing that it was not an optimum time for breeding.
since the piglets would be born in midwinter. Thus
Ovarian cysts are defined as pathological structures
in the wild, the most likely result would be a high
more than 10mm in diameter that are present in
mortality rate in the newborn piglets and possibly
the ovaries and are associated with the absence of
the loss of the whole litter. Thus feral pigs are sea-
normal cyclical ovarian activity. Typically, ovarian
sonally anoestrous,with the onsetofthe anoestrous
cysts are multiple, each being 20-30mm in diam-
period being influenced by the photoperiod (Tast
eler, so that the overall diameter of the ovary can be
up to 100mm,as shown in a real-time ultrasound
image (Fig. 27.6). Real-time B-mode ultrasound scan-
ning, cither transcutaneous or transrertal,enables
Farrowingrae%
the diagnosis of the disorder (Kauffold et al 2004a).
95
%at puberty a 225 days
90
Recent findings in our laboratory indicate that the
85-
%Inostrus7days
LH surge that triggers ovulation may not occur, and
80-
allerweaning
thefollicles continueto growbeyond thenorinal size
75-
for ovulation of 7-9 mm in diameter.The impaired
70
LHI surge may be due to stress, zearalenone toxic-
65-
ity,hormonal (gonadorrophin) treatment adminis-
60
tered at an inappropriate stage (early dioestrus) of
55-
the oestrous cycle or early induction of ovulation
50-
Winter
Soring
Summar
Autumn
after parturition (e.g. carly weaning protocols). The
incidence of ovarian cysts has been reported to vary
Fig.27.5 Major manifestations of seasonal inferility in the pig
between 5% and 10%.Multiple ovarian cysts may
presented as percentages for each reproductive parameter.
contain some luteal tissue,which,ifit persists,will
Data from Peltoniemi & Virolainen (2006).
inhibit subsequent LH secretion and thus cyclical
637
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Infectious agents
Viral infectiont*
Porcine parvovirus
Porcine parvovirus (PpV) is a classical example of
a viral pig disease that affects mainly the reproduc
tive system. It has also been used as an example of
the temporal relationship between the acquisition
of immunocompetence and the development of the
embryos and fetuses (Fig. 27.7). During the embry-
onic period of development, infertion is likely
to cause death and resorption of the embryos. In
the fetal period,if the infection occurs before day
70 of pregnancy, the fetuses become mummified.
Diern
tence has been acquired, then the consequences are
not serious, amounting to a slight weakness of the
newborn pigleis or in some cases no clinical signs
PPVdiseaseiswidespread,with herdprevalence in
most countries exceeding 6o%. Thus, for most pro-
ducers, it is a disease they have to cope with, since
eradication may not be a feasible exercise. The con-
trol programme involves vaccination of all breeding
animals in the herd:gilts,sows and boars.As PpV
is known as'gilt disease'it is essential that gilts are
vaccinated twicebeforethey areinseminatedfor the
first time. Vaccine-induced immunity is boosted in
a stepwisemiannerso thiatsows that havefarrowed
at least once clearly have higher antibody titres than
unbred gilts (Fig.27.8). Therefore,in practice, signs
of PpV may be seen in cases where vaccination of
replacement gilts hasnot been carried out or where
B
there is vaccination failure. Common causes ofvac-
cination failure are the use of out-of-date vaccine, an
Fig. 27.6 (A) Real-lime transcutaneous ulrasound image
showing multiple ovarian cysts (B)in a sow. On the scale, the
Timc of infction with PPV
distence between the marks represents 10 mm.
Mummification
Ovarian activity. Large multiple ovarian cysts gener
of fetuses
ally severely conpromise fertility; single and smaller
Reabsorption and
Clinical signs not
repeat breeding
apparent, since immune
ing and result in reduced litter size (Castagna et al
response triggerec
2004, Alnond et al 2006). Early segregated wean-
35
70
114
ing(weaning beforeday14of lactation) and a short
Day of pregnancy
weaning-to-oestrus interval(<3 days)are known
toincrease therisk of ovarian cysts(Castagna et al
Fig.27.7 Temporal relationshipbetween the development
2004). The prognosis and response to any treat-
ofimmunocompetence of porcine conceptuses and the
ment are generally poor,and culling of the sow is
consequences of PpV infection throughout pregnancy in the
therefore often warranted.
gilt andsow.
638
Chapter
1271
Infertility and subfertility in the gilt and sow
-100
Porcinereproductiverespiratorysyndrome
1:128-
←一H-tire5
-90
Porcinereproductive respiratory syndrome(PRRS)
-ELISA%
80
occursin sows andgilts,causing severeillnesswith
70
pyrexia,inappetence,listlessness and,as the name
60
implies,respiratory discase with bronchopneumo-
-50
nia and pleurisy. It affects the reproductive system
1:64-
40
and causing late-term interruption of pregnancy
—30
mummified fetuses, stillbirths and weak born pig
1:32-
-20
1:16-
lets. However transplacental infection may occa-
10
1:8
sionally also occur earlier during pregnancy.
0
Sampling1
Sampling2
Sampling3
Sampling4
Routes for the shedding of the virus include
HIrange
1:8-1:5-12
<1:8-1:2048
1:8-1:2048
1:32-1:2048
saliva,nasal secretions,urine and faeces.In semen,
ELISArange 0-80%
0-80%
%98-0
%66-0
the virusmay be shed for up to 43 days after expo-
sure. It has also been reported that fetuses may die
Fig.27.8 Haemagglutinin inhibition (H) titres and ELISA
percentages of39 gilts before and aftervaccinations against
from hypoxia due to arteritis of the umbilical ves-
porcine parvovirus.Sampling 1,before thefirstvaccination at
sels (Lager & Halbur 1996).Exposure of PRRS-naive
the age of 6monthswith the booster3 weeks later (n=39);
replacement gilts to virus-infected tissues confirmed
sampling 2,2-3 weeks after the bcoster(n=39);sampling
positive, resulted in prebreeding infection of gilts
3, in mid-pregnancy (n=35); sampling 4, after farrowing but
followed by sufficient immunity toprotect the suh-
before weaning(n=13).(Oravainen et al 2006a)
sequentpregnancy(Menardet al2007).
inappropriate injection site(the neck instead of the
Aujeszky'sdisease(pseudorabies)
base of the ear), storage problems (frozen/heated
vaccine) and improper vaccination technique.It
Another viral disease ofpigs mainly affecting the
may also be that some animals do not develop the
reproductive system is Aujeszky's disease (or pseudo-
required immune response because of some defi-
rabies), due to infection with a herpesvirus.Herd prev
ciency in the mechanism.
alence ofpseudorabiesinWesterncountriesisusually
low butonceinfected,a herdwith a continuouspig
Circovirus(PCV-2)
productionsystemmaysufferfromitfor alongtime.
Therouteoftransmission ofthevirus isusually by
Circovirus(PCV-2)infectionsareknown to cause
inhalationoringestion.ltmayalsobetransmitied by
reproductive disease in sow herds in a number of
coitus,althoughthereissomeargumentastowhether
countries,including South Korea and Spain (Chae
true venereal transmission occurs.Aujeszky's disease
2005,Maldonado etal 2005).Thevirus is described
ischaracterizedbynervous andrespiratorysigns,asso-
as infecting the conceptuses following transpla-
ciatedwitharisein temperature andoftendeath in
cental transmission,Embryonic orfetal death and
young piglets.Infection in adults may result in still
lossofthewholelittermayocciratanystageof
births and abortion.In adult boars and sows,theclini-
pregnancy (Chae 2005).In addition to abortion,
cal signsof this disease areseldom severe and usually
anincreasednumberof stillborn andmummified
consist of pyrexia,depression and anorexia that lasts
fetuses and weak born piglets may be observed.
for up to a weel. Of great significance to the breeding
The oronasal route is considered to bethemost
herd is thefact that thevirus causes embryonicdeath,
common route of infection;horizontal transmis-
fetal mummification and stillbirths.
sion between pen mates, and from one pen to
another,may bevery efficient.However,ransmis-
Otherviralagents
sion through semen may also occur, although it
has not yet been proved to be a significant route.
Anumber of other viruses have been associated
Herds suffering from the epizootic phase of infec-
with reproductive disorders in the pig (Almond et al
tion associated with reduced farrowingrates and
2006).However,they are more likelyto exert their
increased stillbornratesmaybenefitfromvaccina
tion programmes that have recently been developed
illessnthwilhyi
(Segales et al 2007).
than attackingthereproductive systemdirectly.
639
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Bacterial infections
Leptospirosis
Vulvar discharge syndrome
Leptospirosis isanown to be a widespread disease
compromising reproduction in the pig population
Although the overall prevalence of vulvar discharge
worldwide.Lepiospira pomona is the most widely
syndrome is generally considered to be quite low
recognized pathogen,but serovars tarassovi,bratis-
in the whole overallpopulation ofbreeding sows,
lava and-icterohaemorrhagiaemayalsobepathogenic
it may cause a serious problem in some individual
in pigs. Leptospires have a predilection site for the
herds(Oravainen et al2006b).Themostimportant
predisposing factor is thought be the production
then secreted via ihe urine into the environment
environment, where activity of sows is discouraged
intermittently for a period of up to 2 years. Rodents
becauseofa toorestricted activity area(<2.5m²per
are often thought to be the most significant reser-
sow),inadequate bedding material and restraining
voir species, maintaining the infection in the pro-
the sow in the feeding stall. In such circumstances,
duction environment. During the acute phase of the
sows tend to drink less, resulting in reduced urine
disease, mild general symptons such as fever and
output. In addition, they also tend to lie down for
anorexia may be seen;however, this phase often
prolongedperiods on dirty slats,resultingin heavy
passes unrecognized. During the chronic phase of
faecal contamination ofthevulva andperivuilvararea
the infection, abortion rates of sows increase con-
of the integument, so that there is an increased risk
siderably, especially during the second half of ges-
ofenvironmental bacteria, such as Escherichia coli,
tation.Furthermore,stillbirth rates may increase
entering the genital tract (Oravainen et al 2006b).
and newbornpiglets may lackviability.Diagnosis
Theoriginofdischargemaybe:theuterus(metritis/
is based on serological testing (microscopic agglu-
endoetritis),cervix(cervicitis),vagina（vaginitis)or
tination test,MAT) and demonstrating the presence
urinary tract.In the evaluation of the discharge,the
of leptospires in tissues and body fluids. Prevention
normal physiology of the aestrous cycle should be
is based on rodent control and better hygiene, par-
kept in mind. During the luteal phase or pregnancy,
ticularly improved drainage of urine from the foor
themucous membranein the cranialvagina and
surface. In addition, antimicrobials (tetracycline and
caudal cervix should appear pale and dry, whereas
streptomycin) can be used for treatment and vac-
duringihe follicular phase and oestrus it should be
cines are available for prevention.
more reddish in colour and moist.Thecervix should
be more or less closed during the luteal phase and
Brucellosis
pregnancy. During the follicular phase, the cervix
Brucellosis, due to infection with a number of
obvious during oestrus.Physiological postweaning
Brucella spp., has been recognized as a disease
secretions associated with oestrus are usually clear,
associatedwith abortion in the pig since the early
while the viscosity varies depending on the stage of
1900s.Although Brucella may not be highly patho-
the oestrous cycle. Secretions that are white, grey or
genic for the pig, the zoonotic nature of the disease
another colour maybe considered to bepathologi-
presents a risk for humans handling pigs and inter.
cal, especially if the volume is more than 5 ml and
species transmission lo other domestic animal spe-
the discharge has an abnormal (unpleasant) odour.
cies makes it an important infectious disease.The
It isuseful to note thevolume of the discharge.
most important Brnicella species in the pig is B. sis,
In urinary tract infections and metritis, the vol-
however other species such as B.neotomae,B.ovis,
ume is substantial (>100ml),whereas it is usually
B.canis,B.abortus and B.melitensis have also been
less in cases ofvaginitis,ceivicitis or endometritis.
identified. The most significant route of transmis-
In the interpretation of vaginoscopic findings,it is
sion is direct contact between animals,and infection
also useful to consider the association of discharge
is usually acquired through the oronasal or genital
with thephiase ofthe oestrouscycle.lnendametritis,
route.Adult pigs that are infected usually lack gen-
thie discharge usually appears at the time of oestrus,
eral systemic signs,such as feverand loss ofappetie.
whereas, if there is a urinary tract infection, the dis-
Abortion may occur at any stage of pregnancy. As
charge appears at the time of urination; in addition
sowsusuallyeliminatethebacteriawithin30 days
blood and protein may be demonstrated, as well as
after infection, a period of reproductive rest of two
a high pHI value of 8-9.
oestrous cycles duration(42 days) may be enough to
640
Chapter
1271
Infertility and subfertility in the gilt and sow
ensure that the infection has been eliminated, and
In a recent study, oestrus was induced during lac-
subsequent artificial insemination (AI) may be war-
tation in 22% of sows (Kuller et al 2004). Oestrus
ranted. Othier signs of the disease include subfertil-
duringlactationmaybeconsideredtobedisadvan
ity, orchitis, posterior paralysis and lameness.Boars
tageous, since it is often poorly expressed by the
may be unable to eliminate the bacteria and may act
sow and occurs at unpredictable times.Generally,
as carriers within a herd. Antimicrobial therapy is
the effects ofreducing the suckling stimulus on the
often ineffective and an eradication programme may
reproductive performance of first-litter sows are con-
offer the best outcome.
flicting.However, some farmers use these techniques
successfully.
Otherbacterial diseases
Another approach, which allows the first-litter
sow to recover from the effects of the previous lac-
Bacteria causing an acute systemic response result-
tation,is lo inseminate or serveher at the second
ing in pyrexia present a risk topregnant sows and
oestrus after weaning instead of the first one ('skip
gilts.For example,endotoxaemia caused by Gram-
a heat'). Missing the first oestrus can improve preg-
negative bacteria or generalized clinical signs caused
nancy rates by 15% and subsequent litrer sizes by
by Erysipelothrix rhsiopathiae can cause aboriion at
1.3-2.5 piglets (Clowes et al 1994). When using this
any stage of pregnancy. The better the immunity of
approach, efforts to ensure good oestrus detection
theherd towards thesepathogens,thelower therisk
are important to make suire that the second oestrus
of reproductive disorders.
is observed.
Whether or not these lechniques should be used
is a matter of economic considerations. The costs of
Reproductive management of
an exiended weaning-to-service interval should be
breeding sows and gilts to ensure
weighed against thebenefits of improved pregnancy
optimum fertility
rates and litter sizes.
Management of lactation
Gilt management and feeding
Animportant way to ensure optimum fertility,and
Gilt development has been an important aspect of
thus reduce the level of subfertility, isby preventing
optimizing litter size. Generally speaking, mating
excessive weight loss during lactation. Optimizing
gilts at a young age, orat a relatively low body weight,
feeding and nutrition during lactation can achieve
has no negative effect on first-litter size. Hlowever,
this.
second-litter size can be compromised, since young
Onemethod ofrelieving the sow from the'meta-
sows have the impetus to grow, while feed intake
bolic burden'of lactation is by reducing theeffects of
is limited during thefirst lactation.Sows with low
the suckling stimulus.Reducing the number of pig-
weaning weights after thefirst lactation may have a
lets forthewhole,or part,oflactation may reduce
second litter that is smaller in number than the first
milkproduction and mayalsoreduce theinhibition
of the suckling-induced suppression of LH release
ler syndromeThis haspersuaded many veterinar
by endogenous opioids.Small numbers ofpiglets
ians in practice to recommend inseminaling gilts at
duringlactationhavebeen shown to improve the
an older age when they are more mature.Breeding
reproductive performance of sows but the reduc-
for thefirst time at the age of 250-260 days is com-
tion in thenumber ofpiglets hastobe substantial
mon in Europe nowadays, however, and this may be
to have an effect,partly because piglets in saller lit
toogreat an agefrom aneconoinicalviewpoint
ters will consume moremillk per piglet.
Increasing feed intake during pregnancy decreases
Effecis of interrupted suckling (daily temporary
the voluntary feed intake during lactation.Insufficient
removal of the whole litter) or split weaning (perma-
feed intake during pregnancy results in thin sows,
nent removal ofpart of the litterafew daysbefore
which cannot be compensated for by increased vol-
completing weaning) on subsequent reproduction
untary feed intake during lactation in first-litter sows.
have been reviewed by Matte et al (1992). In gen-
Thus, these thin sows may have a prolonged wean-
eral, the effects of such techniques on the weaning-
ing-to-oestrus interval. Therefore, gilts should be
to-oestrus interval are variable and relatively small.
fed according to theirrequirementsformaintenance,
641
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
reproduction and growthbut should notbe overfed.
Table7.3Weaning-testrusntervalovulatinratnd
Inpractical terms,giltsmay haveanenergy intake of
differentpatternoTfeed intakeduring a28-daylactation
day at thebeginning and end ofpregnancy,respec
period(derived fromZaketal 1997a)
tively(Evertsetal 1994).Foroptimumreproductive
Feeding pattern
performance,a targetbackfat thickness at firstpartu
rition of 20mm has been advised (Yang et al 1989).
AA
AR
RA
Amorerecentrecommendationsuggestsatargetback
Weaning-to-oestrus
88.7*
122.3
122.3
fat thicknessof17-20mm ataweightof175-185kg
interval (hours)
(Cloweselal2003)
Ovulation rate
19.9*
15.4
15.4
Embryo survival rate
87.5*
86.5
Feeding the sow
AA,dingdth%df
During lactation,energy requirements of sows are
last7ays;RA，50%fadlbfrhefist21aysadlbfrthelastdys.
estimated to be 12.6MJ ME per 100kg of body
Significant difference.
weightformaintenance,plus6.2MJMEper suckling
piglet formilk production.For a 200kg sow nursing
asmallerlittersizeatfarrowing.Whentheovulation
12 piglets,this means a daily ME intake of 99.5MJ.
rateisloworembryonicmortalityishigh,thenumber
For most commercial sow diets, this represents a
ofviableembryosmaybebelowtheminimumof two
daily feed intake of 7.7kg/day.Because of low par-
per uterine horn.This minimumis required around
ity or high farrowing house temperatures,this daily
day 10-15 of pregnancy for maternal recognition of
requirement is not often met.This means that basi-
pregnancy.n thatcase,sowswill notremainpregnant
cally sows shouldbe fed to appetite duringlactation.
andreturn tooestrusafter21 days
However,in thosebreeds with a known large appe-
Some reports show that feeding lactating sows
tite,it is advisablenot to exceed theserecommenda-
morethantwiceadaywillimproveoverallfeed
tionsbecause oestrus duringlactation may occur.
intake,compared withad libfeeding systems.A 10%
It hasbeenshown that thelastweekof lactation is
higher feed intake has been observed when using
a critical period,asgonadotrophinsbegin to stimu-
self-feedersinsteadof feeding twicea day.Generally,
latefolliculargrowth some timebeforeweaning.As
it is advisabletoremovefeedfrom thetroughonce
farasfolliculargrowtlisconcerned,energybalance
daily to prevent thefeed from becoming mouldy
andfeed intake of the sow during early lactation is
and sour.
secondarytothatinlatelactation.iffeedisrestricted
A gradual increase in feed intake during the first
during thelast weekbefore weaning.theweaning-
weekoflactation,andagoodappetitethereafterwith-
to-oestrusinterval isextended,the ovulationrate is
out periodsoflossofappetitehavebeenfoundtobe
decreased and embryonicsurvivalisreduced(Table
a superiorpatternoffeedintake（Koketsuetal1996a,
27.3 (Zaket al1997a)).Sows that were deprived
1996b).These sows had thebestreproductive perfor-
offood during thelastweekoflactationalsohad a
manceinthefollow-up period.If sows are overfed
lower number of large follicles and theinvitromat-
at theonset of lactation,sometimesthere isa drop
urationcapacityofovafromthesefolliclesproved
in feed intakein lactation.In these sowsreproduc-
tobereduced(Zaket al 1997b).In addition,the
tive performance is impaired.Therefore,it is advis-
quality of thefluidof thesefollicles seemed lower,
able to increase feed intake gradually in thefirst days
oflactation.2kgoffeedatfarrowing and astepwise
licularfluidfrom thesesowsalsoshowed impaired
increase of feed intake of 0.5kg per day until therec-
maturation
ommended feed intake is reached has been recom-
These data suggest that lowfeeding levels during lac-
mended as a feeding strategy during the puerperium.
tation impairfollicular development during and after
lactation,resultingin a lower ovulation rate and an
Useoftheboar
impaired quality of ova and follicular fluid. This may
alsoexplain the increasedembryonicmortality dur-
Useoftheboar in oestrus stimulation and detec
ingthesubsequentpregnancy.Alowerovulationrate
tionofstandingoestrusisessentialin themodern
and increased embryonic mortalitymay both result in
reproductive management of the sow.For proper
642
Chapter
271
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthegiltandsow
expression ofoestrous signs,and therefore ade-
result of this,insemination routines can be modi-
quate detection ofoestrus,direct nose-to-nose con-
fied so that the timing of the first insemination can
tactbetween thesow andtheboarisessential.The
be improved.
best management routine is to allow direct nose-
to-nosecontactwiththeboaratleasttwicea day
Lightprogrammes
whileapplyingthebackpressure'teston the sow.
This contact should be allowed daily afier weaning
The lightintensity in the breeding area should be at
untilnaturalmatinghas occurred orAlhas been
least200lux,withregular cyclesoflight anddark.In
performed andthe standingoestrus hasended in
termsof thefertility ofsows,16hoursofcontinu-
the sow.lntroducingtheboar tothe sowduring
ouslightfollowedby8hoursof darlknesshasbeen
oestrus detection isbetter than continuouslyhous-
found to be as good as a rotational regimen. In the
ingtheboar and sows adjacent to eachother.In
rotational regimen,8 hours of light and 16 hours
giltsmorethan5months ofage,daily nose-to-nose
ofdarknessin thelactationunitwasfollowedby16
contactwiththeboarhasbeenshown tohasten
hoursoflight and8hoursofdarkness inthebreed
the onset ofpuberty,and this dailyroutine should
ingunit.Themost important pointregarding its use
becarriedout until thegiltshavebeen successfully
is that thelightprogramme shouldbeconsistent,
bred.
with a clear differencebetween night and day,so
that the sow can adapt herphysiologicalfunctions
Timing of artificial insemination
accordingly （Tast etal2005)
TimingofAlis an important factorin ensuring good
Hormonaltreatments
fertility.Inseminating tooearly may not besuccess
fulwhileithesowisbredtoolateaftervulation,
Synchronizingoestrusingilts
endometritisresultingindecreased littersizemay
A groupofgiltsmayme synchronized foroestrus using
occur.In thesow,standingoestrus lasts for about 48
physiological and pharmacological methods.The
hours onaverage and ovulation takesplacewhen
physiological approach involves regrouping of gilts
two-thirds of standing oestrus has passed. The dura-
and placing them adjacent to a boar(Pearce1992).
tionofovulation(fromthefirst ovulation to the
If larger-scale and more precise synchronization
last)is about2-4hours.Spermmayremainviable
in the female genital tract for 20-24 hours and ova
is required,pharmacologicalmethods maybeuise-
ful (see Ch.1).A synthetic progestogen(altrenogest,
maybefertilizedforupto2-4hours afterovulation.
Regumateporcine)givendailyinthefeedfor14-18
Therefore,anoptimal timeforAl hasbeenfound to
days and then stopped,will synchronize oestrus and
be 0-24 hours prior to ovulation.In practice, the
allow sows to be bred as group at the same time;
time ofovulation isnot usually monitored,and a
standingoestrusislikelytooccur4-6daysafterthe
second insemination12-24hoursafterthefirst Al
last dayofprogestogenadministration.Furthermore,
iswarranted.Al after ovulation andatthe endof
gonadotrophins given parentally,1-2 days after the
standingoestrusshouldbe avoidedbecauseofthe
last dayofprogestogentreatment,may enhancefol
possibility of inducing endometritis. Subfertility
licular development andovulation.Recent resulis by
maybecausedbyinadequateoestrus detectionrou-
Soedeetal(2007) showed that gilts synchronized
tinesorbecausefirstinseminations aretimed too
with progestogen had improved follicle develop-
latein oestrus.This can be aproblem especially in
ment while under the influence of the progesto-
sows with slighily prolonged weaning-to-oestrus
gen,resulting in higher ovulation rates after their
intervals,sincetheyhave ashort duration ofoestrus
withdrawal
and thusshouldbeinseminatedearly aftertheonset
ofoestrus.On some farms,theaverage durationof
standingoesirusin sows isshorter than normal.In
Afterweaning
order toverifythis,thefarmershouldbe advised
Useofgonadotrophins
to implement a thorough oestrus detection regi-
men,as outlined above,sothat thestartandendof
The use of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
behaviouraloestruscanbedeterinined andamean
plus equinechorionicgonadotrophin(eCG) direcily
valuefor theduration calculatedfor theherd.Asa
643
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
weaning-to-oestrus interval, as shown in many
procaine penicillin G is the antimicrobial agent of
studies,but it may also result in lower pregnancy
choice (Peltoniemi et al 2003, Friendship 2006).
rates or smaller litter sizes.The latter maybe related
For the treatareit and prevention of leptospiro-
to differences in follicle development at the time of
sis, teuacycline and streptonycin may be indicated
hCG + eCG injection, but no data are available to
(Friendship 2006).
substantiate this.
Genetics
Use of progestogens
It appears that various physiological changes may
Epidemiological studies have shown that a short
have occurred in the reproductive capacity of the
weaning-to-oestrus interval is a risk factor for the
contemporary sowoverrecentdecades（1954-
'second litter syndrome. Sows with a long weaning-
2006).While the ovulation Iatehas nearly doubled
to-oestrus interval are more likely to produce a
from 13-16 to 20-26, the embryo survival rate has
larger second litter(Morrow et al 1992). This may
decreased from 75-79% to 60%,and fetal survival
provide an explanation as to why ovularionrates or
has decreased from 69-74% to 50%.The increased
embryo survivalmaybeimprovedby allowingthe
ovulation rate is apparently due to selection over
sow to recover for a longer period affer lactation. For
decades for large litter size, and good fertility is gen-
such a recovery, sows may be given resting period
erally expected if the sow is served or inseminated
for the duration of the entire oestrous cycle ('skip a
correctly;the fertilization rate is generally good
heat').Alternatively, sows may be treated with a pro-
(85-95%). Uterine capacity may be the most sig
gesterone analogue, such as altrenogest, after wean-
nificant factor that has reduced embryonic survival,
ing to artificially extend the weaning-io-cestrus
since experiments simulating uterine crowding
interval (Koutsotheodoros et al 1998).The treat-
have shown how reduced uterine space increased
ment period may vary between3 and 7 days after
embryonic and fetal mortality and reduced fetal
weaning. Llse of a progestogen has been reported
growth (Pere et al 1997).In the future, if litter size
to increase pregnancy rates, ovulation rates and lit-
continues to rise because of increasing ovulation
ter size and to decrease diversity between developing
rates, then there will be negative effects on the birth
cmbryos(Soede & Kemp 1993).The positive effecis
weight ofpiglets and therefore a compromised start
onovulation rate,embryo development and embryo
toneonatal life can be anticipated.Furtherimore,the
mortalitymaybe explainedby restoration of follicu-
duration of standing oestrus and the intensity of
lar development under progestogen treatment after
lactation.
relatewell withintheindividual over time.Gilts that
show good oestrus signs at puberty may show better
Antimicrobial treatments
signs of oestrus after weaning and thus the inten-
sity of oestrus signs may beused in thefuture as a
In uterine infections, the causative bacteria may
selection criterion for replacement females (Sterning
originate from the environment (opportunist patho-
et al 1990)
gens) oralternatively,natural mating or Al can trans-
Another aspect that has changed in the mod-
mit them.In the postpartum dysgalactia syndrome
ern dam-line sows is their response to low feed
(PPDS)and in postmating endometritis,the bacteria
ing levels during lactation.In literature published
causing thiedisease areusually of environmental ori-
during the 1970s and early 1980s,feed restriction
gin; coliforms have been reported as the most com-
resulted in quine dramatic effects on the weaning-
mon contaminant isolated at culture (Klopfenstein
to-oestrus interval (about 10 days) and hiad hardly
etal 2006,Oravainen et al 2006b).In the vaginal
any effect on ovulation rate and embryo survival.
discharge syndrome, between-aninal transmission
In more recent work,the effects of feed restriction
may beimportant,with Actinobacillus suis reported
during lactation on weaning-to-oestrus interval
as being responsible. In the case of coliforms, in
are quite small (less than a day),while effects on
addition to supportive therapy (fluids, non-steroi-
ovulation rate and embryo survival are far more
dal anti-inflammatory drugs and oxytoxin), antimi-
pronounced.Feed restriction seems to decrease
crobials such as ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulfa
ovulationratesbybeiween2and 4andembryo
may be indicated. For Actinobacillus suis infection, survival by between 10% and up to even 20% in
644
Chapter
1271
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthegiltandsow
modern sows.This change in theresponsiveness of
Maes D,Dewulf],Vanderhaeghe Cet al 2006Reprod
sows to feedrestriction duringlactationis aresult
Domest Anim 4l:438
Maldonado1.Segales 1,Martinez-PuigDet al 2005Vet]
ofa strong selection against weaning-to-oestrus
169:454
intervalin thepast20years.Thisimpliesthat,in the
Martinat-Botte12003ReprodNutrDev43:225
modern sow,the effects of low feed intake during
MatteJ,Pomar C,CloseWH 1992 LivestoclProdSci
lactation on the weaning-to-oestrus intervals are less
30195
Maugei R1982 In:FoxcroftJ,ColeR(ed) Controlof pig
nounced.Thefirst-littersowisespeciallyvulnerable,
reproduction.Butterworths,London,p509
because ofher restricted feed intakecapacity.Based
Menard J,BatistaL,D'AllaireSD2007In:PMWS,PRRSand
onanalysesof 135USA farms,Morrow et al (1992)
Swine influenza associated diseases,5th International
Symposium onEmerging and Re-emerging pig diseases,
showed that,inabout40%ofthefarmsstudied,the
Krakow,Poland24-27June 2007,vol1,p170
second-littersizeof the sowswaslessthan,orequal
MorrowWEM,LemanAD,WilliamsonNBetal1992Prev
to,thefirst litter produced.Since then,thisphenom-
VetMed12:15
enon hasbeenknownas the'second littersyndrome'
Oravainen J,Hakala M,Rautiainen Eetal 2006a Reprod
(Morrow et al1992).
Domest Anim 41:91
OravainenI,HeinonenM,Seppa-Lassila Letal2006b
ReprodDomestAnim 41:549
References
Oravainen],HeinonenM,Tast Aetal200sVulvar discharge
syndromeinlooselyhousedFinnishpigs:prevalence and
evaluation ofvaginoscopy,bacteriologyandcytology.
Almond GW.Flowers WLBatista L,D'AllaireS2006In:
Reprod Domest Anim43:42
SirawB,Zimmermann J),D'Allaire S,TaylorD)(ed)
Osweiler GD 2006In:StrawB,Zimmermann 1l.D'Allaire
Diseases of swine,thedn.Blackwell Publishing,Oxford,
S,Taylor DI (ed) Diseases of swine, 9th edn.Blackvcll
p113-147
Publishing.Oxford,p915-929
Castagna CD,Peixoto CH,BortolozzoFPetal 2004Anim
PearceGP1992Vet Rec130:318
Reprod Sti 81:115
PeltoniemiOA,VirolainenJV2006Reprod FerilSuppl
ChaeC2005Ve1]169:326
62:205
Clowes EI,Ahierne FX,Foxcroft CR 19941AnimSci72:283
Peltoniemi OAT,PyralaS,RantalaMetal2003
Clowes El,AherneFX,SchaeferAl.eial 2003Anim Sci
Recommendationsfor use ofantimicrobial agents in the
81:1517
treatmeni of themost significant infectious diseases in ani-
Everts H,BlockMC,Kemp B etal 1994 Requirements for
mals.Ministry ofAgriculiure and Forestry,Helsinki
pregnant pigs. CVB Documentation Report 9. CVB Leystad,
PereMC,Dourmad 1Y,EtienneM19971Anim Sci75:1337
Netherlands.p51-51
Segales J,Larsen L,WallgrenPetal2007In:PMWS,PRRS
Friendship RM 2006 In:Giguere S,Prescott JEBaggot JD et
and Swine influenza associated diseases,5thInternational
al (ed)Antimicrobial therapy in veterinary medicine,4th
Symposium onEmerging and Re-emerging pig diseases,
edn.Blaclwell Publishing.Oxford,p535-543
Krakow,Poland24-27June2007,vol 1,p35-37
Kauffold I. Althouse GC 2007 Theriogenology 67:901
Soede NM,Kemp B1993 Theriogenology 39:1043
Kauffold J,RautenbergT,Gutjahr Set al 2004a
SoedeNM,Bouwman EG,van LangendijkPet al2007
Theriogenology 6l:1407
Reprod DonestAnim42:329
KauffoldJ,RautenbergT,RichterAet al 2004b
SterningM,Rydhmer L,EliassonLetal 1990ActaVetScand
'Theriogenology 6l:1635
31:227
Klopfenstein C,Farmer C,Martineau GP2006 In:Straw B
TastA,alliO,AlhstrmSetal20o1Seasonalalterationsin
Zimmernann Jl.D'Allaire S,Taylor DI （ed) Diseases of
circadianmelatoninrhythmsoftheEuropeanwildboar
swine,9thedn.Blackwell Publishing,Oxford.p57-85
and domesticgilt.2001.IPineal Res30:43
Koketsu Y,Dial GD,Pettigrew]E,KingVL1996a」 Anim Sci
TastA,Halli O,Virolainen IV ctal2005VetRec156:702
74:2875
YangH,EasthamPR,PhillipsPWhittemore CF 1989Anim
KoketsuY,Dial GD,Pettigrew JEetal 199Gb|Anim Sci
Prod48:181
74:1202
Zak LCosgroveIRAherneFX,Foxcrofi GR1997aAnim
Koutsotheodoros F;Hughes PE,Parr RA etal 1998Anim
Sci 75208
Reprod Sci 52:71
Zak L],XuX,Hardin RT,Foxcrof GR1997bReprod Feril
Kuller WI,SoedeNM,van Beers-Schreurs HM etal 2004
110:99
Anim Sci82:405
ZwierzchowskiW,PrzybylowiczM,Obremski Ketal2005
LagerKM,Halbur PG1996|Vet Diagn Invest 8:275
Pol /Vei Sci8:209
645
28
Chapter
GaryEngland
Infertility and subfertility in the bitch and queen
The dog and cat are among the most common
It is with increasing frequency that both individ
specieskeptaspetsbyhumans.There havebeen con-
ual breeders and the managers of breeding colonies
siderable advances in our knowledge of canine and
approach theveterinarianfor help withbreeding
felinereproduction,andoverthelastfewyearsthere
problems.Thismaybebecauseofthevalueofan
has been increased awarenessofinfertilityin these
individualanimalthatfailstoreproduceorbecause
species. In the dog in particular, this has been the
ofa concernforthe declinein theproductivity of a
result of breeding animals for working and show
breedingcolony.In the former case,continuation of
purposes,following the substantial developments
abreedinglineis theultimateaim,while forthelat-
in the use of dogs as assistance animals for disabled
ter,greater productivity allows smaller numbers of
peopleandstudyof domesticcarnivoresasmodelsfor
breedinganimalstobemaintained.Thebreedingof
endangeredspecies(Durrantetal2006).Nevertheless,
largenumbersof dogsandcatsiscommonforphar-
much attentionhasbeenpaidtotheconurolofrepro-
maceutical and biological laboratories and alsofor
duction,principally as a result ofthe considerable
theproduction ofworkingandassistanceanimals
problemworldwideofpetoverpopulation(Olson&
such asguide dogsforvisuallyimpairedpeople.For
Moulton1993).However,there is no doubt thatrepro-
the latter,colony managementrequires not only a
ductivefailureiscommon,andthismaybeattributed
high output but consistent production throughout
to the high degree of inbreeding(Wildt et al 1983).
theyear.
Innormal circumstances the fertilization/implan-
Thenormalexpectationof fertilityin thebitchis
tationrateisbetween 80%and 90%(Reynaud
a whelpingratein theregion of70-80%(Hancock
etal2006).The extentofinfertility is,however,
&Rowlands 1949,Strasser & Schumacher 1968
unknown.In thebitch,reduced fertility may not
Andersen 1970,England 1992),while the queen
be fully appreciated because matings are relatively
may rear between one and three liters per year
infrequent when cornpared with other domestic
(Stabenfeldt & Shille 1977,Cline et al 1981,Con-
species and because the majority of breeding ani-
cannon 199l).There are considerable variations
mals arehoused singly orin small groups.The situ-
from this,depending upon age and breed.For the
ationisfurthercomplicatedbecause‘fertility'often
bitch,the peak inreproductive efficiency occurs at
represents an owner'spersonalexpectation ofthe
approximately 3years ofage,with a decrease in the
reproductiveperformanceofthebitch orqueen;this
pregnancy ratefrom age8（Fig.28.1)anda signifi-
expeciationmaydifferbetweenacommercialbreed-
cant decline inthenumberofpupsborninbitches
ingestablishimentandtheownerofanindividual
aged 7years and above(Blyue & England 1993).
pet.In addition, there arewide reed variations,ar-
Blythe&England(1993) also demonstrated a varia-
ticularlyinlitter size,whichmakeitdifficult tocom-
tion in prolificacy between different breeds of dog.
pare animals of different breeds.
Similarly in the cat,an age-relatedreduction inthe
646
Chapter
281
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthebitchandqueen
themale shouldalways beinvestigated;collection
andevaluationofasemensampleprovideabasic
40.0-
assessment of themale's fertility(see Ch.30).In
30.0-
additionattention should alsobegiven tothemat
ing routine since owners who are unfamiliar with
%20.0-
normal mating behaviour may inadvertently be hin-
dering conception.Examples of this are the belief
10.0-
that ovulation always occurs asetnumber ofdays
after the onset of pro-oestrus in thebitch and that
0.0-
0-22-33-44-55-E6-77-83-99+
only a single mating is necessary to induce ovula-
tion in the queen.
Fig.28.1 The percentage of bitches not pregnant following
mating to a fertile stud dog according tomaternal age.
The dog
numberoflittersperyear and averagelitter sizehas
Structuralabnormalitiesofthe
alsobeen noted （Robinson & Cox 1970,Schmidt
bitch'sreproductive tract
1986),which is most marked after 6years of age
(Lawler&Bebiak1986).Interestinglyarecentstudy
Congenital abnormalities
of2400pregnancies demonstratedthat in older
bitches, although fewer pups were born within
Agenesisofanovaryisrare anddoesnotcauseinfer-
each litter, there was also a lower incidence of still-
tility unless both ovaries are affected.In some cases
birth,suchthatoverall therateofdeclineinweaned
theremay alsobe agenesisofthe ipsilateraluter-
pups was slower than the decline in the number of
ine tube and/or uterine horn,although the latter
pups born (Phillips L& England GCW, unpublished
may occur with anormal ovary.Ovarian dysplasia
observations).It should be remembered,however,
has also been reported in a bitch with an abnormal
that there aremarkedbreedvariations fornormal
number of chromosomes (Johnston et al 19s5),
litter sizeinboth thedog andcat(Lyngset&Lyngset
and evaluation of the karyotype may be useful when
1970,Robinson&Cox1970,Robinson 1973);these
investigating the cause in these cases.
shouldbeconsideredwhen ananinalispresented
Bitches withuterinetubeand/or uterinehorn
becauseofallegedsubfertility,
agenesis and normal ovaries usually exhibit typical
The investigation of infertility in the bitch is com-
oestrous behaviour but either fail tobecome preg-
plicatedbythefactthatfailuretoconceivedoesnot
nant(bilaterallesion)orhavesmallnumbersofoff-
resultin animmediatereturn to oestrusasoccurs in
spring (unilateral lesion). Diagnosis usually relies
polyoestrous species.However, the early diagnosis
upon direct inspection of the reproductive tract via
of pregnancy is now possible using real-time ultra-
laparotomy or laparoscopy;the use of radiogra-
sonography(Yeager&Concannon 1990,England&
phyfollowingtheinjectionofradiopaquecontrast
Yeager1993),thedetectionofacutephaseproteins
media into theuterus(Lagerstedt 1993)is not as
inserum(Eckersalletal1993)andthemeasurement
useful in thebitch as forother species,particularly
ofplasma concentrations of relaxin (Concannon
for demonstratinglesions of theuterine tube,which
et al 1996).These methods allow improved investi-
in this speciesisvery small and rarelyfills with con-
gations intowhy an individual animal fails topro-
trastmedium.
ducelive offspring.Furthermore,recent studies have
Other congenital anomalies of the tubular geni-
demonstrated thevalue ofreal-timeultrasound in
tal tract include segmental aplasia of the mullerian
documenting early pregnancy failure(England&
ductsystem.Theaetiology ofthisconditionremains
Ruisso2006a)
uncertain;however,the inadvertent administra
Aswith other species,infertility in thebitch and
tion of exogenous hormones duringpregnancy may
queenmaybecategorizedaccordingtowhether
resultin thepartialorcompleteabsenceofaconnec-
the cause is:(1) structural (including congenital,
tionbetween themullerian ducts and the urogenital
acquired and neoplastic diseases),(2) functional
sinus(Christiansen 1984).Complete aplasia ofthe
(including endocrinological abnormalities),(3)
vagina results in infertility (Wadsworth et al 1978,
infectious or(4)managemental.The influence of
Hawe&Loeb1984)andallowstheaccumulation
647
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
ofuterine fluid, producing similar signs to those
ofpyometra.In thesecases the only treatiment is
ovariohysterectomy.
Anatomicalabnormalitiesofthecaudal reproduc-
tive tract are common in bitches.These may pro-
duceclinical signs associatedwithvulvarpruritus or
chronicvaginitis(Hlolt&Sayle1981,Soderberg1986);
however,most commonly they are firstrecognized
during a prebreeding examination or when there is
pain associated with intromission.Most abnormali-
tiesarefound atthejunctionbetweenthevestibule
and the vagina.The most common presentation is a
dorsoventralfibrousband thatrequires either sim-
pletransactionifsmallorepisiotomyandextensive
dissection if large.Circumferentialstrictures ofthe
vaginamay alsooccur at thisposition,although they
Fig.28.2A4-month-oldintersexGermanShepherdwith
are less common, and unless extensive many can be
clitoral hyperplasia and thepresenceof anos clitoris.
treated by dilation under general anaesthesia.
Such congenital abnormalities maybe considered
gonadal or phenotypic sex;these conditions have
tohave five aetiologies.Thefirst is theresult of hypo-
beenreviewedbyMeyers-Wallen(1993).
plasia ofthegenital canal,which causes vestibulo
Mammals develop female genitalia unless there
vaginal hypoplasia andavaginalstricture ofsome
is the presence of a Y chromosome.The sry gene
length.The second aetiology is the result of poor or
(the sex-determining region on the Y chromosome)
inadequatefusionofthemillerianductstotheuro-
encodes the testis-determiningfactor.Itis thought
genital sinus, causing annular fibrous strictures at
that Sry activates genes in the testis pathway and/
thissite.The thirdrelates to tissuevestiges remain-
ing at the vestibulo-vaginal junction resulting in
orsuppressesgenesin the ovarianpathway(Meyers-
Wallen2006).
hymenal remnants or a complete hymen.Fourthly.
Abnormalitiesofchromosomalnumber include
incompletefusionofthetwomullerianductsmay
phenotypic females (XO or Xxx), which have under-
Tesult in a double vagina or a vertical fibrous divi-
developed genitalia,and chimeras and mosaics
sion within the vagina,and the final aetiology is
that arise from two cell populations with different
imperfect joining of the genital folds and genital
chromosome constituents.In chimeras and mosa-
swellings resulting in vestibulo-vulvar hypoplasia.
ics,there may beboth ovarian and testicular tissue
Congenital abnormalities of the external genita-
(truehermaphrodite);thephenotypeofthe animal
lia arerare.Vulvar hypoplasia associatedwith peri-
dependsupon the amount offunctional testicular
vulvar dermatitishasbeen described(Christiansen
tissue(Meyers-Wallen&Patterson 1989).
1984);the relationship between this condition
Animalswithabnormalitiesofgonadal sexare
and earlyneuteringhasnotbeenfully established.
Masculinized female pups that have an abnormally
thoseinwhichchromosomalandgonadalsexaredis-
similar. Such individuals are called sex-reversed.XX
shapedvulva may be produced following androgen
sex reversal is inherited as an autosomal recessive
or progestogen administration during pregnancy
trait in the American Cocker Spaniel, and appears
(seeabnormalities ofphenotypic sex,below).
tobe familial in other breeds (Meyers-Wallen &
Patterson 1988).Affectedanimals may conform to
Intersex
one of three categories:(1) true hermaphrodites
Intersex animals have ambiguous genitalia.In the
with one ovotestis,bilateraluterine tubes and nor-
bitch this is usually recognized because of an abnor-
mal external female genitalia;(2) true hermaph-
mal phenotypic sex appearance; externally the ani-
rodites with ovotestes and/or epididymides and
mal appears fenale but when it reaches puberty
masculinized external male genitalia;and (3)XX
theclitorisenlargesandmale-likebehaviourmay
males(Meyers-Wallen&Patterson 1989).Animals
develop(Fig.28.2).Intersex animalsmay be clas-
withabnormalitiesofphenotypicsex arethosein
sified asthosewith abnormalities ofchromosomal,
whichchromosomalandgonadalsexarethesame;
648
Chapter
28
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthebitchandqueen
however,theinternalorexternalgenitalia areambig-
uous.Animalsmaybe either female or male pseudo-
hermaphrodites.Female pseudohermaphrodites
generally occur as the tesult of androgen or proges-
togen administration during pregnancy;they have
masculinization of the externalorinternalgenitalia
but with two ovaries.The clinical appearance may
varyfrom simpleclitoralenlargementtoalmostmale-
like external genitalia.Progestogens administered dur-
ing pregnancy have been most frequently implicated,
since these agents are used by some veterinarians to
prevent allged luteal deficiency. Male pseudoherma-
phroditeshave testes,but the internal or extermal gen-
italia arefeminized.Thismaybe theresultoffailureof
Fig.28.3Bitch with hyperplasia of thevagina during oestrus.
mullerian ductregression or thefailure of androgen-
Theentirecircumference of thevaginal mucosa ishyperplastic
dependentmasculinization.In many cases,the exact
andprotrudesfrom the vulva.Top isthe dorsal commissure.
aetiologyremains unknown.However,removalof the
reprodutiveactnludngnadsusually
sary.Following gonadectomy an enlarged clitoris may
breedingasubmucosalresectionmaybeperformed
reduceinsize,althoughclitoridectomymaybeneces
during early oestrus. Breeding from these bitches
sary subsequently (see Ch.4).
shouldhowever,bequestionedsinceafamilial n
dency has been reported (lones & Joshua 1982).
Acquired abnormalities
True vaginal prolapse (see Ch. 5) is very rare but
has been reported during 0estrus (Schutte 1967a).
Acquired atrophy of the genitalia has been seen with
and chronicprolapserequiringhysteropexy hasbeen
neoplasia ofthehypothalamus orpituitary(Arthur
observed during pregnancy (Memon et al 1993).
etal 1989):this is termedFrohlich's syndrome
Other acquired abnormalities of thereproductive
Neoplasia
tract include endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra
(which are discussed later)and vaginal hyperpla-
Ovarian tumours are uncommon in lhe bitch,
sia （Fig.28.3）.The latter condition,which is often
accountingfor approximately1%ofallneoplasms
wrongly calledvaginalprolapse,may causenfertil-
(Cotchin 1961,Hayes & Harvey 1979）.There is an
ity by preventingmating.The aetiology is not clear;
increasedincidenceofovarianneoplasiainolder
however,insomebitchesthevaginalmucosacranial
dogs (Jergins & Shaw 1987): the mean age of occur-
to the urethral orifice becomes hyperplastic during
renceis8years(Withrow&Susaneck1986).Ovarian
pro-oestrus andoestrus and may protrude from the
tumours may be germ cell,epithelial or sex cord
vulva and prevent mating. In some cases only the
stromal in origin.Themostimportantaregranulosa
ventral mucosa protrudes as a simple tongue-shaped
pieceoftissue,whilein other cases itmayinvolve
duce clinical signs related to a mass effect or ascites.
the entire circumference of the vagina,result-
Thesetumoursdonotfrequentlymetastasizeandare
ing in the protrusion of a cylindrical-shaped mass
usually endocrinologicallyinactive;however,they
through the vulvar lips.The hyperplasia appears
may secrete (1) progesterone and produce absence
to be an accentuated response to normal circulat-
of cyclicity, cystic endometrial hyperplasia and pyo-
ing oestrogen concentrations,which regresses at the
metra,or(2) oestrogen and produce signs of persis-
beginning of metoestrus (dioestrus). The hyperpla-
tent oestrus or possibly bone marrow suppression;
sia returns at the subsequent oestrus and in many
rarely, alopecia is a presenting clinical sign.
cases appears to worsen at each subsequent cycle.
A less common tumour is the papillary cystadeno-
Conservative therapy using emollient creams and
carcinoma,whichmayoccurbilaterally(Neilsen1963)
topical antimicrobial agents is often sufficient,and
These tumourscommonlymetastasizetotheperito-
recurrencemaybepreventedbyperforiminganova-
neal lymphatics,producing obstruction and ascites.
riectomy,orovariohysterectomy duringthesubse-
This neoplasm has been found to be a consequence
quent anoestrus.However,ifthebitch isrequiredfor
ofprolongedadministrationofdiethylstilbestrol.
649
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Thediagnosisofovariantumoursisusuallymade
on thebasis ofclinical signs,abdominalpalpation,
radiography and ultrasonography(Goodwinetal
1990).Ovariectomyor ovariohysterectomymaybe
curativeif performed early.
Uterine tumours are uncommon(Brodey& Roszel
1967).The most frequently reported such lesions
have been fibroleiomyomata. These are discrete
andnon-malignant but haemorrhagemay occur,
resulting in a sanguineous vulvar discharge.Uterine
tumoursmaybediagniosed usingreal-timeB-mode
ultrasound (Fig.28.4).
Tumours ofthecervixarerare,butbenigntumours
Fig.28.5Surgicalremoval ofa large vaginal tumour(T)via an
ofthevaginaandvestibulearemorecommonand
episiotomy.
includefibromata,fibroleiomataandlipomata
(Withrow&Susaneck1986)（Fig.28.5).Theseoften
originaiefrom theventralvaginal floorcranial tothe
urethral orifice andmay cause a local vaginitis and
haemorrhage.Usuallythey canberemoved via an
episiotomy; concurrent ovariectomy or ovariohys-
terectomy reduces therisk of recurrence.
The transmissible venereal tumour (TVT)（Fig.
28.6) affects the vagina and external genitalia of the
bitch and the penis of the dog.Transmission of the
tumour occurs at coitus when infected cells‘seed'
the genital mucosa of the recipient (Cohen 1974).
Autotransmission to the nasal and oralmucosa may
occurbylickingofthetumour.Thelesions,which
areoftenfriableandmultilobulatedandmaybe
Fig.28.6Transmissiblevenereal tumourwithin thevestibule
single ormultiple,generallyreach their maximum
of a bitch.
size after 5-7 weeks and then regress spontane-
ouslywithin6months(Moulton1961).Theuseof
surgical debulking and various chemotherapeutic
regimes has been described,including cyclophosph
amideand vincristine,and radiation therapy(Calvert
etal 1982,Thrall 19s2).Such tumours are more
common in tropical countries and in the UK are gen-
erallyonly seeninimportedanimals(Booth1994).
Functionabnormalitiesofthe
bitch's reproductive tract
Delayed puberty and prolonged
anoestrus
Theageofpubertyinthebitchrangesbetween5and
24 months (Andersen & Wooten 1959, Rogers et al
1970,Concannon 1991);although this isinfluenced
Fig.28.4Ultrasound image of the uterusof a bitch demonstrat-
by breed,body weight and environmental con-
ing a hypoechoicuterine tumour(T).The uterus(U)lies dorsal to
ditions (Christiansen 1984,Feldman &Nelson
thebladder(B).
1987a,Concannon 1991).Bitches that do not reach
650
Chapter
28
Infertility and subfertility in the bitch and queen
pubertyby2yearsofagearethereforeconsideredto
reproductivesignstobepresentindogswithhypo
havedelayedpuberty.Sinceitisnotuncommonfor
thyroidism and,interestingly,the condition was
there tobefew signs associatedwith thefirst oestrus,
shownnottoberelatedtopoorreproductiveper-
bitchesthatarethoughttohavedelayedpuberty
formanceingreyhouids(Bealeet al1992)
may simplyhave had an unobserved oestrus.Failure
to identify oestrus should also be considered in
Inductionofoestrus
bitchesthathaveprolongedinteroestrousintervals.
A high peripheralplasmaprogesteroneconcentra-
It may be possible to induce cyclicity in bitches pro-
tion(>2.0ng/ml (6.5nmol/1)) demonstrates that
vided that there is no underlying disease.A variety
ovulation has occurredwithin thelast 60 days (i.e.
of agents maybe used for thispurpose with a vari-
the oestrus has been missed).
ety of success rates (England 1994).Unlike other
The normal interoestrous interval is between 26
domestic species,itis not possible to induce oestrus
and36weeks(Christie&Bell1971),and this is vari-
in thebitch by shortening theluteal phaseusing
ableboth withinand beiweenbreeds(Linde-Forsberg
prostaglandinssince theluteal phaseis followed by
&Wallen 1992) and cannot beused to predict the
avariable,but prolonged,period ofanoestrus.Itis
next oestrus in an individual bitch (Bouchard et al
noteworthy that induction of oestrus for the treat-
1991).Therefore,itis difficult to define prolonged
mentofdelayedpubertymaybeconsiderablyless
anoestrus,except tha it is an interoestrous interval
successful thantheinductionofoestruswhere here
greater than that which was anticipatedfor a partic-
isprolongedanoestrus.
ularindividual.TheBasenji dogfrequentlyexhibits
Prolactinistheprincipal luteotrophichormone
its pubertal oestrus at approximately 300 days of age
in the bitch.Administration of prolactin inhibi
and thereafter cycles annually(Concannon 1993).
tors(cabergoline,bromocriptine,metergoline)dur
To investigateboth delayedpuberty and prolonged
ing the luteal phaserapidlyremoves the support for
anoestrusitisnecessary to ensure thatanoestrus has
the corpora lutea andresultsin a dramaticdecline
notbeenmissed andthattheanimal'sbodyweight
in plasma progesterone concentration (Onclin &
and nutritional plane are normal. Debilitating dis-
easemay result in a failure to cycle,asmay the use
results in the bitch entering anoestrus.Prolactin also
ofcertain drugs including progestogens,androgens
appears toplay arolein theregulation ofinteroes-
and anabolicsteroids.
trous intervalspossibly by affecting gonadotrophin
Somebitcheswithdelayedpubertyhaveanunder-
secretionand/orovarianresponsivenesstogonad
lying chromosomal abnormality.Of these many are
otrophins (Concannon 1993);ifprolactin inhibi-
phenotypically abnormal (having a small,cranially
lors are administered continually during anoestrus,
positionedvulva anddeveloping clitoral enlargerment
thereisarapidreturn tooestrus(Okkensetal1985,
at puberty). A smaller proportion are phenotypically
van Haaften et al1989,Verstegenetal1999).There
normalbuttheabnormalcomplementofsexchro-
is alsoarapidreturn tooestruswhen anoestrus is
mosomesresultsinovarianhypoplasiaorovarian
prolonged（Arbeiter eial 1988,Jochleetal 1989,
dysgenesis.Establishingakaryotypeusually demon-
HandajaKusuma&Tainturier1993).Themostuse-
strateschromosomalabnormalities such as77XO,
ful method of oestrus induction therefore appears to
79XXX,79XXYand78XX/78XY(Johnston1989).
bethe administration ofprolactininhibitors.When
Progesterone-producingovarian cysts thatprevent
prolactin inhibitors are administereddaily contin
areturn to oestrus havebeen described in the bitch
ually during prolonged anoestrus, there is a rapid
(Burke 1986),although these are very rare.
return to oestrus (usually within 30 days）. If treat-
There hasbeen considerable interest in therole
ment is siopped once pro-oestrus has begun there
ofhypothyroidism asacauseofacyclicityin the
isusually a highpregnancy rate,similar to natural
bitch (Manning 1979,lohnston 1989).The mecha-
cycles.
nism of this is not fully understood,although the
Forbitches with delayed pubertyitmaybenecessary
administrationofthyrotrophin-releasinghormone
toattempt oesirusinductionusinggonadotrophins,
(TRH)causes the release of prolactin (Reimers
shouldadministration ofprolactininhibitorsfail.
etal 1978);therefore,factors that affectTRH are
Manyprotocolshaveusedexogenousgonadotrophins
likelytoaffectboththyroidfunctionandprolac-
fortheinductionofoestrus,andcommonlylowdoses
tin secretion(Concannon 19s6).Itis rare foronly
ofequinechorionicgonadotrophin(2oIu/kgfor
651
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
5days)witha singleadministration ofhuman cho-
serosanguineous vulvardischarge ofa short duration.
rionic gonadourophin（5ooil on the fifth day) are
However, ovulation does not occur; follicles presum-
recommended.Exogenous gonadotrophins should
ably regress andthe signs of pro-oestrus disappear.
beusedwith caresinceArnoldetal (1ysy) showed
A normaloestrus followsseveralweekslater.The
thathighdoses andlongtreatment timescould
recognitionofthesplitoestrus syndromeisimpor-
induce hyperoestrogenism,preventimplantation
tanttoensurethatmatingisachievedatthecorrect
and induce bone marrow suppression and death.
time inrelation to ovulation.In some cases induc
Exogenous pulsatile administration of gonado-
tionofovulationmaybeattemptedusinghuman
trophin-releasing hormone (GnR-l)may be used
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG),although it can be
inan attempt tomimicnatural profiles and induce
difficult tobecertainwhen to administer thisprepa-
physiologicalconcentrations of follicle-stimu-
ration.This is most successful when administered at
lating hormone（FSH)and luteinizinghormone
thepeak ofvaginalepithelialcell cornification.
(LH）.The pulsatile administration of GnRH to
anoestrousbitchesevery90minutesfor 6-12days
Unpredictableovulation time
induced a ferile oestrus with pregnancy in three of
eight bitches (Vanderlip et al 1987).Pulsatile infu-
Most bitches ovulate between10and14 daysafter
sions are necessary because the constant infusion
the onset of pro-oestrus(see Ch.1).Hlowever,ovu-
ofGnRHproducesinitial stimulationfollowed by
lation innormal bitches may occur as early as day 5,
downregulation of GnRHreceptors.However, such
or as late as day 30,after the first signs of pro-
oestrus (Fig.28.7). In addition to this large varia-
techniques arenotpractical in theclinicalsituation.
Concannon(1989) achieved some successininduc-
tion,bitches arenotnecessarily consistent between
ingoestrususinga GnRHsuperagonist administered
cycles(Englandetal 19s9).Infertility may therefore
via a subcutaneous osmotic pump.Concannon et al
result because of attempted matings at inappropri-
ate times in relation to ovulation (see'Management
inagroup ofbitches by initiallypreventingoestrus
factors affectingfertility',below).
using progesterone and subsequently inducing
oestrususing a GnRl agonist.Themajority ofuse
of GnRH is for the prevention of reproductive cyclic-
Prolongedpro-oestrus/oestrus
ity (Gobello 2006).
Thenormalinterval betweentheonsetofpro-oestrus
andovulationvariesfrom5to30days（England
et al 1989,unpublished observations).Hlowever,
Silentoestrus
mostbitchesovulatebyday14aftertheonsetof
Normal cyclical endocrine changes may occur in
pro-oestrusand thosethatovulatelater thanthis are
somebitcheswithoutobviousexternalsignsofpro-
often consideredto haveprolongedoestrus.These
oestrus or oestrus. This may occur in up to 25% of
animalsdonotrequire treatmentbutrequirecareful
greyhound bitches at the first cycle after puberty
assessment ofthe optimal mating time.Caseswhere
(Gannon 1976).It is possible ihat oestrus events
pro-oestrusoroestruspersistslonger than 30 days
arenotobservedbytheowner,becausethereisonly
(Wright1990)mayrequire treatment.Theinduction
slight vulvar swelling and minimal serosanguineous
ofovulationmaybeattemptedbythieadministra-
discharge, or because the bitch is particularly fas-
tionofhCG(20Iu/kg).Itcanbe difficult topredict
tidious. On some occasions overt pseudopregnancy
the correct time to administer hCG,since its early
Occurs in the absence of a preceding observed oestrus.
usemayresult in either failure ofresponse orpos-
However,ovulation can be confirmed by the meas-
sibly luteinization without ovulation.Commonly,
hCGis administered once more than 80%ofexfoli-
tration.If suspected,oestrus can be defected by the
ated vaginal epithelial cells are anuclear.
weekly examination of exfoliative vaginal cytology.
Oestrogen-secretingfollicularcystsareveryrarein
thebitch but these may produce persistent oestrus.
Similar clinical signs may be seen with oestrogen-
Splitoestrus (falseoestrus)
secretingovariantumours,wherehighconcentrations
Occasionally, andmostcommonlyattheir first
oestrus,bitches developvulvar swelling and a
sion,resulting in anaemia and thrombocytopenia.
652
Chapter
281
Infertilityandsubfertilityinthebitchandqueen
09
50
pregnancies
40
30
10
Days in relation to onset of pro-oestrus
Fig.28.7Therelationshipbetween thecalculateddayofovulation and thenumberof daysfrom theonsetofpro-oestrusin278
bitches(England,unpublished observations).
In suchcases,treatment isby unilateral ovariectomy,
may be detected byultrasound and misinterpreted
although consideration should begiven to thefact
by theinexperienced clinician,parabursal cysts have
thatthebitchmaybenormalorhaveasplitoestrus
no clinical significance.
syndrome.The administration oflithium carbonate
True oestrogen-secreting follicular cysts produce
may be useful in cases ofoestrogen-induced bone
persistent oestruswithvulvar discharge,flank alope-
marrow suppression(Hall 1992).
cia and hyperkeratosis (Fayrer--losken et al 1992).
Ultrasonographically,large fluid-filled folliclesmay
Ovulationfailure
be identified butmust be carefully differentiated
Lntilrecently,thediagnosisofovulationfailurewas
mostcommonlymade onthebasisofa shortened
interoestrousinterval(Johnston1988).However,
following the introduction of routine monitoring
ofplasma progesterone concentrations,bitches that
fail to ovulate have been detected (Wright 1990,
Arbeiter 1993).Theincidence ofovulation failure
has not been established; however, attempts at treat-
mentmaybemadebytheadministrationofhCG
(Johnston 1991).In some instances theremay be a
delayin ovulation,i.e.a slowbutprolonged increase
in plasma progesterone prior to ovulation.These
cases are also often treated with hCG but efficacy
remains to be proven.
Ovarian cysts
Cystic follicles (Fig.28.8) and corpora lutea are very
rarein thebitch;mostovariancysticstructuresare
follicular cysts.
ofparabursalorigin(Fig.28.9)and,although they
653
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Andersen (1970) found tiat follicular and luteal
cysts weremostgommon in older bitches.Similar
findings have-been noted in the ovaries of aged
bitches,whiich have a inucohaemorrhagic vul-
var discharge,a condition referred to as metrorra-
gie (Lesbouyries & Lagneau 1950). These bitches
are often attractive tomale dogs but will not allow
coitus; a study of exfoliative vaginal cells demon-
strates neutrophils, erythrocytes and parabasal epi-
thelial cells. This condition is often persistent and
unresponsive to medical therapy such that ovario-
hysterectomy is usually the treatment of choice.
Premature ovarian failure
Premature ovarian failure has been suggested as a
rare but permanent cause of anoestrus in previously
normal bitches（Feldman &Nelson 1987b).For an
accurate diagnosis of these cases, investigation of
the karyotype and measurement of plasma concen-
trations of gonadotrophins and thyroid hormone
should be undertaken (Johnston 1989). In valuable
breeding animals, oestrus induction regimens may
be contemplated; however, there is no information
on the aetiology of the condition, nor the efficacy of
these treatments.
Habitual abortion
Fig. 28.9 The reproductive tract of a bitch demonstrating
There is little, other than anecdotal, evidence to sug-
multiple parabursal cysis adjacent to the ovary and prox mal
gest that habitual aborion is a clinical problem in
uterine horn.
thie najority of breeds of dog, with the exception
of the German Shepherd, where inadequate luteal
function has been documented (Gunzel-Apel et al
from normal follicles and early corpora lutea, both
2006). Cases of abortion and resorption have been
of which have central fluid-filled cavities. Some fol-
documented using real-time B-mode ultrasound
licular cysts respond to alternate day administration
(England 1992,Muller&Arbeiter 1993,England &
ofhCGon three occasions.In others such treatment
Russo 2006a),although England (1992) suggested
does noi succeed (Arthur et al 1989) but the cysts
may respond to progestogen administration using
bitches that had previously had reproductive dis-
drugs such as megestrol acetate. With the latter there
ease. Most cases of abortion are probably related to
is an increased risk of pyometra, since the progesto-
an abnormal uterine environnent (cystic endome-
gen is administered following a prolonged period of
trial hyperplasia), fetal defects and/or the result of
oestrogen priming. Ovariectomy may be necessary
infectious agents.
in cases that do not respond to exogenous hormone
The role of poor luteal function as a cause is
therapy (Vaden 1978, Burke 1986).
less certain; although implicated by some workers
Luteal cysts have been identified in postmor-
[Feldman&Nelson 1987a,Purswell 1991), the mini-
tem studies (Dow 1960);however,their signifi-
mum concentration of progesterone required 1o sup-
cance is unknown. Burke (1986) suggested that
port the pregnancy is only 2ng/ml (Concannon &
Hansel 1977). There is no doubt that the corpora
longed anoestrus （sic) and cystic endometrial
lutea remain the principal source of progesterone
hyperplasia.
production throughout gestation and that pregnancy
654
Chapter
281
Infertility and subfertilityin thebitch andqueen
may be terminated by ovariectomy (Andersen &
normallymixed.Theaerobicbacteriaisolatedfrom
Simpson1973) ortheinduction of luteolysis(Onclin
normal bitches include Escherichia coli, staphy-
et al 1993) at any stage. However, clinical prob-
lococci and streptococci（Olson &Mather 1978,
lems appear only to occurin the German ShepherdAllen & Dagnall 1982)while the anaerobicbac
[Gunzel-Apel et al 2006) orfollowing oestrus induc-
teriainclude Prevotella spp.and Peplostreptococcis
tionregimens(Bartaetal1982,Volkmannetal2006)
spp.(Baba el al 1983). Mycoplasmas have been
and in onecaseofoophoritis(Nickeletal1991）.ln
isolatedfrombetween30%ands8%ofnorinal
my experience, plasma progesterone concentrations
bitches(Bruchim etal 1978,Doig 198l,Baba et
ofbitcheswithhabitual abortionarenotdissimilar
al1983).Greater numbers of bacteria are found
to those ofnormal pregnantbitches.Progesterone or
within the vesiibule compared with the vagina; the
progestogen supplementation during pregnancy may
uterus is normally sterile(Olson et al 1986).‘The
produce masculinized female pups(Curtis & Grant
stage of the oestrous cyclemay influence thebacte-
rial flora,because there is a significant increase in
impairordelayparturition,resultinginfetaldeah
vaginal bacterialnumberswhen oestrogen concen-
(see Ch.6). Progestogen therapy should be restricted
trations are elevated(van Duijkeren 1992).Several
to thosecases inwhich a truelutealinsufficiencyhas
authorshaveexaminedthevaginalbacterialfloraof
been diagnosed.
normalbitches andcomparedthemwiththose of
infertilebitches.These studies,whichwere reviewed
by van Duijkeren (1992),showed that the bacte-
Infectious agents of the bitch's
rial species cultured from infertile bitches didnot
reproductive tract
differ significantlyfrom healthybitches.Similarly,
Hirsch &Wiger（1977)found that theorganisms
recovered from bitches with vaginal discharge were
Therearethreecategoriesoforganismthatmayexert
qualitatively the same as thenormalbacterial flora,
an influence uponfertility:(1) those agents that are
although thebacterial numberswere higher.
known tohave a specificpathogeniceffect upon the
Therefore,the results ofmicrobiological examina-
reproductive tract; (2) those organisms that are pres-
tionofthereproductivetractofthebitchmustbe
entinthenormalenvironmentandundercertain
treatedwithcaution,becausethesimpleisolationof
circumstances can become opportunisticpathogens;
bacteria from the vagina does not constitute a diag-
and (3) agents that cause systemic disease and exert
nosisofreproductive disease
their effect upon reproduction indirecily.
Opportunisticpathogens
Normal vaginal bacterial flora
The bacterial species fond in bitches with repro
There is a widespread belief among breeders and vet-
ductive disease donot differ significantlyfromthiose
erinarians thatinfertility,vaginitis and fadingpuppy
found in healthy bitches.However,disease may
syndrome are caused by bacteria that inhabit the
result if theuterine or vaginal defence mechanisms
reproductive tract of the dog and bitch.This arose
are depressed,thereby allowing overgrowth of the
from theworkof Stafseth et al (1937) and Hare&
normal commensals（Olson et al 1986).Many of
Fry(1938）,who concluded that streptococci,espe-
the normal vaginal inhabitants may become patho-
cially beta-haemolytic types G and L,were respon-
gens if a breakdown in loral immuniry occurs (van
sible for infertility,abortion,anoestrus and weak
Duijkeren 1992). Some species of E. coli are particu-
pups.With the advent of virus isolation techniques,
larly more lilely tobe pathogenic because they pos-
several specificviruses havebeen identified,andit
sessparticular adhesivecapacity;theseare called the
seemslikelythattheearlierworkoveremphasized
uropathogenic E.coli.
the importance of the streptococci.These bacteria
Bacteriamayenter theuterusduringoestruswhen
arenow consideredtobepartofthenormalcom-
thecervix isrelaxed,and could then causeinfertil
mensalflora andprobablyinvade subsequent1o
ity either directly by interferingwith thezygote or
viral damage, or are contaminants.
by producing spermicidal factors (Jones & Joshua
Many aerobic and anaerobicbacteria normally
1982).Bacieria may persist within the uterus and be
inhabit thevestibule andvagina of thehealthybitch
associatedwiththedevelopmentofpyometra dur-
(Olson &Mather 1978),and thebacterial flora is
ingtheprogesterone-dominantphaseofthecycle
655
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
If vaginal microbiological sampling reveals bacte-
The isolation of the bacterium from blood or
ria present in a pure growth orin very large numbers,
aborted tissue is diagnostic of the disease;however,
then they may be considered significant, although
there may be pr6longed periods when the bitch is
pure growths of bacteria may also be isolated from
not bacteraemic, so that a negative blood culture
normal dogs (Bjurstrom & Linde-Forsberg 1992).
does not rule out infection. Fortunately diagno-
Those bacteria most commonly thought to be sig-
sis, using the plate agglutination test for screening
nificant by some workers, but not by ne, include
and tube' agglutination for confirmation, is not dif
Pseudomonas spp., Proteus spp. and some strepto-
ficult, titres of 1:200 or greater being diagnostic of
cocci.Repeated culture after 1 week shauld be per-
infection.Treaument can be difficult because ofthe
formed to confirm the diagnosis before attempting
intracellular nature of bacterial replication;a com-
treatment. Appropriate antimicrobial therapy, based
bination of streptomycin and tetracycline or enro-
upon sensitivity tests,should only be administered
floxacin is often effective in clinical cases;however,
after investigation ofpossible predisposing causes
antinicrobial treatment doesnotremovetheorgan-
such as anatomical,neoplastic ormechanical abnor-
ism from tissues (Johnston et al1982,Wanke et al
malities of the vagina.Parenteral and topical admin-
2006). Since a carrier state can ocur and these ani-
istration has been advocated.
mals may be potential sources of infection; they are
Mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas have been impli-
best neutered to remove them from the breeding
cated in causing reproductive disease in thebitch
programme.
(Lein 1986).although they are also frequently iso-
lated in clinicallynormal animalswithno evidence
Toxoplasmagondii
ofreproductive tractdisease.Mycoplasimal coloniza-
tion of the vagina has been demonstrated following
Toxoplasma gondi infection causes abortion, prema-
ture birth, stillbirth and neonatal death (Cole et al
prolonged treatment ofbitches with oral ampicillin
and potentiated sulphonamides(Strom & Linde-
1954, Sim etal 1963).Surviving infecied pups may
Forsherg 1993), which suggests that the widespread
carry the infection.The public health consequences
use of antimicrobial agents in healthy bitches should
ofToxoplasna infection shiould be considered when-
be avoided.
ever it is diagnosed. The condition is best diagnosed
by examination ofimpression smears from dead
Specific infections
neonates.Although clindamycin is often used to
treat the condition in dogs and cats,most regimes
Brucella canis
appear to have little effect on the bradyzoite stagc.
Brucella canis is a Gram-positive bacterium that can
Canine herpesvirus
produce ahortion and infertility and result in signifi-
cant economic losses for dog breeders. lt is the only
Canine herpesvirus in adult male dogs generally pro-
bacterium known tobe aspecificcauseof infertility in
duces mild signs limited to the respiratory or genital
the hitch. Bricella infertility was first reported in the
tract.However, thevirus may cause genital lesions in
USA(Moore&Bennet 1967,Carmichael &Kenney
the bitch that may be associated with infertility, and
1968) but has subsequently been found in several
may also cause resorption,abortion and stillbirihs
countries. Barton (1977) found that between 1.5%
(Hashimoto& Hirai 1986).Viral recrudescence may
and 6.6%% of dogs in the UISA had antibodies diag-
Occur at subsequent pregnancies such that the clini-
nostic of infection; however,B. canis is not present in
cal problem may persist for some considerable time
the LIK,although Tayloret al (1975)reported Brucella
in a breeding programme.
abortion in one bitch. B. canis can be transmitted in
Infection of the pregnant bitch results in placental
several ways,including contact with aborted fetal or
lesions and the infection of fetuses(Hashimoto et al
placental tissue,contact with thevaginal discharge of
1979). The infected placentae are macroscopically
infected bitches, venereal transmission and congeni-
underdeveloped and possess small, greyish white
talinfection.The most common method ofinfection
foci characterized by focal degeneration, necrosis
is venereal (Moore & Gupta 1970). Abortion occurs
most commonly between days 45 and 55 of preg-
sion bodies. Experimental infection during early
pregnancy causes fetal death and mummification,
Or the birth of stillborn or, more rarely, weak pups.
while infection during mid-pregnancy results in
656
Chapter
281
Infertility and subfertility in the bitch and queen
abortion and infection during late pregnancy results 2 weeks of age, which can occur as a consequence
in premature birth (Hlashimoto et al 1979). The of uterine infection or as a result of exposure to the
vinis has also been recovered from vesicular lesions
virus soon after birth (Guy 1986). Ceriain premises
on the genitalia ofbitchies (Post & King 1971).
may have significant problems with canine parvovi-
Variable-sizedvesicles are commonly observed in
rus as a result of subclinical infection maintaining a
thevestibule(Hashimoto et al 1983) and frequcntly
viral output that infects neonates shortly after birth.
thieselesions are evident at the onset of pro-oestris,
In these casesitmay be necessary to ceasebreeding
suggesting that venereal transmission is probably
to remove susceptible animals from the equation,
important in adult dogs.
Pups may become infected at birth, during passage
of any other animalsprior to introduction.
through the vagina, and subsequently die with char-
acteristicwidespread histologicalnecrotizinglesions
Canine adenovirus
(Carmichael 1970). Pups that survive the illness
may show persistentneurological disorders(Percy
It is well established that infection with canine ade-
et al 1970). Pups are only at risk while in utero and
novirus during pregnancy may result in the birth of
during the first 3 weeks oflife; attempts toproduce
dead or weak pups that die within a few days of par-
thiegeneralized disease in older pups have failed
turition(Spaldinget al 1964).The disease is uncom-
(Wright & Cornwell 1970a). In the pups, the disease
mon except in unvaccinared bitches. In most cases,
is rapidly fatal and treatment is often unrewarding:
the virus is ingested by neonates and causes mortal-
symptomatic therapy is all that is available since spe-
ity from 3 weeks of age onwards (Cornwell 1984).
cific antiviralagents arenot efficacious(Wrighit&
Virus shedding can persist for some considerable
Cornwell 1970b). Recrudescent viral sliedding from
time and the virusmay persistin the environment
thevesicularlesions may be stimulated bythe stress
for up to 10 days. Carrier bitches may act as a source
of pregnancy and parturition.
ofinfection for pups.Bitches should bevaccinated
With respect to diagnosis, serology denonstrates
prior to mating and when this is undertaken there is
exposurenotinection,andvirus isolation of patho-
reasonable maternally derived antibody for up to 10
logical examination of fetuses is required. Infection
days after birth,
is becoming increasingly prevalent within Europe
and as a result a new vaccine has been licensed for
use.The vaccine contains canine herpesviruis glyco-
Canine distempervirus
protein subunits and is administered 1-2weeks after
Experiinental exposure of pregnant bitches tocanine
mating and again G weeks later (i.e. 1-2 weeks before
distemper virus was found to produce either clini-
the expected rlate of whelping). Re-vaccination is
cal illness in the bitch with subsequent abortion, or
recommended at each pregnancy. A high level of
subclinical infection of the bitch and the birth of
efficacy has been demonstrated, although protective
levels of antibody appear to be present for only 3
clinically affected pups (Krakowka et al 1977). Thtis
provides evidence for transplacental transmission,
months.
although the frequency of this undernatural condi-
tions is unknown bul appears tobe rare.
Canine parvovirus
Canine parvovirus infecrion has been implicated by
Cysticendometrial hyperplasia
some breeders as a cause of infertility in their ken-
Aetiology
nels.However,Meunieretal (1981) found that,after
the introduction ofcanineparvovirus to a kennel of
Although the exact aetiology of cystic endometrial
2000 brood bitches, the conception rate,incidence
hyperplasia and pyometra is uncertain, this syn-
of stillbirths, average litter size and average number  drome is probably best categorized as an infectious
of pups weaned per litter did not change. Canine
cause ofinfertility even though the roleofthe endo-
parvovirus may, however, cause an acute generalized
1crine environment is significant. It has been sug-
infection in pups and death after the time that mater-
gested that cystic endometrial hyperplasia,which
nally derived antibody wanes,often after weaning.
precedes pyometra as a clinical disease,mayresultin
More rarely, there is infection in neonates less than
infertility due to conception failure and embryonic
657
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
resorption. The condition may be recognized by
whether all cases of spontaneous pyometra are pre-
ultrasound examination of the uterus during the
ceded by cystic endometrial hyperplasia, but this
luteal phase.The detection of multiple small, focal,
seems likely.-
fuid-filled cystic regions within de endometriun
Much atuenuion has been paid to the work of Dow
is diagnostic; endometrial biopsy is not necessary.
In many cases cystic cndometrial hyperplasia leads
imentally in young ovariectomized bitches by the
ultimately to pyometra, the incidence of which is
adrninisiration of cycles of oestrogen and proges-
high. In fact, pyometra is recognized as one of the
terone. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia was induced
common causes of illness and death in this species.
following three such cycles oftreatment but there
There has been considerable debate over the pre-
werenoinflammatory changes in the endometriun,
disposing factors and theexact aetiology of pyometra.
If,however,in thefifthorsixth ycle the doseof pro
Most observers are of thie opinion that thespontane-
gesterone was increased,typical acute endometri-
ous disease is of middle-aged or old bitches. Dow
tis became superimposed upon the cystic glandular
(1958, 1959a) reported that the mean age of clini-
hyperplasia. It is worth noting that ihe dose rates of
cal cases was 8.2 years, with only 12% of cases less
the hormones used were very high. Successful induc-
than 6 years of age. Several workers have suggested
tion of pyometra was achieved by Teunissen (1952)
that the condition is more common in nulliparous
without the need for cycles of oestrogen and proges-
bitches（Dow 1958,1959a,Frost1963) while others
terone; this difference may have been due to the age
have suggested that it is more common in bitches
of the bitches used in the study, since Dow's bitches
with abnormal oestrous cycles and pseudopreg-
were between 9 and 18 months of age whereas
nancy (Dow 1959b, Whitney 1967). Fidler et al
'Teunissen's bitches were up to 5 years old.
(1966), however, found no relationship to parity or
Itwas suggested that pyometra was the result
oestrous characteristics;this opinion is now widely
of excessive and/or prolonged stimulation of the
accepted.Pyometra is a disease of the luteal phase,
,,  d  s
with most bitches showing clinical signs between
corpora lutea (Hlardy & Osborne 1974). However,
5 and 80 days after the end of oestrus.
although corpora lutea are always present within
the ovaries of bitches with clinical pyometra (the
ducing bacteria into the uterus were unsuccessful
result of the long luteal phase), there is no evidence
(Benesch & Pommer 1930,Teunissen 1952);how-
of excessive progesterone production (Christie et al
ever, the latter worker managed to induce endo-
1972). Progesterone concentrations in bitches with
metritis when bacteria were introduced into thie
pyometra aresimilar tothose inlhiealthybitchies at
oestrous uterus during laparotomy when the uterine
the same stage of the luteal phase [Hadley 1975a,
horn was also ligated. Although successful attempis
Chaffaux&Thibier 1978,De Coster et al 1979}and
to produce the disease following the administration
the functioning capacity of the corpora lutea has
ofoestrogens have been reported (Bloom 1944, von
been shown to be normal (Colombo et al 1982).
Schulze 1955),it was the work ofTeunissen (1952)
Hadley (1975b) inadvertently produced a cystic
that indicated the importance of progesterone in the
endometrial hyperplasia in bitches that were sub
aetiology of the condition and also demonstrated
jected to repeated uterine biopsy during the early
the potentiation of the effects of progesterone by
luteal phase of the cycle. These animals were much
ocstrogen. Teunissen's general ronclusions were
younger thanthose thatnormally developthelesion
thatprogesterone was themain hormone concerned
and had not been subjected to any hormone therapy.
with inducinguterineglandular hyperplasia,which
Dhaliwal et al(1997,1999) found thatvarious
preceded pyometra. Continuing glandular hyperpla-
concentrations of circulating steroid hornones,
sia occurs under the influence of progesterone and
particularly oestrogen and progesterone, wherher
regresses at the end of the luteal phase. However,
endogenous or exogenous, influence the concentra-
during the animal's life there is progressive hyper-
tion and distribution of steroid receptors within the
plasia, which ultimately results in the development
ulerus of biiches. Such changes may be involved in
of pathological lesions termed cystic endometrial
the pathogenesis of pyometra.
hyperplasia. The mucosal epithelial cells are charac-
Organisms isolated from the uterine fluid in cases
teristically tortuous with a hypertrophic clear cyto-
ofpyometra are those found as part ofthe nor-
plasm(Hardy & Osborne 1974). It is not known
mal vaginal and vulvar microflora.It is generally
658
Chapter
281
Infertility and subfertility in the bitch and queen
agreed that the predominant bacterium isolated
Somebitchesmaybepresented laterwhen thereis
isEsclierichiacoli buthas especialvirulence factors
avulvar discharge,which in some cases is associ-
(Dow1960,Grindlay etal1973,Wadas etal 1996).
atedwith improvement in the general health. In
Sandholm et al (1975) found that the progesterone-
other cases,the bitch remains unwell and there
sensitizedendometriumandmyometrium hadan
is no discharge of pus.The bitch's abdomen may
affinity for E.coli.Theseworkerspostulated that uri-
becomedistendedandshemaybethoughttobe
nary tract infection was associated with pyometra,
pregnant, although systemic illness is common.
theuterusbecominginfected duringearlymetoestrus
These cases generally end fatally, often within
whenreceptors forE.coli developwithin the endo-
14-21 days from the onsetof clinical signs;thecer-
metrium,thus enhancing the colonization ofthe
vix remains closed throughout.Death may be due
uterus with bacteria.Itis lilkelythat thelongluteal
totoxaemiaalone oritmaybeassociatedwithperi-
phaseofthebitchisanimportantcontributoryfac-
tonitis due torupture oftheuterus.Occasionally,
tor inthedevelopmentofthecondition,sinceithas
the cervix relaxes and there is an outpouring of pus
been shown that,in the cow,progesterone increases
justbefore death.
the susceptibility of the genital tract to infection
Ina further category,there may be intermittent
(Rowson et al 1953).Brodey(1968) hypothesized
openingof the cervix,withrelativegood healthfol
that anogenital bacteria entered the uterus during
lowing the discharge of pus and malaise during the
oestrus andwere able to proliferateduring the luteal
intervening periods.
phase.This suggestion offers aplausible explanation
Somecasesofopen-cervixpyometramaypersist
of the aetiologysince thecondition ismore likely to
for years with a more or less continuous vulvar dis-
developwhen thereis cysticendometrial hyperpla-
charge.Body temperature may be normal or slightly
sia;however, it has also been suggested that bacteria
elevated in cases of open-cervix pyometra, while
may enter the uterus either haematogenously orvia
thereis commonly an elevated body temperature in
lymphaticspread（Teunissen1952).Afurtherfactor
cases of closed-cervix pyometra.In toxaemic patients
tharmust be considered in the aetiology of pyometra
thetemperaturemaybesubnormal
is the use of exogenous reproductive hormones.
The character of the vulvar discharge may vary
Anderson etal (1965)reported the occurrence of
considerably.Most oftenit is of thin consistency and
pyometra following the useof medroxyprogesterone
light chocolatebrown in colour,and has a charac-
acetate fortheprevention of oestrus.Similar find-
teristic odour.In other cases itisyellow in colour,
ings have been observed with several other progesto-
often blood-tinged, and varying from a watery to a
gens.The experimental use of oestrogens in the bitch
creamy consistency.Thevulva is generally enlarged
does not usually result in the development of pyo-
and theremay be discoloration or scalding ofthe
metra.However,oestrogensenhancethestimulatory
perivulvartissues andperineum.
effects of progesterone on the uterus.For this reason,
An increased thirst is commonly observed in
when oestrogens are administered post-mating 1o
advanced cases,which is dueioreducedpermeabil-
prevent conception,pyometra may beinduced(von
ityforwaterinthedistalconvolutedtubuleofthe
Durr1975,Nelson&Feldman 1986);thisprobably
kidney (Asheim 1964).Renal dysfunction is prob-
relates to the increasing concentrations of progester-
ablycausedby theformationofimmunecomplexes
one seen during oestrus.
(Sandholm et al 1975).
Clinical signs
Diagnosticfeatures
There is a wide range of clinical signs associated
Abdominal palpation.Before examination the ani-
withpyometra in thebitch.Whenacompletehis-
mal shouldbegiven the opportunity to urinate and
toryisavailableitisusuallyfound thatthebitchwas
defecate.In cases of open-cervix pyometra the uter-
in oestrus a fewweeksprior to theillness.In some
ine horns may be detected as thickened, often irreg-
cases,when thereisa vulvar discharge,the owner
ular and slightlyturgid structures from 1-3cm in
may consider thistobeacontinuationofoestrus
diameter.Theirlocationwithin theabdomen isnot
(Table 28.1).
generally altered from normal. Occasionally, some
Ifpresentedearly,thegeneral listoryisthat the
areasof the uterine horns areturgid andsolid topal-
animal hasbeenlethargicwithareduced appetite.
pate while others,which are distended by pus,may
Increased thirst andvomiting are variable findings.
beindistinguishablefromthesurroundingbowel.
659
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
Table 28.1 Difierenial diagnosis of vulvar dischiarge in thebitch (adapted fram Allen & Renton 1982)
Nature of the
Condition
History
Condition of
Cytologicalsr
Comments
discharge
the vulva
findings*
Clear or straw-
Oestrus
Expected in
Swoilen cr
LIEC, AEC,RBC,
Attracive to male
coloured
"heat'
slightly soft
no WBC
Mucoid
Metoestrus
Recent oestrus
Large but soft
PBC, SIEC, VSIEC, WBC
No malaise
Mucoid
Normal
Pregnant/recent
Large but soft
PBC,SIEC,WBC
No malaise, coes not threaten
pregnancy
oestruis
pregnancy
Purulent
Juvenile
Before first
Normal
PBC,SIEC,VBC
May respond to antibiotics but
vaginitis
'hieal'
recurs. Recovery after puberly
Purulent
Vaginitis
Variable but
Depends on
Depends on the stage
Specific causes include: certain bac
often excessive
the stage of
of the cycle
terial orvra infections,chem cal
licking,
the cycle
irritation (urne), mecnanical irrita-
atiractive
tion (foreign body), neoplasia and
tomale
anatomical abnormalites
Purulent/
Pyometra
Oestrus2-8
Slightly
WBC, SIEC, LIEC,RBC,
Diagncsis using ultrasonography.
haemorrhagic
weekspreviously
swollen
bacteria, cell debris
Ofteri malaise
Purulent/
Metritis
Recent
Large
Multinucleated cells,
Severe malaise
haemorrhagic
parturition
LIEC,uterine cells
Haemorrhagic
Pro-oestrus
Expected in
Swollen
SIEC, LIEC, RBC,
Attractive to male
'heat'
WBC
Haemorrhagic
Oestrus
Expected in
Swollen or
LIEC, AEC, RBC,
Atractive tc male
'heat'
sliglily soft
noWBC
Haemorrhagic
Follicular
Persistent
Swolien
LIEC,RBC,±WBC
Nomalaise,attractive tomale,may
cysts
discharge
develop bone marrow suppression
Haermorrhagic
Vaginal
Recent trauma or
Depends on
RBC, depencs on the
Rare,may start up to 2 weeks
ulceration
mating
the stage of
stage of the cycle
after mating
the cyc'e
Haemorrhagic
Placental
Pregnant
Normalor
RBC,TuCus
Ultrasound, radiography,etc.,
separation
slightly swo len
will confirm pregnancy
Haemorrhagic
Subinvolu-
Persistent
Normal
RBC,arge polynucle-
No malaise, refractory to
ticn of pla-
discharge
or slightly
ated vacialated cells
treatment
cental sites
af:er whelping
swcllen
Haemorrhagic
Transms-
Notall counries
Depends on
RBC,tumour
Identification of tumour on vulva
sible veneral
the stage of
cells?
or in vagina confirms diagnosis
tumour
the cycle
Haemorrhagic
Cystitis
Frequent
Depends on
RBC,mucus
Small volumes of urire, dysuria
urination
the stage of
thecycle
Haemorrhagic
Urinary trac:
Dysuria
Depenos cn
RBC, tumou
Endoscopymay show origin of
neoplasia
the stage of
cells?
haemorrhage, positive contrast s
thecycle
ourethrography may bediagnostic
Haemorrhagic/
Abortion
Pregnant
Slightly
RBC,mucus
Ultrasound shcws uterus with
brcwn-coloured
enlarged
similar appearance to postpartum
Green/brown-
Parturition
Pregnant
Slightly
RBC,SIEC,
Painting, nest-making, milk
colcured
swollen
uterine cells
production
Green/brown-
Dystocia,
Ncn-productive
Slightly
RBC,SIEC,
Ultrasound will confirm
placental
swollen
uterine cells
pregnancy and fetalviability
separation
PBCarahasalcells,IECmallinterediatepitelilcelsEClargentemeciatepithelial cellEC,nuearpieliall
RBC,erythrocytes:WBC.pclymorphonuclear leukocytes:VSIEC. vacuolated smallintermediate erithelial cells ('metoastrus cells).
660
Chapter
28
Infertility andsubfertilityinthebitchandqueen
Caremust betakennot toconfuse thecolonwith
Itshould be remembered,however, that these
thickened uterinehorns.In cases ofclosed-cervix
findingsarenotspecificforpyometra,sinceearly
pyometra the degree ofuterine distension may be
pregnancy has a similar radiographic appearance.
greater and tleremay bevisible abdominal enlarge-
Pneumoperitoneographymaybeausefulaid,which
ment.In large or obese patients,abdominal palpa-
allowsclearer radiographicdifferentiationofthe
tionmaynotbepossible.
uterus in casesofpyometra(Glenney1954),butthis
Ultrasonography.Ulltrasound is particularly valuable
is notroutinely performed.
fordetectingtheuterusthatisfilledwithfluid.The
Haematology.The total number of leukocytes is fre-
uterushasan increased diameter andmay befolded
quenilyelevated in casesofpyometra(Khuen et al
upon itself sothat several sectionsof eachhornmay
1940),although the degree is much less marked
be imaged in a single plane (Fig. 28.10). The diam-
in cases of open-cervix pyometra compared with
eter of the uterus may vary depending upon whether
closed-cervix pyometra(Morris etal 1942).However,
the cervix is open or closed. The uterine wall is usu-
an elevated white cell countis not always present
ally relatively hypoechoic and is increased in thick-
(Sheridan1979)
ness.The uterine lumen is usually grossly dilated
Rectalexamination.It maybepossibletopalpatethe
with anechoic fuid,although small echogenic
distendeduterusperrectum,especiallyifslightback-
particles and mass lesions may be identified.The
wardpressureis appliedto theabdominalwall.
diagnosis is most simple when the dianeter of the
uterus increases above that of thesmall intestine.In
Treatment
caseswheretherearelargevolumesofuterinefluid,
Ovariohysterectomy toremove thepus-distended
thereisusuallyafarenhanceimeni effect(Feeney&
uterus (Fig.28.11) is the treatment of choice for pyo-
Johnston 1986).Rentonet al(1993) suggested that
ultrasonography could be used to monitor cases
metra.Bitchesthat arepresented early in thecourse
ofthe disease are usually a low surgicalrisk,and
ofpyometraduring treatmentandBigliardi etal
(2004) demonsirated early diagnosis of the clinical
success rates up to 92% have been reported (Austad
1952).Lower success rates may be obtained with
condition.
bitches that are toxaemic. Intravenous fluid therapy
Radiography. The detection of a soff-tissue-opacity
mass lesion within the caudal abdomen, caus-
is essential in allcases to ensureminimum renal
ing cranial displacement of the small intestine
toxiceffects (Ewald 196l).Attention should also
bepaidtoplasmaelectrolytesand acid-basestatus
and dorsal displacement of the colon,has been
since complications associated with septicaemia
usedforsome timetoindicateenlargementofthe
bacteraemia and uraemia are common (Feldman
uterus （Engle 1940,Schnelle 1940,Walker 1965).
&Nelson 1987a).While the ideal situation is 10
administer intravenous broad-spectrum antimicro-
粤-RUC-89
bial agents and fluid therapy, it is not always pos-
R.V.C.
sible to stabilize the patient before surgery.
10cm
If the condition is not life threatening and the ani-
HEARHR
mal isparticularlyvaluable,the question ofrestora-
tionoffertilitymaybeconsidered.Attemptshave
F8
been made to drain the uterine fluid using a cath-
eterplacedvia thecervix(Stephenson&Milks1934,
Funkquistetal1983).However,thistechniqueis dif
ficult to perform,and surgically-introduced drains
have been advocated by some workers(Mara1971,
Gourley1975).Theseareinsertedtranscervicallyvia
a hysterotomy and are used to flush theuterus after
ENHO
PDST1→
surgery.High success rates havebeen reported using
thismethod(Mara 1971).
Fig.28.10 Ultrasound image of thereproductive tract of a
In those cases where it is essential to retain repro-
bitchwith pyometra.Theuterine horns（U)are distended with
ductive function,or where surgery isnot possible
anechoicfluidandcanbeseeninthreecross-sectionalplanes
because of intercurrent disease,medical therapy
dorsal to thebladder(B)
maybeconsidered.Therehavebeen several reports
661
Part
51
 Subfertility and infertility
vomiting, diarrhoea, pyrexia and abdominal pain;
these effects may,be severe and can persist for up to
60 minutes. Fafihermore, the regime is not recom-
mended in cases of closed-cervix pyometra because
of the risk of uterine rupture (Jackson 1979, Renton
et al1993).
However a combination of prostaglandin with
the prolactin inhibitor cabergoline has been found
to be successful for treating both open-cervix and
closed-cervix pyometra (England et al 2007). In all
cases therapy should be combined with appropriate
broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents and intrave-
A
nous fluid administration.
Reported success rates for the treatment of pyo
metra have varied; one bitch of three treated by
uterine drainage subsequently became pregnant
(Lagerstedt et al 1987),while Feldman & Nelson
(1987b) found that 37 of 42 bitches subsequently
whelped after treatment of open-cervix pyometra
with prostaglandin.Gilbert ei al (1989) achieved a
clinical cure in 33of 40 bitches and,of these,nine
eveniually produced litters. The long-term compli-
cations were anoestrus,recurrence ofmetritis,fail-
ure to conceive and abortion.England et al (2007)
found thar following treatment with cloprostenol
and cabergoline11 of21 successfully treated bitches
B
were mated at the next oestrus and seven becoime
pregnant.
Fig. 28.11 The reproductive tracts from twvo bitches with
Additional treatment opportunities including the
pyometra. Note the diferent degrees of distension.
administration of the progesterone receptor antago-
nist aglepristone(Breitkopf et al 1997) or possibly
combination of progesterone antagonists with pros-
of successful medical management using oestrogens
taglancdin and prolactin inhibitors may be useful in
(presumably to induce cervical relaxation) (Watson
the future for treatment of this condition.
1942,Fethers 1943),drugs to induce uiterine con-
nine[Cowie&Muir 1957),etamiphylline（Thomas
Management factors affecting
1980) and several other agents (Spalding 1923,
fertility of the bitch
Linde 1966). However, since pyomeira is a disease
of the luteal phase and ovariectomyhasbeen shiown
to produce resolution of the clinical signs (Watson
The majority of bitches presented for fertility inves-
1957), there has been considerable interest in the
tigation are normal healthy fertile animals whose
use of prostaglandins to cause lysis of the corpora
apparent inferility is related to a misunderstand-
lutea as well as for their uterine spasmogenic action
ing of proper breeding management (England &
(Swift et al 1979, Sokolowski 1980, Henderson
Russo 2006b). In modern breeding protocols, the
1984, Wheaton & Barbee 1993). Prostaglandins
dog and bitch are often not allowed to display nor-
have been used successfully in the treatment of cases
mal courtshiipbehaviour, since they are introduced
of open-cervix pyometra (Nelson et al 1982, Gilbert
when the owner considers that the time for mat-
ing is correct. This is usually based simply upon the
one concentrations were low (Renton et al 1993).
number of days from the onset of vulvar swelling
Prostaglandins have some adverse effects,including
and the appearance of a serosanguineous vulvar
restlessness, pacing,hypersalivation, tachypnoea,
discharge.
662
Chapter
28
Infertility and subfertility in thebitch and queen
While the majority of bitches ovulate between
2-3days（Holst&Phemister1974,Concannon el
10 and 14 days after the onset of pro-oestrus,this
al 1989);therefore thie time span over which fertil-
event may occur asearlyasday5oraslateasday
ization may occur, termed the‘fertilization period’
30.In addition,bitches are not necessarily consis-
(Jeffcoate&Lindsay 1989),is between 4and7 days
tentbetween cycles(Englandetal 1989).Therefore,
after the LH surge (ie.between 2 and 5 days after
shouldabitchbematedondays12-16afterthe
ovulation)（Fig.28.12)
onset of pro-oestrus (which is common breeding
Dogsperm canremainviableandferilewithinthe
uterus and uterine tubesfor at least 6 days or more
failure ofconception.
(Doak et al 1967).Therefore,it is possible for mat-
ings that takeplace beforethe fertilization period
toresult inconception.A second term may there-
Thefertileandfertilizationperiod
forebeused,the‘fertileperiod',whichdiffersfrom
A surge in plasma LH concentration is the trig-
the‘ferilization period’in that it encompasses the
ger for ovulation,which occurs 40-50 hours later
periodof sperm survival within the femalereproduc-
(Phemisteret al 1973).Ovulation is spontaneous,
tive tract before ovulation and oocyte maturation.
and eggs are ovulated as primary oocytes Doak et al
Theferileperiodextendsfrom3daysbeforeuntil
1967,Reynaud et al2006).The oocytes are imma-
7 days after the preovulatory LH surge, and may be
turealovulation andmustreach themetaphaseof
even longer for dogs with exceptional semen quality.
the secondmeioticdivisionafterextrusionof the
Determinationof the timetomatecan thereforebe
assessed on thebasis of the time of theLH surge,or
thisfurther stage ofmaturationlasts 48-60 hours
methodsthatmayreliablyindicatethe‘fertilization
(Tsutsui1989).Eggsremainfertilizableforafurther
period’or the‘fertile period.
Peakfertility
Ferilization
Ferlile period
period
100-
Ovulation
75
50-
LH
Progesterone
25
D
14
12
10
10
14
Days in relation to LH surge
Fig.28.12Schematic representat on of thechanges in peripheral nlasma hormones during pro-oestrus,cestrus andearly
663
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
While itwas initially thought that theLH surge
1993).Progesterone concentration may also be
occurredsynchronouslywiththeonsetofstanding
measured using thismetliodon wholeblood
oestrus(Concannon etal1975),itwassubsequently
(England199Bouchardetal1993)andvaginal
shown thatthismay occurbetween3daysbefore,
fluid（England &Anderton 1992）.Furthermore,it
and 9 days after,the onset of oestrusMellin et al
has been demonstrated that progesterone can be
1976,Wildtetal1978a,Concannon &Rendano
measured in faeces allowing thepotential for non-
1983).Therefore,teasing thebitchhaslittlevaluein
invasive monitoring of the time of ovulation (Hlay
determining thefertileperiod.Clinicalassessment
etal2000).
of the volume and colour of thevaginal discharge
is similarly unreliable for determining the fertile
Vaginal cytology
period(Rowlands1950.Bell&Christie1971).
Examination ofexfoliativevaginalcells is com-
monly used to monitor the oestrous cycle.During
The optimal mating time
pro-oestrus,increased plasma oestrogen concen-
The optimal time formatingis likely tobe during or
trations cause thickening of the vaginal mucosa,
immediately beforethefertilizationperiod,and the
which becomes a keratinized squamous epithe-
period ofpeak fertility for natural matingsranges
lium.Vaginalepithelial cellsmaybecollectedeither
from 1 daybefore to5-6daysafter theLH surge
using a moistened swab or by aspiration.The rela-
(Holst &Phemister 1974,Concannon et al 1989;
tiveproportions of different typesof epithelial cells
England et al 1989)（Fig.28.12).Determination
can beusedas amarker ofthe endocrine environ-
ofthetimetobreedcouldthereforebebasedupon
ment (see Ch.1, Fig. 1.34）. Several methods for
methodsforestimatingthetimeof theLH surge.
stainingofcells andvariousindicesofcornification
and keratinization have been suggested as markers
for the stage of the cycle(Schutte 1967b, Klotzer
Hormonemeasurement
1974).In general,thefertile period can be predicted
Measurement ofplasma concentrations ofLH is a
by calculating the percentage ofepithelial cells that
reliable and accurate method of determining the
appear cornified using a modified Wright-Giemsa
optimum time to mate.However,there is no read
stain (van der Holst&Best 1976),although staining
ilyavailablecommercial assayforcanineLHl,and at
with a modified trichrome stain,allowing an assess-
presentmeasurementrequiresradioimmunoassay,a
ment ofthepercentage of keratinizedcells,hasbeen
techniquethatis time-consuming andexpensive.An
suggested as being most useful (Schutte 1967a).
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay(ELISA)has
A schematicrepresentation ofthechangesofexfolia-
recentlybeen describedforthemeasurement of LH
tivevaginal cells is given in Chapter 1,Figure 1.33,
concentrationinfoxplasma(Maureletal1993)but
and Figure28.13.
has yet to be evaluated in the dog and a key chal-
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes are absent from
lengeinmeasuringLHisthefactthatconcentrations
thevaginal smear duringoestrusbecausethekerati-
peak andreturn tobasal within a short period of
nized epithelium is impervious to these cells.Their
time, necessitating daily sampling.
reappearance duringlate oestrusreflectsthebreak-
Plasma progesterone concentrations begin to
down ofthisepithelium(Evans&Cole1931）.The
increasetowards the end of pro-oestrus at the time
return of polymorphonuclear leukocytes to the vag-
of the LH surge (Concannon et al 1975, Hadley
inal smear hasbeenused by someworkers as an
1975a). Progesterone is produced by luteinizing
indicator ofthetime ofoptimumferility(Andersen
follicles,and therefore,serial monitoringofplasma
1980).
progesterone concentrations allows anticipation of
Feldman & Nelson (1987a) suggested that breed-
ovulation. Since progesterone concentrations rise
ing should be attempted throughout the period
slowly prior to ovulation,daily sampling is not
whenmorethanSo%ofepithelialcellsarecorni-
necessary.Commercial testkits designed to meas-
fied（Fig.28.13).While this is a good guide,some
ure the concentration of plasma progesterone by
bitchesreachpeak values ofonly60% cornifica-
ELISA are available.Thesekitshavebeen shown to
tion,while in others there may be two peaks of
be useful for predicting the optimum mating time
cornification（vanderHolst&Best 1976).Some
in thebitch（Eckersall&Harvey 1987,England&
bitches demonstrate poor cellular changes in
Allen 1989b,Dietrich &Moller 1993,Fienietal
the vaginal smear （Tsutsui 1975) and typical
664
Chapter
281
Infertilityand subfertilityin thebitchandqueen
Fertilization
Fertile period
WBC:++
+/-
+/-
十++
++
100-
WBC:
Ovulation
2
75
50
P
anuclearcells
Plasmaprogesterone
25
12
-10
10
14
16
Days in relation to pre-ovulatory LH surge
Fig.28.13Schematicrepresentation of thechangesin thepercentageofanuclearepithelialcellsinrelation to ovulationand the
fertileperiodin the bitch.
metoestrus cells may be found during pro-oesirus
characteristiccolourofanyfluid present (Lindsay
(Fowler et al 1971).Allen (1985) noted that poly-
1983a).Enlargedoedematous pink or pinl/white
morphonuclearleukocytesmaybefound through-
mucosal folds are present during pro-oestrus and
outtheentire oestrousperiod;theextentofthese
oestrus. Progressive shrinking of these folds,is
variationshasnot been quantified.Evaluation of
the anuclear cell index of cells aspirated from the
result of an abrupt withdrawal of the water-retaining
cranial vagina was found to increase the pregnancy
effect of oestrogen during its preovulatory decline
rate and littersizeofagroup of bitchescompared
(Concannon 1986).Subsequently,mucosal shrink-
witha similar groupmated only on thebasis of
age is accompanied by wrinkling of the mucosal
the onset of pro-oestrus (England 1992).The tech-
folds,whichbecomedistinctly angulatedand dense
nique is particularly useful for bitches with irreg-
cream to white in colour. These gross changes have
ular oestrous cycles and those with prolonged
been used to assess thefertile period(Lindsay 1983a,
pro-oestrus orprolonged oestrus,
b, Jeffcoate & England 1997).Vaginoscopic evalua-
tion is based upon assessment of the appearance
Vaginal endoscopy
ofthevaginalwall(themucosal foldconiours and
profiles,the colour of the mucosa and of any fluid
Vaginoscopy is the technique of examination of the
present),and the changes in this appearance at spe-
vaginalmucosausingeitherarigidendoscopeora
cific times of the oestrous cycle.A specific scoring
paediatricproctoscope.Vaginoscopicassessmentis
system was devised by Lindsay and others (1988)
basedupon observationofthemucosal foldcon-
and Jeffcoate&Lindsay(1989)andhasbeen modi-
tours and profiles, the mucosal colour and the
fied by me as below（Fig.28.14):
665
Part
5
Subfertility and infertility
rounded (D2') and there is sloughing of the
Ferile period
Fertiliza
penoc
cornified layegs of the epithelium (‘D2'and‘D3'),
Tesultingina thin mucosa ofvariegated colour
10
0S1S2A1A2
A3D1D2D3D411
with flattened folds and a rosette-appearance to
the mucosa(D4′)
Plasma progesterore
·Inactive phase (I): The decline phase is fol-
lowed by a return to a phase characterized by a
thin,red and dry mucosa with low and flattened
mucosal folds.This appearance is also designated
T.There maybe more debris present at this siage
than found inphaseI prior to the onset of pro-
pestrus.
-6
-2
DaysinrelationtopreovulatoryLHsurg
A clear relationship is present between the appear-
ance of thevaginal wall and the underlying endo-
Fig.28.14Schematicrepresentationof therelatonship
between the vaginoscopic score and the time of ovulation,
crinology（Fig.28.14）.The specifictiming of some
evenis is variablebut a good correlation has been
concentrations in bitches (see text for description of the vari-
demonstratedbetween theonset ofovulation and
ous vaginoscopic scores).
phaseAl,andagoodrelation between thefertiliza-
tionperiodand phasesA1-A3.Generallytheonset
ofthefertileperiodcanbedetectedbyobservingthe
·Inactive phase (1):This phase is characterized by
onsetofmucosalshrinkagewithoutexcessive angu-
aihin,redand drymucosa withlowandflattened
lations,while gross shrinkage of entire mucosal
mucosalfolds
foldswith obvious angulation(phase A2 and A3)
is characteristic of the fertilization period （Fig.
·Oedematous phase(O):This phase is character-
28.14). Breeding is best planned approximately 4
izedby a thiclened andoedematousmucosa that
days after the first detected mucosal shrinkage, or
appearsurgidlyswollen,rounded andgrey/white
in colour
at the onset of theperiodofobvious angulation of
mucosalfolds.The end ofthefertilizationperiod
Shrinkage phase (S): This phase is characterized
can be detected by observing sloughing of the vagi-
bya thickened mucosa,which is normally white
nalepithelium(see above)and development ofa
in colourbutwhere thereisreduced turgiditywith
variegatedappearanceto thecolourofthemucosal
progressive furrowing. wrinkling and indentations.
surface.
Themucosal foldprofileis,however,still rounded
rather than angular.The progresive nature of this
plasemeans that theearly changes are designated
Ultrasoundexamination
'Sl'and the later changes'S2'
Real-time B-mode ultrasound imaging has been
·Angulated phase(A):This phase is characterized
used in several species tomonitor follicular growth
bya thickened mucosa,which isnormally white in
and toidentify the time of ovulation.Imaging of the
colourbutwherethereissignificant reducedtur-
bitch'sovariesandthedetectionofovulationwas
giditysuchthatinprofilethemucosalfoldshave
reported by Inaba etal (1984).Subsequent work
progressive shrinkage and angulation such that
suggested that a dramatic decrease in the size or
number of follicles occurred atovulation(Wallace
ance.The mucosa is wrinkled and shrunken in
etal 1989),although no detailsofovarian morphol-
appearance.Theprogressive nature of this phase
ogy were published.England &Allen(1989a) sug-
means that the early changes are designated Al
gested that ovulation was difficult to deteci since
and the later changes'A2'and 'A3
folliclesdidnotcollapseandbecausecorporalutea
·Declining phase(D):This phase is characterized
had central fluid-filled cavities unoccupied by luteal
byaprogressivedeclinein thesizeof themucosal
tissue（Fig.28.15).Thecentralanechoicappearance
fold profile,Early in the phase (designated ‘D1)
of the corpora lutea was confirmed in a combined
there is a flaccid appearance to the mucosal fold
ultrasonographicand histological study[England&
profile.Subsequently,the folds become more
Allen1989b)
666
Chapter
281
Infertility andsubfertilityin thebitchand queen
OVARYL
POSTI
Fig.28.15 Ultrasound imageof an cvary of a bitch during
Fig.28.16Photomicrographof the cervicovaginal fluid
collected fromabitch duringoestrus.Crystallization of the
metoestrus(dioestrus).A single large cavitated anechoic cor-
mucus hasresulted in the formation of a fern-like pattern.
pus luteum can be seen within the ovary (crosses).
Ovulationcouldbedetectedbya decreaseinfol-
cervical glandular tissue (England 1993),may be
liclenumberand a stubjectivedecrease infolliclesize
usefulwhen combinedwith vaginal cytology for
(Wallace et al 1992), whileEngland & Yeager(1993)
determining the optimal mating time (England &
found thatovulationwascharacterizedbyadecrease
Allen1989c).
inthe number of fluid-filled follicles and their
replacement by similar-sized hypoechoic structures;
Vulvar softening
thesestructuresdeclinedinnumberafter ovulation
and were replaced by fluid-filled corpora lutea.
During pro-oestrus the vulva becomes enlarged
and turgid. There is often a distinct softening and
Studyof thecervicovaginal secretion
decreasein swellingfollowing thepreovulatory LH
surge (Concannon 1986). This method is impre-
Variationsintheelecuricalresistanceofthevaginal secre-
cisebut is probably the singleclinical event thathas
tionduringtheoestrouscyclehavebeendescribed and
proved to beuseful for assessing the optimal mat-
Klotzer [1974) reported that the resistance decreased
ing time.
during the last part of oestrus in all bitches. These
results were confirmed by Gunzel et al (1986) and,
although thetechnique hasbeen poorly investigated
Cat
in the dog it is used commercially for the detection of
insemination time of thefox（Fougner1989)
Van der Holst &Best(1976) suggested that the
Structuralabnormalitiesofthe
aniountofglucosewithinthevaginaldischargewas
queen'sreproductive tract
ausefulindicatorofthe optimumtimeofbreed-
Congenital abnormalities
ing.The principle of this technique is related to a
change in the pH of vaginal secretion, since glucose
The range of congenital abnormalities of the repro-
is liberated from carboglutelin, which is then con-
ductive tract of the queen is similar to that of the
verted intolacticacid(Vogel&vanderHolst1973).
bitch. Ovarian agenesis is rare and resuls in perma-
Although initial results were promising, this tech-
nent anoestrus and infertility. Small ovarian rem
nique has notfound clinical acceptance,presumably
nants containingfibrous tissue may beidentified at
because ofindividual bitchvariations.
laparotomyorlaparoscopy(Schmidt1986).Similar
Crystallization of mucus collected from the
to the bitch, the establishment of a karyotype may
anterior vagina has been described in the bitch
beuseful in theinvestigation of these cases.
(Fig.28.16), occurring after the peak in plasma
Ovarian hypoplasia is also rare in the queen
oestrogenconcentrations（England&Allen1989c)
(-lerron 1986),although phenotypically normal
Assessment of the mucus,which originates from
queensmayhavenon-functionalovariessecondary
667
Part
5
 Subfertility and infertility
to chromosomal abnormalities (Centerwall &
Neoplasia
Benirschke1975,Johnston et al1983)
Ovarian tumouis are uncommon in the queen. They
There are a small number of reports of aplasia of
the tubular genital tract, although unilateral and/
generally reach a large size before diagnosis and are
not frequently metastatic, often being granulosa-
or bilateral agenesis of the uterine tube and uterine
horn has been identified (Herron 1986).It is not
endocrinologically active and result in clinical signs
uncommon for these lesions tobeassociatedwith
of persistent oestrus, cystic endometrial hyperpla-
absence of the ipsilateral kidney and ureter.The
sia and bilaterally symmetrical alopecia(Barrell &
queenmaybe ferrile when the abnormaliry is uni
Theilen 1977).The treatment of choice is ovariec-
lateral,although litter size is often reduced.In many
cases, these lesions are only diagnosed at explor-
tomy.Malignant endometrial adenocarcinoma is
the most common uterine neoplasm,although
atory laparatomy.
Vaginal aplasia may result in the retention of
benign tumours have also bcen reported (Hlerron
1986).These tumours may be associated with a per
uterine fluid and cause endometrial changes and
infertility.The uterus may be so large that it can
sistent haemorrhagic vulvar discharge and straining.
be detected by palpation; otherwise ultrasonogra-
Inall cases,ovariohysterectomy is curativeprovided
that metastases have not developed. Tumours of
phy will demonstrate a tubular fluid-filled uterus
present within the caudal abdomen. In rare cases
thevagina includepedunculatedleiomyomata and
fibromata. These are rare and generally produce
simple vaginal bands or strictures may be identified
and can be manually broken down, allowing nor-
clinical signs of vaginitis and straining to defecate,
mal coitus.
Local excision is usually curative and ovariohysterec-
Disease of the caudal reproductive tract is rare.
Vulvar and vaginal atresia may occur separately or
tomy may reduce the risk of recurrence.
simultaneously. Small labia with orwithout steno-
sis of the vestibule are observed in the former,
while stenosis of the vagina is observed in the latter
Functional abnormalitiesof the
(Saperstein el al 1976),
queen's reproductive tract
Intersex
Delayed puberty and prolonged
Several femalecaiswith ambiguousgenitaliahave
anoestrus
been described (Herron & Boehringer 1972, Felts
1982).In many cases,the external genitalia are
Theonset ofpuberty inthe queenis influenced by
underdeveloped until puberty, when the animal
both bodyweight and the season ofbirth,since nor-
may demonstrate male-like behaviour. Clitoral
mally the queen is a seasonally polyoestrous breeder.
enlargement has not been reported (Herron 1986).
In most cases puberty occurs in the spring: therefore
An exact diagnosis may not always be reached;
those animals born in autumn may exhibit their
however, removal of the reproductive tract includ
first oestrus at 6 months ofage and thoseborn in
the summer reach puberty at 9 months of age (Fig.
ing gonads is necessary in most cases.Animals may
be classified as having abnormalities of chromo-
28.17). However, queens born in winter or spring
may not exhibit puberty until 12 months of age
somal, gonadal or phenotypic sex; afull description
is given for the bitch (see p. 648).
(Goodrowe et al 1989).
Queens that do not reach puberty by their sec
ond spring are considered to have delayed puberty.
Acquired abnormalities
In the northern hemisphere, queens generally com-
Acquired abnormalities of the reproductive tract of
mence oestrous behaviour in January or February, an
the queen are rare. Occasionally ovariobursal adhe-
event that is dependent upon photoperiod (Herron
sions of unknown aetiology are identified,but these
1986).Prolonged anoestrus may be associated with
are usually unilateral and cause reduced fertility
systemic disease, poor nutrition of a high parasite
rather than infertility.The most common acquired
burden (Mosier 1975). If these factors are elimi-
abnormality is pyometra (see later), although
nated,14 hours of daylight should abolish anoestrus
hydrometra has also been reported.
in the healthy normal queen (Gruflydd-Jones 1990).
668
Chapter
281
Infertility and subfertilityin thebitchand queen
diagnosis is made upon the absence of behavioural
oestruswhileendocrinologicaleventsarenormal.
Winter
Cases arebestevaluatedbythestudy ofvaginal
ancestrus
January
cytology to demonstrateoestrus(see later),removal
ofthequeentoanewenvironmentortheinduc
tion ofoestrus.Occasionallythecondition occursin
Autumn bith=
Oclober
queensthatarelactatingalthoughmorecommonly
puberty at6months
Onsetof
cats are anoestrous at this time.
ofage
puberry
Prolonged oestrus
Sumnerbinth=
thatpersistsforthedurationofup totwofollicu-
puberty at 9months of aqe
lar cycles(Fig.28.18).Inthese cases,oestrogen con-
cenrations remain high,presumably ihe result of
Fig.28.17 Schematicrepresentation of sea5onal polyoestrous
overlapping follicular waves in the absence of ovu-
showthevariationofage atpubertydepending upontime of
lation.Thecondition is morecommonin oriental-
birth.
type breeds.The fertility of these cycles is uncertain,
althoughit islikelythatfertilitymaybereduced
Attention should also be given to whether proges-
togens have been used for the control of dermato-
Oes
se0
Oes
logical or behavioural problems,since their use will
prevent oestrus.
Inductionofoestrus
When it is necessary to breed the queen,it may be
possibletoinducecyclicityprovidedthatthereisno
underlying disease and day length is suitably long.
Crude extracts of FSH and LH have been used to
induce oestrousbehaviour and ovulation(Foster&
Hisaw1935).Other workusedpregnant mare serum
gonadotrophin (equine chorionic gonadotrophin
21
707784
(eCG)administered daily for S days,with reasonable
Daysinrelation toonselofirst oestrus
success(Colby 1970).The queen appears tobesensi
se0
Oes
Oes
tivetoteeffectsofexogenousgonadotrophinsand
high doses mayresult in large numbers of cysticunovu
latedfollicles(Wildtetal197Sa).When anoestrous
queenswere given a singlebolus of10oIll ofeCG,
followed5-7dayslaterby50IuofhCG,ovulation
and pregnancy rates were similar to those at natural
cycles (Cline et al 19so). Similarly,the administra-
tionofFSH-1for5-7daysresultedinahighpregniancy
rate(Wildt et al 1978a).More recently, a decreasing
doseregimen ofFSH-Pcombinedwith a single dose
ofhCGwas shown tobe successful (Popeetal 1993).
TT
1
7
1421283542495663707784
Daysinrelation to onset of first oestrus
Silentoestrus
Fig.28.18Plasma oestrogeninnormal cycling queen（top)
Cases of silent oestrus are usually identified in
andqueen withprolonged oestrus(bottom);the period of
queens that are low in the hierarchy ofa catcolony.
standingoestrus(Oes)in theseunmatedqueens isshown by
Theincidence of silent oestrus is unknown,and the
the greybar.
669
Part
51
Subfertility and infertility
because of inappropriate mating time and resul-
and by measurement of plasma progesterone con-
tant failure ofovulation.Inmost cases,treatmentis
centrations thaiyremain basal following cessation of
notwarrantedsinceprolongedoestrusisgenerallya
behaviouraloestrus.Ovulationmaybefacilitatedby
sporadic occurrence.
ensuring that sufficientmatings occur at thebegin-
ningofoestrus,or bythe administration ofa sin-
Ovulatoryfailure
gledoseofhCG(500Iu)on thefirstdayofoestrus
(Wildt&Seager1978).
Cats are induced ovulators with eggs being fertiliz-
able at ovulation followingmating or artificial stim-
Pseudopregnancy
ulation of the genitalia(Greulich 1934).Copulation
produces a rapid pituitary-mediated release of LHI
While in the bitch pseudopregnancy is nota cause of
(Robinson&Sawyer1987）andmultiplecopula
infertility,in thequeen the absenceofcyclical activ-
tionsusually arerequiredtoensurethatovulation
itymay be explained bythiscondition.
Occurs(Concannon etal 1980).Failure ofovula-
Non-fertile matings or occasional spontaneous
tionmay occurif the queen is notmated a sufficient
ovulations(Lawleretal1993)resultintheformation
number of times.However,approximately 90% of
of corpora lutea,which secrete progesterone.During
queens ovulateifmatedthreetimes at4-hour inter-
the life span of thecorpora lutea the queen does
valsfor the first 3 days of oestrus (Schmidt 19S6).
not denonstrate oestrous activity,resulting in inter-
There is also a reduced magnitude of LHrelease
oestrous intervals of between 35 and 70 days,with
formatings that occur later intooestrus.Therefore,
an averageof45days Verhage et al1976,Wildtetal
breedingonthefirstfewdaysofoestrousbehaviour
198l).Diagnosisoftheconditionisbaseduponthe
ensures thegreatestsuccess.Ovulatoryfailuremaybe
demonstrationofelevatedconcentrationsofplasma
diagnosed by a return to oestrus after 3 weeks (cats
progesterone (Fig. 28.19). Late in the breeding sea-
that ovulatebut fail obecomepregnant enter pseu-
son,however,pseudopregnancy may be followed by
dopregnancy and have a delayed return tooestrus)
anoestrus.
100-
rbitrary
75
50
Parturition
atid
25
-10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Days inrelation to sLHurge
Non-mated
OestrusInteroestrusOestrus
Pseudopregnant
Oestrus
Pseudopregnancy
Oestrus
Pregnant
Oestrus
Pregnancy
animals and the onset of oestrus in theunmated animals.
670
Chapter
281
Infertility andsubfertilityin thebitch and queen
Ovarian cysts
Infectiousagents affecting the
In thequeenysticstructurescanbeassociatedwith
queen'sreproductive tract
the ovaries. However, the majority of these are not
of ovarian origin, being remnants of mesonephric
There arenoreportedvenereally-transmitted infec-
andretetubules.Thesecystsare endocrinologically
tions or specific genital infections that are recog-
inactive and donotproduce clinical signs.Truefol-
nized as causes ofinfertility in cats.Hlowever,there
licular cysts,associated with hyperoestrogenism,
are severalopportunistic pathogens and specific
havebeenreported (Herron 1986)andmay be
infectious agents that may have a direct effect upon
associatedwith exaggerated sexualbehaviour and
fertility.
prolonged oestrus.Diagnosis maybe made on the
basis of clinical signs,on measurement of plasma
oestrogen concentrations or by the demonstration
Opportunisticpathogens
of persistent cornification of vaginal epithelial cells.
Manyaerobic and anaerobic bacteria normally
hCGmaybeadministered inan attempt to induce
inhabit the vestibule andvagina ofqueens.It has
ovulation;however,in most cases,either ovariec-
been suggested that they may enter the uterus at
tomy or the use of progestogens to suppress the
mating and subsequently cause abortion because
clinical signs is necessary.
the progesterone-dominant uterine environment
allows themtoproliferate(Christiansen1984,Troy
Premature ovarian failure
&Herron 1986a）.It is not clear,however,whether
bacteria isolated from aborted fetuses have caused
Premature ovarian failure has been suggested as a
the abortion or whether theyhave invaded the
causeofpermanentanoestrusinpreviouslyfertile
uterusafterdilatationofthecervixatthetimeof
queensthatresultsina shorteningoftheirrepro-
the abortion.Bacteria commonly isolated include
ductive life(Feldman &Nelson 1987b).The condi-
E.coli,staphylococci,streptococci,salmonellae and
tionisdifficult toconfirm anddiagnosisrelies upon
mycobacteria(Troy &Herron 1986b). Immediately
eliminationofothercauses of anoestrus.In valuable
breeding animals, oestrus induction regimens may
prior toanabortion,tliequeenmaybecomepyrexic
and lethargic.Treatment includes the adminisira-
becontemplated;however,thereisnoinformation
on the efficacy of these treatments.
tionofbroad-spectrum antimicrobial agents,fluid
therapy and drugs to stimulate uterine evacuation.
Hysterqtomy toremovefetal tissue israrelyneces
Habitual abortion
sary,although ovariohysterectomy may berequired
shouldaseveremetritisdevelop
Thereislittlenon-anecdotalevidencetoshowthat
habitual abortion occurs in the queen;however,the
condition is commonly diagnosed and treated.In
Specific infection
many cases it issuggested thathabitual abortion is
Feline leukaemia virus
the result of progesterone deficiency (Christiansen
1984),although evidence for this is lacking.As in
Felineleukaemia virus(FelV)hasbeen implicated
the bitch,the minimum plasma concentration of
ina variety ofclinical syndromes including infer-
progesterone required to maintain pregnancy is
tility,embryonic resorption and abortion (Hardy
approximately 1-2ng/ml,with ovarian-derived pro-
1981).FeLVisbelieved tobethe single most com
gesterone being the major source throughout preg-
mon cause of infertility in the queen (Jarrett 1985)
nancy (Verstegen et al 1993a).The administration
Fetal resorption is seen frequently, although abor
ofprogesteroneorprogestogenshasbeenadvocated
tionandthebirthofpermanentlyinfectedkittens
toprevent habitual abortion(Christiansen 1984);
alsooccur.The aetiologyofthereproductivedisease
however, this therapy is empirical and suffers the
is uncertainand,whileitisknown that thevirus may
risk of prolonging gestation and producing mascu-
cross the placenta,one possibility is that secondary
linized female kittens and cryptorchid male kittens.
bacterial infections occurbecauseofFeLV-induced
Progestogen administration should belimitedto
jmmunosuppression (Jarrel 1985).Diagnosis of
thosecasesinwhicha truelutealinsufficiencyhas
FeLVinfectionmaybeachievedbyvirusisolation,
been diagnosed.
immunofluorescenceoranELiSAmethod.Owners
671
Part
151
Subfertilityandinfertility
should bediscouragedfrombreedingfromFelV-
Abortion generally occurs during the last 2 weeks of
positive queens, since all offspring are born per-
pregnancy (Norsworthy 1974, 1979). Diagnosis is
sistently infected.These kitens usually develop a
made by serolegical and pathological investigation.
FeLV-related disease soon after birth.Vaccines are
now available that provide protection against FeLV
Toxoplasmagondi
and its related diseases.
Toxoplasma gondiinfection has been incriminated as
a rare cause of abortion and congenital infection of
Feline herpesvirus
cats（Troy &Herron 1986b).It is thoughtthat preg-
FelineherpesvirusI mayresult in abortion duringthe
nancy loss is caused by systemicillness in the dam
5thor 6thweekofgestation.Lesionsmaybefound
rather than induction of uterine or fetal lesions.
within theuterus;however,placental lesions have
Transplacentalinfection or transmissionbysuckling
onlybeendemonstratedfollowingexperimental
presuimably explainshow T.gondii cystshavebeen
infection(Hoover&Griesemer1971).Classicallythe
identifiedin very young animals prior to thelikely
organism causes feline viral rhinouracheitis and,in
timefor establishing cysts via ingestionof the organ-
thenaturallyoccurringdisease,abortionsarethought
ism afterbirth.Serological screening is necessary to
tobetheresult of anon-specificreactionto theinfec-
demonstratetherole ofthisprotozoonin cases of
tion (Troy & Herron 1986a).Transnission of the
abortion.Raw orundercooked meat should not be
virus occurs via therespiratory tract,with up to s0%
fed toseronegativepregnant queens.
ofcatsremaining aschroniccarriers.The diagnosis of
herpesvirusinfection isbased upon the clinical signs
Chlamydophilafelis
and the isolationof virus.Vaccinationof queens pro-
videsgoodimmunity and shouldberecommended
ThereislimitedevidencethatChlamydophilafelis
for all breeding animals;however,vaccination does
causes abortion in the queen.Themode of transmis-
notprevent development ofthecarrierstate,where
sion hasnotbeenelucidated,althoughtheorganism
stress mayresult in a return ofviral shedding.
hasbeen isolatedfromthegenital tractofinfected
cats,and there is circumstantial evidence associat
ing infection with reproductive disease(Willis et al
Felinepanleukopeniavirus
1984).As well as direct isolation ofthe organisin,
Felinepanleukopeniavirus istransmittedbydirect
diagnosis is possible by demonstratinghigh anti
contactwith saliva,faeces and urine.Infection of
body titres.lt is difficult to confirm whether the
pregnant queens may result in abortion, stillbirths,
isolation ofthis organism indicates itsrolein an
neonataldeathis andfetalcerebellar hypoplasia
abortion,since itmay simplybean opportunistic
(Troy &Herron 1986a).These effects are the result
bacterium.Vaccination is highly protective and in
oftransplacental infection leading to fetaldeath
most cases results in maternally derived antibodies
andresorptioninearlypregnancyGillespie&Scotl
that persist until approximately 2months of age.
1973),and cerebellar hypoplasia when infection
occursfrom themiddle thirdofpregnancy onwards
(Gaskell 1985).Diagnosis may be made on the basis
Cysticendometrial hyperplasia and
ofthe clinical signs,histopathological findings,
pyometra
virus isolation andpaired serum samples that dem-
onstrate a rising antibody titre.There is no treatment
Aetiology
for kittens with cerebellar hypoplasia.
Both natural and experimentally-induced cystic
endometrial hyperplasia andpyometra havebeen
Felineinfectiousperitonitisvirus
described in the queen (Dow 1962a,b). The syn-
Felineinfectiousperitonitisvirushasbeenimplicated
dromeismorecommon in older animals(Lein&
asacausefnertilitystilrthmtriti
Concannon1983)andisuncommon duringwin-
tion and abortion, chronic upper respiratory tract dis-
ter,when queens are acyclic.In naturally occur-
ease and fadingkitten syndrome(Scott et al 1979,
ring cases, corpora lutea are present within the
Troy&Herron19S6b).Queens are not always ill and
ovaries, suggesting that progesterone is involved in
may sufferresorptionorabortion,whichis nnoticed.
thepathogenesis,in a similar manner to thebitch.
672
Chapter
28
Infertility and subfertility in the bitch and queen
Interestingly, approximately half of the cases are
seen in unmated queens,in which there should
ductive tract from a queen following ovariohysterec
beno luteal phase.This may be explained by the
tomy is shown in Figure 28.20.
observation of Dow [i96zb) and Lawler et al
A variety ofmethods have been investigated for
promoting uterine drainage, although cervical cath-
out mating. Lawler et al (1993) showed that 35% of
eterization has not been reported in the queen.
queens ovulated spontaneously without copulation
Surgical drainage and lavage of the uterus via a lapa-
or mechanical stimulation of the cervix.Reporis
rotomyand uterotomyhavebeen described(Gourley
of the relationship between the incidence of pyo-
1975, Vasseur & Feldman 1982). Following lavage,
metra and parity (Colby 1980) have been disputed
an indwelling drainage tubeis placed in each uter
(Feldman&Nelson 1987b).
ine horn and passed through the cervix and vagina
The bacteria isolated from cases of pyometra are
to allow postsurgical lavage.
similar to those found in the bitch, frequently being
Medical therapy may be useful and has been
opportunistic organisims that are nornal inhabitants
shown to have a good success rate (Feldman &
of the genital tract of cats, including E. coli (Joshua
Nelson 1987b;Davidson et al 1992).Tle forimer
1971,Choi&Kawata 1975,Lawleretal1991). Culture
authors only treated queens that were less than 6
of vaginal swabs is therefore of limited value.
years of age and had open-cervix pyometra using
0.1 or 0.25 mg/kg of dinoprost daily for 5 days, and
Clinical signs and diagnostic features
they found that 12 of 14 queens subsequently pro-
duced litters.The adverse effects of prostaglandin
The severity and clinical signs of the cystic endo-
administration in the queen are similar in duration
metrial hyperplasia/pyoinetra coinplex vary con-
and effect to those rioted inithe bitci and include
siderably. In early cases there may simply be mild
tachycardia,salivation,vocalization,defecation and
endometrial hyperplasia with glandular dilatation.
alteredbehaviour.Prostaglandin therapy should be
This leads to a hostile uterine environment that may
combined with appropriate broad-spectrum anti-
lead to fetal resorption. Queens with endometrial
microbial agents and fluid therapy, Prostaglandins
hyperplasia are often clinically norimal, although
are known to have a direct luteolytic effect in the
orcasionally the uterus may be enlarged and can be
palpated. Ulltrasound exanination of these cases can
their uterine spasmogenic action,explains why this
reveal the presence of anechoic regions within the
regimen appears to be very successful. However, the
uterine mucosa, representing cystic glandular tissue;
luteotrophic action ofprolactin and the luteolytic
occasionally free uterine fluid may be detected.
effects of prolactin inhibitors such as cabergoline
Cases of pyometra are not often difficult to diag-
have been demonstrated (Verstegen et al 1993b); it
nose, since many queens have a malodorous vulvar
is likely that these agents when used in combination
discharge, although the quen may be particularly
with prostaglandin will be efficacious and reduce the
fastidious and regularly clean hier perineum. Often,
dose requirement for prostaglandin.There may also
oestruswill havebeenobserved within2monthsof
the onset of the discharge. The range of diagnostic
methods described in the bitch may be helpful to
confirm the diagnosis. The use of real-time diagnos-
tic ultrasouind provides the most accurate method,
although radiography, haematology and clinical
examination are also rewarding. Care mnust be exer-
cised in palpating the abdomen because of the risk
of causing rupture of the uterurs.
Treatment
As in thebitch,ovariohysterectomy is the treatment
of choire for cases of pyometra.Aitention should
always bepaid to the electrolyte and acid-base sta
Fig.28.20 Reprodurtive tract of a queen with pyometra
tus of the animal prior to surgery;intravenous fluid
673
Part
51
Subfertilityandinfertility
be options for combinations of progesterone recep-
Vulvar swelling during oestrus does not occur;
tor antagonists with theprolactin inhibitors and
therefore,clinical assessments of the queen are of
prostaglandins as described in the bitch.
little value ferdetermining the optimum breeding
time.A small amount of whitevulvardischargemay
occasionally be noticed during oestrus (Tsutsui &
Management factors affecting
Stabenfeldt 1993).The examination ofexfoliative
fertility of the queen
vaginal cytology is useful in the queen for determin-
ingthestageofthecycle;however,thetechniquedoes
not enable theprediction of the onset ofoestrus;up
In the queen,modernbreeding protocols may ham-
to one-third of queens may show signs of oestrus
per reproductive performance because of a misun-
before the vaginal smear contains evidence of corni-
derstanding of the normal reproductive physiology.
fied cells (Shille et al 1979).The technique is there-
Ovulation is considered to be induced by an
fore most useful for verifying oestrus (Banks 1986).
adequate surge ofplasma LH, released following
The smearmay be collected eitherusing moistened
coitus.In one study,singlecopulations induced an
cotton swab orby irrigation with an eyedropper con-
LH surgesufficienttocauseovulationsin only50%
tainingsterilesaline.Staining oftheepithelial cells
ofqueens(Concannon et al 19s0).When four to
can be achieved using a variety of stains including
12unrestrictedmatingswereallowedina 4-hour
amodified Wright-Giemsa stain.Erythrocytes are
period,themean concentrationsofLHwere three
not foundwithin the vaginal smear because uterine
to six times higher than for single matings and all
diapedesis is not a feature of oestrus in the queen.
The changes inthevaginalsmear arethereforelim-
at limited, predetermined intervals on single or
ited to changes in morphology of epithelial cells,
sequential days of oestrus can result in LH release of
because polymorphonuclear leukocytes are also
variable incidence,magnitude and duration (Wildt
usually absent except during early metoestrus and
et al 1978b,1980,Banks & Stabenfeldt 1982）.lt
pregnancy.The percentage of epithelial cells that are
can be seen, therefore, that restricted mating regi
mens, which are common breeding practice, may
to that seen in the bitch.During oestrus more than
result in failure of ovulation in a high proportion
80% of cells are cornified.If the queen does not ovu-
ofqueens. Multiplematings shouldresult in ovu-
late, theexfoliative cellsreturn to a state similar 1o
lation, although Glover et al (1985) suggested that
that observed during anoestrus or early pro-oestrus.
repeatedmatingsvery earlyinoestrusmaynotresult
Earlymetoestrusischaracterized byincreasingnum-
in adequate LH release while similar matings later
bers of parabasal and small intermediate epithelial
in oestrus arelikely tobe successful at inducing ovu-
cells,while debris,mucus and polymorphonuclear
lation.Therefore, it is important that not only mul-
leukocytes also become evident.
tiplematingsbutalsonormalcourtshipbeallowed,
Care should always betaken when collecting vagi-
to ensure that matings occur throughout oestrus and
nal epithelial cells since the techniquemay induce
not simply at the time thebreederconsiders tobe
ovulation.
correct.
It is difficult to identify accurately the stages of
pro-oestrus or oestrusin the queen;however,unlike
References
in thebitch,thebehavioural events aremore repeat-
able. During the I-2 days of pro-oestrus, the queen
AllenWE 1985JSmallAnimPraci26:343
refusescopulationbut ismore active and may show
Allen WE,Dagnall GRI1982Small Anim Pract23:325
interest in themale;this period can only truly be
AllenWE,RentonJP1982BrVet138:188
identified in the presence ofa male.Oestrus may last
Andersen AC1970Thebeagle as anexperimental dog.lowa
between 3 and 20 days, with an average of 8 days.
StateLlniversity Press,Ames,IA,31
During this time,the queen displays a crouchingand
AndersenK198o In:MorrowDA(ed) Currenttherapy in the-
lordotic stance that facilitates mounting by themale.
riogenology.WBSaunders,Philadelphia,p661
This response can be elicited by firmly grasping the
AndersenAC,SimpsonME1973Theovary andreproductive
cycle of the dog (beagle）.Geron-X,Los Angeles,CA
queenby the skin on thebackof theneck.Mating
Andersen AC,Wooten E 1959 In:Cole HH (ed)
should be attempted commencing at midoestrus,
Reproductionin domesticanimals.AcademicPress,New
3-4 days after the initial signs of pro-oestrus.
York,p359
674
Chapter
281
 Infertility and subfertility in the bitch and queen
Anderson RK.Gilmore CE,Schnelle GB 1965IAm Vet Med
Cline EM,Jennings LL,Sojka NI 1980LabAnim Sci30:1003
Ass0c146:1311
ClineEM,ennings L,SojkaNJ1981 FelineIract 11:10
ArbeiterK1993JReprodFertil Suppl47:453
Cohen D 1974Transplant 17:8
Arheiter1,BrassW,BallabioR,chleW 1988J Small Anim
Colby ED 1970 LabAnim Care20:1075
Pract29:781
ColbyED 1980 In:MorrowDA (ed) Current therapy in the-
Armold S,Anold P,ConcannonPWet al 19891Reprod Fertil
riogenology.WBSaunders,Philadelphia,p69
Suppl39:115
ColeCR,SangerVL,Farrell RL,KornderJD1954Northm
Arthur GH,Noakes DE,Pearson H 1989Veterinary reproduc-
Vet35:265
tionandobstetrics,6thednBailliereTindallLondon,
ColomboG,Baccani D,Masi Iet al 1982ClinVet[Milan)
p488
105:196
AsheimA1964ActaVet Scand5:88
Concannon PW 1986In:Burke T)(ed) Small animal repro
AustadR1952Nord VetMed 14:67
duction and infertility.Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia,p 23
Baba E,Hata H,FukataT 1983AmIVetRes44:G06
ConcannonPW1989J ReprodFertil Suppl39:149
BakerTG1982Reproduction in Mammals I.Germ Cells and
Concannon Pw 1991 In:CuppsPT(ed)Reproduction in
Fertilization,p17.Cambridge:Cambridge Ulniversity Press
domestic animals,4th edn.AcademicPress,New York,
Banks DR 1986 In:Morrow DA (ed) Current therapy in the-
riogenology.WB Saunders,Philadelphiap795
Concannon PW 1993J Reprod Fertil Suppl 47:3
BanksDH,Stabenfeldt GH 1982BiolReprod 16:603
ConcannonPW.Hansel W1977Prostaglandins 13:533
Barrett RE,Theilen GH 1977 In:Kirk RW (ed) Current veteri-
Concannon PW,RendanoV1983AmJVet Res44:1506
nary therapysmall animal practice,6th edn.WB Saunders,
Concaon PW,Hansel W,VisekWI1975Biol Reprod
Philadelphia,p 1179
13:112
Barta M,ArchibaldLEGodkeRA 1982Theriogenology
Concannon PW,Hodson B,LeinD 1980Biol Reprod 23:111
18:541
Concannen PW,McCann IPTemple M 19891Reprod Fertil
BartonCL 1977VetClinNorthAmSmallAnim 7:705
Suppl39:3
BealeKM,BloombergMS,Gilder Velal1992」AmAnim
ConcannonPw,TempleM,Montanez A,FrankD1993」
Hosp Assoc28:263
ReprodFertil Suppl 47:522
Bell EI,ChristieDW1971VetRec88:536
Concannon PW,Gimpel T,Newton L,CastracaneVD 1996
Benesch FPommerA1930WienTierartzMonatsschr17:1
Am IVetRes57:1382
Bigliardi E,Parmigiani E,Caviranis Set al2004 Reprod
Cornwell HIC1984 In:ChandlerEA,Sutton JB,Thompson
Domest Anim 39:136
D) for theBritish Small Animal Veterinary Association(ed)
Bjurstrom L,Linde-Forsberg C1992AmJVet Res53:665
Canine medicine and therapeutics,2nd edn.Blackwell
BlooinF1944NorthAmVet25:483
Scientific,Oxford,p340
BlytheSA,England GCW1993JReprodFertil Suppl47:549
Cotchin E1961 ResVetSci2:133
Booth MJ 1994ISmallAnimPract35:39
Cowie RS.MuirRW1957VetRec69:772
Bouchard G,Youngquist RS,Vaillancourt D etal 1991
Curtis EM,Grant RP1964 IAm VetMed Assoc 144:395
Theriogenology 36:41
DavidsonAP,FeldmanEC,Nelson RW1992I AmerVet Med
Bouchard G,Malugani N,Youngquist RSet al1993I Reprod
Assn 200:825
Fertil Suppl 47:517
De Coster R,Dleteren G,Josse Metal 1979 Ann Med Vet
Breitkopf M,Hoffmann B,Bostedt H1997IReprodFertil
123:233
Suppl 51:327
Dhaliwal GK,EnglandGCW,NoakesDE1997Reprod Fertil
Brodey RS1968In:KirkRW(ed) Current veterinary
Suppl 51:167
therapy: small animal practice,3ededn.WB Saunders,
Dhaliwal GK,England GCW,Noakes DE1999Anim Reprod
Philadelphia.p 652
Sci56:259
BrodeyRS,RoszelIF1967AmVet MedAssoc149:1047
Dietrich E,MollerR1993ReprodFertil Suppl47:524
BruchimA,Luisky l,Rosendal S1978ResVet Sci 25:243
DoakRL,HallA，DaleHE[967]Reprod Fertil 13:51
BurkeTI (ed) 1986Small animal reproduciion and infertility.
DoigPA1981CanI CompMed45:233
Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia
Dow C1958Vet Rec70:1102
Calvert C,Leifer CE,MacEwen EG 1982 JAm Vet Med Assoc
Dow C1959aj Comp Pathol 69:237
183:987
Dow C1959bIPathol Bacteriol78:267
Carmichael LE 1970JAmVet MedAssoc156:1714
DowC1960|CompPathol70:59
Carmichael LE,Kenny RM 1968|Am VetMed Assoc
Dow C1962a|CompPaihol72:303
152:605
DowC1962bVetRec74:141
Centerwall WR,BenirschkeK1975AJVetRes26:1275
Durrant BS,Ravida N,SpadyT,ChengA 2006
Chaffaux S,Thibier M 1978 Anin Rech Vet 9:587
Theriogenology 66:1729
Choi W,Kawata K1975 Ipn JVet Res 23:141
Eckersall PD,Harvey MIA 1987Vet Rec120:5
ChristiansenIb] 1984Reproduction in the dog andcaL
Eckersall PD,HarveyMJA,FergusonJMetal 1993Reprod
Bailliere Tindall,London
Fertil Suppl 47:159
ChristieDW,Bell ET 1971ISmallAnimPract 12:159
England GCW1991Vet Rec129:221
ChristieDW,Bell ET,Parkes MF et al 1972Vet Rec 90:704
England GCW1992/SmallAnim Pract33:577
675
Part
[51
Subfertilityandinfertility
EnglandGCW1993I ReprodFertil Suppl47:551
Gunzel A.Koivisto P,Fougner JA 1986 Theriogenology
England GCW 1994VetAnnu 34:189
25:559
England GCW,AllenWE1989a] Reprod Feril Suppl 39:91
GunzelApel abel Sunck CFetal
England GCW,AllenWE 1989bVet Rec125:555
Theriogenology 66:1431
EnglandGCW,AllenWE1989cJReprodFeril86:335
GuyIS1986Vet ClinNorthAmSmall Anim16:1145
EnglandGCW,AndertonDI1992VetRec130:143
HadleyJC1975aVetRec96:545
England GCW,RussoM2006aTheriogenology 66:1694
HladleyIC1975b1Small AnimPract16:249
England GCW,Russo M2006bInPract28:588
Hall EIi992JAmVetMed As50c200:814
England GCW,YeagerAE1993J ReprodFertil Suppl47:107
Hancock JL,Rowlands IW1949VetRec61:771
England GCW,Allen WE,BlytheSA1989Vet Rec125:624
Handaja Kusuma PS,Tainturier D 1993J Reprod Fertil Suppl
England GCW.Freeman SLRusso M2007Vet Rec 160:293
47:363
Engle JB 1940 North Am Vet21:358
Hardy WD 1981 I Am Anim HospAssoc17:941
EvansHM,Cole HH1931 Mem LIniv Calif9:65
Hardy RM,OsborneCA 1974JAmAnim Hosp Assoc10:245
EwaldBH1961SmallAnimClinic4:383
HareT,FryRM 1938Vet Rec50:1540
Fayrer-HoskenRA,Durham DH,AllenSetal 1992 1AmVet
HashimotoA,Hirai K1986In:MorrovDA(ed)Current
Med Assoc201:107
therapyintheriogenology.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
FeeneyDA,JohnstonG] 1986In:Thrall DE(ed)Textbook of
p516
veterinary diagnosticradiology.WBSaunders,London.
Hashimoto A.HiraiK,OkadaK,FujimotoY 1979Am J Vet
P467
Res 40:1236
Feldman EC.Nelson RW 19S7a In:Canine and feline endo-
Hashimoto AHirai K,Fukushi H,Fujimoto Y1983IpnIVet
crinology andreproduction.WB SaundersPhiladelphia,
Sci45:123
p399
HaweRS,Loeb WF 1984 JAmAnim Hlosp Assoc20:123
Feldman EC,Nelson RW 1987b In:Canineand feline endo
Hay MA,KingWA,Gartley CI,Goodrowe KL2000 CanIVet
crinology andreproduction.WBSaunders,Philadelphia,
Res64:59
p525
HayesA.HIarvey HI1979IAmVet MedAssoc174:1304
Felts|1982]An1VetMed Assoc181:925
HendersonRT1984AustVet|61:317
FethersG1943Aust Vet|19:30
Herron MA 1986 1n:MorrowDA(ed) Currenttherapy in the-
Fidler l1,Brodey RS.HowsonAECohen D1966IAmVet
riogenology.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,p829
MedAssoc149:1043
Herron MA,Boehringer BT 1972Feline Pract 5:30
Fieni EDecouvelaere E,Bruyas JE Tainturier D 1993 IReprod
Hirsch DC,Wiger N1977 1Small Anim Pract 18:25
Fertil Suppl 47:529
Holst PA,Phemister RD 1974 Am 」Vet Res 35:401
Foster MA,Hisaw FL1935Anat Rec62:75
Holt PE,Sayle B19S1Small Anim Pract 22:67
FougnerJA1989JReprodFertil Suppl39:317
Hoover EA,GriesemerRA1971AmJPathol 65:173
FowlerEH,FeldmanMK,LoebWF1971AmJVetRes32:327
Hornby RB 1943Vet Rec55:6
FrosiRC1963VetRec75:653
InabaT,Matsui N,Shimizu R,lmori T1984 Vet Rec 115:267
Funkquisi B,LagerstedtAS,LindeC,ObelN193ZbVet
JacksonPGG1979Vet Rec131:105
Med30:72
Jarreu JO 1985In:Chandler EA,Hilbery ADR（ed) Feline
Gannon | 1976 Racing Greyhound 1:12
medicine and therapeutics.Blackwell Scientific,Oxford,
Gaskell RM1985 1n: Chandler EA,Hilbery ADR(ed) Feline
p271
medicine and therapeutics.Blaclwell Scientific,Oxford
JeffcoatelA,EnglandGCW1997IReprodFertilSuppl
p251
51:267
Gilbert RO,NothlingO,OetteEE1989Reprod Fertil
JeffcoateIA,LindsayFEF1989」ReprodFertil Suppl39:277
Suppl 39:225
JerginsAE,Shaw DP 1987 Comp Cont Educ9:489
CillespieJH,Scott FW1973AdvVetSciConipMed17:164
JochleW,ArbeiterK,PostKet al 1989Reprod lertil Suppl
ClenneyWC1954VetMed40:535
39199
GloverTE,Watson PF,Bonney RC1985JReprod Fertil
JohnstonSD 1988In:LaingIA,Brinley MorganWJ,Wagner
75:145
WC(eds)Fertility and infertility in veterinary practice.
Gobello C 2006 Theriogenology 6: 1560
BailliereTindall,London,160
Goodrowe KL,Howard JG.Schmidt PM,Wildt DE 1989
lohnstonSD1989|ReprodFertil Suppl39:G5
IReprodFeril Suppl39:73
Johnston SD 1991 Vei Clin North Am SmallAnim21:421
GoodwinJ-K,Hager D.Phillips LLyman R 1990Ve Radiol
Johnston CA,BennetM,lensen RK,Schirmer R1982Am
31:265
Vei MedAssoc180:1330
Gourley IM 1975 In:Bojrab MI (ed)Current techniques in
JohnstonSD,BuoenLC,MadI JE1983AmVet MedAssoC
small animal surgery.Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia,p244
182:986
GreulichWW1934AnatRec58:217
JohnstonSD,Buon LC,WeberAF Madl JE1985
Grindlay M,Renton JP.Ramsay DH 1973 Res Vet Sci 14:75
Theriogenology 24:597
Gruffydd-Jones T]1990In:HutchinsonM(ed) Manual
Jones DE,Joshua JO1982Reproductive clinical problems in
of small animal endocrinology.British Small Animal
the dogJohn Wright, Bristol
VeterinaryAsscciation,Cheltenham,p143
Joshua JO1971 VetRec88:511
676
Chapter
281
Infertility and subfertility in the bitch and queen
KhuenEC,ParkSE,AdlerAE1940NorthAmVet21:66
Norsworthy GD1974FelinePracl4:34
Kloizer I1974Kleintierpraxis 19: 125
Norsworthy GD 1979 FelinePract9:57
Krakowka S,Hoover EA.Koestner A 1977Am IVet Res38:919
Olkens AC,BeversM,Dieleman S,Willemse S1985VetQ
LagerstedtA-S1993Thesis,Veterinarmedicinska Faculteten,
7:173
University of Uppsala
Olson PNS.Mather EC 1978IAm VetMedAssoc172:708
LagerstedA-S,ObelN,StavenbornM19871Small Anim
OlsonPN,MoultonC1993ReprodFertil Suppl47:433
Pract28:215
Olson PNS,Jones RL,Mather EC 19S6 In:MorrowDA (ed)
LawlerDFBebialDM1986Vet ClinNorthAmSmall Anim
Current therapyin theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders.
16:495
Philadelphia,p469
LawlerDF,Evans RH,ReimersT] et al 1991 Am JVet Res 52:1747
OnclinK,Verstegen JP1999VetRec 144:416
Lawler DEJohnston SD,Hegstad RLet al 1993 I Reprod
OnclinKSilvaDM,DnnayVersegenIP993Rrd
Feril Suppl 47:57
Fertil Suppl 47:403
LeinDH1986In:KirkRW(ed)Currentveterinary ther-
Percy DH,Carmichael LE,AlbenDM1970VetPathol8:37
apy:small animal practice9th edn.WBSaunders,
PhemisterRD,HolstPA,SpanoIS,HopwoodML1973Biol
Philadelphia,p 1240
Reprod 8:74
LeinDH,Concannon PW 1983In:KirkRW(ed) Current
Pope CE,Keller Gl.Dresser BL1993J Reprod Fertil Suppl
veterinary therapy:small animal practice,8th edn.WB
47:189
Saunders,Philadelphiap 936
Post G,King N 1971 Vet Rec 88:229
Lesbouyries G,LagneauF 1950 RecMed Vet12619
PurswellBI 19911AmVetMed Ass0c199:902
Linde NN 1966Mod Vet Pract 47:79
Reimers T].Phemister RD,Niswender GD 1978 Biol Reprod
Linde-Forsberg CWallenA19921Small AninPract 33:67
19:673
Lindsay FEF1983a] SmallAnim Praci24:1
RentonJP,Boyd1S,HarveyMIA19931ReprodFeril Supl
Lindsay FEF 1983b In:Kirk RW(ed) Current veterinary
47:465
therapy: smallanimal practice, 8th edn.WB Saunders.
ReynaudK,FontbonneA,MarselooNet al 2006
Philadelphia,p912
Theriogenology 66:1685
Lindsay FEE Jeffcoate IA,Concannon PW1988In:Proceedings
RohinsonR 1973VetRec92:221
of the1ith International Congress of Animal Reproduction
Robinson R,Cox HW 1970 Lab Anim4:99
andArtificial Insemination,DublinVol4,abstr565
Robinson BL,Sawyer ClH 1987Brain Res 418:41
Lyngset A,Lyngset O1970NordVetMed22:186
RogersAL,TempletonJW,Stewart AP1970LabAnim Care
Manning P] 1979Am IVet Res 40:820
20:1133
Mara IL 1971 In:Kirk RW(ed) Current veterinary ther
RowlandsIW 1950ProcSocStudy Fertil 2:40
apy smallanimal practice,4th edn.WB Saunders,
Rowson LEA.Lamming GE,Fry RM 1953VetRec65:335
Philadelphia.p762
SandholmM.VaseiusH,KvistoA-K1975 IAmVetMed
Maurel MC,Mondain-Monval M,FarstadW，SmithAI1993
ASS0C167:1006
IReprodFertil Suppl47:121
SapersteinG,HarrisS,eioldHW1976FelinePract6:18
MellinTN,Orczyk GP,HichensM,Bchrman HR 1976
Schmidt PM 1986Vet ClinNorth AmSmall Anim 16:435
Theriogenology 5: 175
Schnelle GB 1940North Am Vet21:349
Memon MA,PavleticMM,KumarMSA1993IAmVetMed
SchutteAP 1967aISmall Anim Pract 8:313
Assoc202:295
Schutte,AP 1967bJ Small Anim Pract 8:301
MeunierPCGlickman 1TAppel MJG1981 Cornell Vet71:96
Scott FW,Weiss RC,Post JE 1979 FelinePract 9: 44
Meyers-WallenVN1993/ReprodFertilSuppl47:441
SheridanV1979VetRec104:417
Meyers-WallenVN2006Theriogenology66:1655
ShilleVM,LundstromKE,StabenfeldtGH 1979 BiolReprod
Meyers-WallenVN,Patlerson DF 1988Hum Cenet S0:23
21:953
MeyersWallenVN,PattersonDF1989ReprodFertilSupp
SimJC,Biering-Sorenson U,MollerT 1963AdvVet Sci:335
39:57
SoderbergSF1986VetClinNorthAmSmall Anim16:543
MooreJA.Bennet M1967VetRec80:604
Sokolowski jH 19801AmAnimHospAssoc16:119
Moore JA,Gupta BN 1970J AmVet MedAssoc156:1737
SpaldingRH1923IAm Vet Med Assoc 64:338
Morris ML,Allison JB,White JI 1942AmJ Vet Res3:100
SpaldingVI.Rudd HKLangman BA,Rogers SE1964Vet Re
Mosier]E1975ModVet Pract56:699
76:1402
MoulonJE 1961Tumors of domestic animals.Uiniversity of
Stabenfeldt GH,ShilleVM1977ln:ColeHIH,CuppsPT (ed)
Califonia Press,Berkeley, CA
Reproduction in domesticanimals,3rd edn.Academic
MullerK,ArbeiterK1993|ReprodFertil Suppl47:558
Press,New York,p 499
NeilsenSW 1963IAm VetAnimHospAssoc19:13
StafsethHIThompson NWNeuL1937Am VetMedAssoc
Nelson RW,FeldmanEC1986VetClinNorthAmSmall
90:769
Anim 16:561
5tephenson HC,Milks H 1934 Cornell Vet 24:132
Nelson RW,Feldman EC,Stabenfeldt GH 1982AmVetMed
Strasser H,SchumacherW 1968Small Anim Pract 9:G03
Assoc 181:889
Strom B,Linde-Forsberg C 1993 Am J Vet Res 54:S91
Nickel RF Okkens AC,van der Caag I,van Haaften B 1991
Swift GA,Brown RHI,Nuuall JE1979Vet Rec105:64
VetRec128:333
TaylorD,Renton JP,McGregorA 1975Vet Rec96:428
677
Part
151
Subfertility and infertility
Teunissen GHB 1952 Arta Endocrinol 9:407
Wadas B,Kuhn I, Lagerstedt A-S, Jonsson P 1996 Vet
Thomas KW 1980 Vet Rec 107: 452
Microbiol52:293
ThrallDE1982VetRadiol23:217
Wadsworth PF 1laffC.Prentice DE 1978 LabAnim 12: 165
Troy GC, Hlerron MA 1986a In: Burle'T] (ed) Small animal
WalkerRG 1965J Small Anim Pract 6:437
reproduction and infertility.Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia,
WallaceSS,MahaffeyMB,MillerDM,ThompsonIN1989
p258
|Reprod Fertil Suppl 39:331
Troy GC,Herron MA 1986b In:MorrowDA (ed) Current
WallaceSS,MahaffeyMB,MillerDMetal 1992Am JVet Res
therapy in theriogenology.2nd edn.WB Saunders,
53:209
Philadelphia,p 834
WankeMM,DelpinoMV,Baldi PC2006Theriogenology
Tsutsui T 1975 Jpn 1 Anim Reprod 21:37
66:1573
Tsuisui T 1989 1 ReprodFertil Suppl 39:269
Watson M1942VetRec54:489
Tsutsui I, Stabenfeldt GH 1993 J Reprod Fertil Suppl 47: 29
WatsonM 1957Vet Rec 69:774
Vaden P 1978Vet MedSmall Anim Clin 73: 1160
Wheaton LG,BarbeeDD 1993 Theriogenology 40: 111
Van der 1olsr W,Best AP 197G Tijdschr Diergeneesk 19: 125
Whitney JC1967 J Small Anim Praci 8:247
Vanderlip SL,Wing AE,Felt P etal 1987 Lab Anim Sci
Wildt DE, Seager SWJ 1978 Horm Res 9:144
37:459
Wildt DE,Chakraborty PK,Panko WB,Seager SWJ 197Sa
Van Duijkeren E 1992 Vet Rec 131:367
Biol Reprod 18:561
Van Hlaaften B,Dieleman S, Okkens ACet al 1989  Reprod
Wildt DE,Kinney GM,Seager SWJ 1978b LabAnim Sci
Fertil Suppl 39:330
28:301
VasseurPB,Feldman EC 1982 I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
WildDE,eagerSWChakrabortyPK1980Enocrinolgy
18:870
107:1212
Verhage HG,Beamer NB,Brenner RM 1976 Biol Reprod
Wildt DE, Chan S.Seager SWI, Chalraborty PK 1981 Biol
14:579
Reprod 25:15
Verstegen Jf, Onclin K, Silva LDM et al 1993a I Reprod Fertil
Wildt DE,Bush M,Howard JG et al 1983 Biol Reprod
Suppl 47: 165
29:1019
Verstegen JP Onclin K.Silva LDM, Donnay I 1993b J Reprod
WillisIM,GruffyddJonesT],Richmond S,Paul ID 1984Vet
Fertil Suppl 47:411
Rec 114:344
Verstegen J, Onclin K, Silva LD, Concannon PW 1999
WithrowS]. Susaieck SJ 1986 lr:MorrowDA (ed) Current
Theriogenology 51:597
therapy in theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,
Vogel F,van der HolsiW1973Tijdschr Diergeneesk 98:75
Philadelphia, p 521
Vollkmann DH,KutzlerMA,Wheeler R etal 2006
Wrigh1Pl1990ISmall AnimPraci31:335
Theriogenology 66:1502
WrightNG,Cornwell HIC1970a JSmall Anim Pract 10:669
VonDurr A 1975 SchweizArch Tierheilkd 117:349
Wright NG, Cornwell HJC 1970b Res Vet Sci 11:221
Von SchulzeW1955DtschTierarzil Wochenschr62:504
Yeager AE, Concannon PW1990 Theriogenology 34:655
678
Part
161
Themale animal
29Normal reproduction in male animals...681
TimParkinson
30
Fertility, subfertilily and infertility in
male animals..
705
TimParkinson
31
Artificial insemination......
TimParkinson
29
Chapter
Tim Parkinson
Normal reproduction in male animals
The reproductive organs (Fig.29.1)of the male
Accompanyingthisoutpouchingofperitoneum
animal have three major functions: production of
through the inguinal canal is a diverticulum of the
spermatozoa in the testis,maturation,storage and
internal abdominal oblique muscle,which inserts
transportofsperinatozoa withintheductsystem,
onto thiecremastericfascia andthevaginal tunics.
and deposition of semen within the female geni-
This muscle,the cremaster,raises or lowers the tes-
taltractvia thepenis.The functions of the male
tisinresponsetotemperatureornoxiousstimuli.
hormones are also threefold:maintenanceofsper-
The capsule, or tunica albuginea,of the testis is
matogenesis,production of masculine behaviour
composed principally of fibrous tissue but has a
(primarily libido and aggression) and development
smoothmusclecomponentwhosefunctionislargely
ofthemasculinebodyform.
unknown.Overlying the capsuleis the tunica vagi
nalispropriq.Themainbloodvessels ofthe testis are
Anatomy of the testis,spermatic
distributed over the surface ofthe tunicaalbuginea
before penetrating the capsuleto supply thetestic-
cord and scrotum
ular parenchyma;while the innervation of the tes-
tisis mainly confined to the periphery and little
Thetestesofall domesticmaleanimalsarelocated
nervous tissue is found in its substance.The
at the inguinal region,within a scrotum.In the bull
substance of the testis (Fig.29.3) is composed of
andtheram this structureispendulousandhasan
twomaintissues:seminiferoustubules and intersti-
elongatedneclbutinmostother domesticspeciesthe
tial tissue.Each seminiferous tubule is a highly con-
scrotum is closely applied to the inguinal region.The
volutedunbranchedtubewhichopensatbothnds
scrotum consists ofa skin pouch overlyingvarious
intocollectingtubules andthenceintotheretetestis.
fibroelastic and muscular layers,ofwhich themost
Theseminiferous tubulesarelimitedbyabasement
prominent is ihe unica dartos (Fig.29.2).The dartos
membrane, which is partially surrounded by con-
layers areconfluent between thetestes,where they
tractile myoid cells.Within the tubule, the semi-
form the intertesticular septum.In the boar,the
niferous epithelium iscomposed oftwomain cell
external spermaticfascia is alsoprominent.The tes-
lines,somaticSertolicellsandthesperm-producing
tis itself is surrounded by twolayers of peritoneum,
germinal cell lines.Interstitial tissue,whichconsists
whichareformed duringthedescentofthetestis as
of steroid-producing Leydig cells,blood vessels and
a singleout-pouchingoftheparietalperitoneum,
lymphatics,exhibits much variation in its quan-
through theinguinal canal.Theouterlayerofperi-
toneum,the processus vaginalis（tunica vaginalis
ple,Leydig cells in theram occur in small clusters
reflexa),isreflectedontothetestistoform theserous
around bloodvessels,interspersed inrelativelylarge
outerlayerofthat organ,thetunicavaginalispropria.
lymphatics,whereas theinterstitial tissue of theboar
681
Part
Themale animal
6
Fig.29.1Thegenitalorgansof the bull.a,testis;b,headof epididymis;c,bodyofepididymis;d,tailof epididymis;e,vas
deferens;fvascularpartof spermaticcord:g,ampulla ofvasdeferens;h,seminalvesicle;i,bodyof prostate;k,pelvicurethra
surrounded byurethralismuscle:I,bulbourethral gland;m,bulbocavernosus muscle;n,cruspenis;o,ischiocavernosusmuscle;
p,distal sigmoid flexureof penis;,glans penis;s,retractor penismuscle;t,urinary bladder;u,pubicymphysisv,rectum.（From
Blom&Christensen 1947.)
hasdenselypacked Leydigcells and small lymphat-
of seminiferous tubules openinginto each of the
ics(Fawcett1973).
transitional zones varies between species, as do the
At theendsofeach seminiferous tubule,there is a
number of channels comprising the rete(Setchell
transitional zonebetween spermatogenictissueand
el al 1994).Theretetestisconsistsofa network of
therete testis.In ungulates and carnivores,the rete
interconnecting channels with a simple epithelial
testisisin thecentreofthetestiswithin thefibrous
lining that move the sperm into the epididymis.
matrix of the mediastinum,although its posi-
Therete opens into the epididymis via 13-20 effer
tion differs inrodeiits andprimates.Thenumber
ent ducts (Hemeida et al 1978).These tubules are
682
Chapter
29
Normal reproductioninmale animals
suspension ofthe testisfrom the spermaticcord,
Vaginal tunic
a smaller,medially situated body and a distended
tail,which is continuous with the vas deferens.The
Extermal
muscular wall of the epididymal duct moves sperm
Testicular
spermatic
vessels
through its lumen by peristalsis, so that during pas-
lascia
Mesorchium
sage of the epididymis, sperm,which areimmature
lormadol
Spermatic
Skin.
visceral
onreleasefromthetestis,undergofinal maturation.
pentoneum
The tailof the epididymis alsoacts asareservoir
Delerenttuc
Internal
forfully mature sperm,which becomes turgid with
fascia
ning
stored spern in sexually active animals.In domes-
scrotalseplum
ticanimals,the epididymis is closely applied to the
Cremastormuscle and
Cavily ofvaginal lunic
exterior of the testis, whereas in rodents and pri-
mates the connection is much looser.
Fig.29.2Diagram of theanatomy of the fascial,muscular
Thevas deferensis arelatively thick-walled,mus-
andperitoneal tissuesof theneckof the scrotum.Thevaginal
cular tube that acts as both a reservoir for sperm
tunicisstronglyreinforced by theclosely adherent andmuch
and themeans of their conduction between the
thicker internal spermatic fascia.All the layers are closey
epididymis and the penis. It is situated mediocau-
apposed to theiradjacent structures so that the only(poten-
tial)spaceis theCavityof thevaginal tunic.(Redrawnwith
dallywithin thespermaticcord,inasmall diverticu
permissicn from Cox1982.)
lum ofperitoneum.Inaddition to thevas deferens,
the spermatic cord also contains the arteries,veins
andnerves supplyingthetestis,all ofwhich arecon-
tainedwithin theperitoneal vaginal tunics.Together,
these structures form the spermatic cord.The sper-
maticsacincludes thespermaticcord,theinternal
spermaticfascia,cremaster muscleand cremasteric
fascia.The cremaster muscle is situated on the oppo-
site side of the sac to the vas deferens(i.e.on the
anterolateral surface).Thevasa deferentia enterthe
abdomen through the inguinal canals,whence they
runin acaudal direction to join thepelvicurethra
where thelatter organjoins theneck of the bladder.
A number of short ligaments exist between the
various structures within thescrotum,asshown in
Figure29.4.Theproper ligament of the testisjoins
theventralpoleofthetestistothetailofepididyinis,
Fig.29.3 Histclogy of the testis. Interstitial tissue(l)contain-
ing Leydig cells(I),blood,nervoustissueandlymphatictissue
which is alsojoined tothevaginaltunicbythecau-
is interspersedbetween seminiferous tubules(T),whose
dal ligament of the epididymis.These ligaments
lumen is lined,in some sections,by formed spermatozoa
arederivedfromthegubernaculum.Finally,on the
The periphery of the tubules iscomposed of spermatogonia
external surfaceofthevaginal tunic,thescrotal liga
(g)andSertoli cells(s),with spermatocytes（c)and spermatids
mentjoins thetunicto thescrotalfascia.
(t)occurring deeperin the tubules.
Blood and nervous supply to the
initially relatively straight but have a long convo-
testis
luted section before opening into the epididymal
duct.Fluid resorption occurs in both rete testis and
efferent ducts.
matic arteries,which arise from the caudal aorta,
The epididymis is a single, highly convoluted
close to the renal arteries. In the domestic spe-
tubeinto which thevasa efferentia drain the semi-
cies, these arteries pass through the inguinal canal,
niferous tubules. Grossly, the epididymis appears
enclosedinperitoneum,formingamajorcomponent
as an approximately cylindrical organ,which is
of the spermatic cord. In animals with scrotal tes-
divided into a prominent head, situated closeto the
tes,the spermatic artery becomeshighly convoluted
683
Part
6
Themaleanimal
CAUDAL
CHANIAL
CAUDAL
CRANIAL
nuscle
Vaginaltunic
Deteren:(medal
panialapeilo
Mesorchum
Bodyofepididymis
oadofopididymis
Ligamant ol tal
olepididymis
Tail ol epicidymis
Prcperligamenl
(snoun) ses
natic
ttest:s
Testis covered by
A
viscoralperitoncum
Fig.29.4Ligaments of the scrotum.(A)Lateral view of theright spermatic sacof the horse.(B)Lateral aspect of the contents of
theright spermaticsacof thehorse.Themiostventral part of thespermaticsacshown inFigure29.2hasbeen incised soas to
enterthelumenof thevaginal tunic.(Redrawn withpermissionfromCox1982.)
from thepoint at which it passes through the ingui-
artery reaches the testis(Waites& Moule 1960)
nal canal,although the degree ofconvolution is less
Intherat(Maddocks&Setchell 198s)thepulseis
if the scroum is inguinal than if pendulous.In the
reducedfrom34mmHgattheproximalendofthe
bull, the spermaticartery in the sperimatic cord is
spermaticcord to6mmHgai thetesticularend.It
=5min length (Setchell 1970).The artery does not
appears that a pulsatile arterial blood supply to
divideuntil itreaches thetestis(Setchelletal 1994),
the testisis incompatible with normal spermato-
at which point it divides into major disuributing
genesis.Second,spermatogenesis ismore efficient
arteries thatrun over thesurface of the testis before
at temperaturesbelow themammalian corebody
descendinginto itsparenchyma.
temperature.The close apposition ofartery and
The testis is drained by an anastomosingplexus
veins allowsheat exchangetooccurbetween sper-
ofveins (the pampiniform plexus) that arise in the
maticartery andvein,suchthatthetemperaturein
tunicaalbuginea andreturn to thespermaticcord
the testisis several degreeslower than the core body
through the inguinal canal and thence to the caudal
temperature.Third,it is possible that some counter-
vena cava.Initially,many veins are identifiable in
current exchange ofsmallmoleculessuch astestos-
the plexus but,as the plexus ascends the spermatic
terone,mayoccurbetweenspermaticveinandartery
cord,fewer and fewer collateral branches are appar-
althoughtheimportanceofsuch transfersremainsto
ent,until a few main veins penetrate theinguinal
be established.
canal.These finally join,as a single vein,into the
The nervous supply ofthe testis (Hodson 1970)
caudalvenacava orrenalvein(Setchell1970).Inthe
is derived from the thoracolumbar sympathetic
bull,veins of different sizes arepresentn theplexus
outflow,whose visceral motor fibres innervate the
large veins running parallel to each other and sur-
smoothmuscleofthetesticulararteriolesandofthe
rounding the spermatic artery, smaller veins wih
testicular and epididymal capsules.Thesefibres and
a less organized architecture,and tiny veins in or
their accompanying visceral sensoryfibresrun in the
closely applied to the walls of the spermatic artery.
spermatic cord.The scrotumhas both visceral and
Allthese veins communicate with one another
somaticinnervation,which is derived from nerves
(Heesel al1984)and there is alsoevidence of arte-
that pass through the inguinal canal and arise as
riovenous anastomoseswithin thespermaticcord.
branches of the pudendal nerve. A further promi-
The spermatic artery is therefore in very inti-
nentfeature oftheinnervationof the scrotum isthe
mate contact with the pampiniform plexus.This
motorsupplytothecremastermuscleanddartos.
complex vascular anatomy fulfils several func-
Howeverasmightbe expected from theinterspecies
tions.The extension of the length of the sper-
variation in anatomyofthe scrotum,there is also
matic artery results in the arierial pulse being
considerable variation in the detail of its nervous
almostcompletelyeliminatedbythetimethe
supply.
684
Chapter
291
Normal reproduction in male animals
Accessory glands
The mid-piece and tail of the sperm may be con-
sideredtoforma singlefunctionalentity.The tail
itself consists of a central axoneme,which,in the
The accessory glands include the ampullae,prostate,
regionofthemid-piece,is sheathed inahelixof
vesicular glands and bulbourethral (or Cowper's)
mitochondria （reviewed by Bedford &Hoskins
glands. There is much variation between the anat-
1990). Sperm metabolize simple molecules, princi-
omy of the accessory glands in the different species,
pally sugars and their derivatives (e.g. fructose, glu-
which is summarized in Table 29.1.
cose,mannose and pyruvate),by both aerobic and
anaerobicpathways,toprovide energy for motility
Structure and function of
and themaintenance ofionicgradienis acrossmem-
branes (Harrison 1977).Forward motility of sperm
spermatozoa
results from coordinated waves of flagellar bending
progressing from the neck along the length of the
Spermatozoa are divided into three main segments:
tail.Bendingof the tailoccurs astheresultof forces
the head,mid-piece and tail （Fig.29.5).Thehead
generatedbetweenadjacentperipheral doubletsof
consists oflittle other than the condensednucleus
the axoneme(Satir et al 1981).The dynein arms of
andtheoverlyingacrosome.Ofiheotherenzymes
the doublet,which in the resting state arebound
contained within the acrosome,themain two are
totheadjacent doublet,unbind,elongate and then
acrosin and hyaluronidase(Morton 1977).During
bind to a new sitefurther along the filament.The
the acrosome reaction,the outer acrosomal mem-
unbinding process,which is the adenosine riphos-
brane fuseswiththeplasmalemma,under thecon-
phate(ATP)-using step,is then repeated,resulting
trolofintra-and extracellular calcium,whereupon
in a progressive bending of the flagellum. The dou-
exocytosisofthecontentsoftheacrosome occurs
blets on one side of the axoneme work in opposi-
(Hlarrison & Roldan 1990).The main functions
tion to each othetproviding the alternating beat of
ascribedtotheacrosomalenzymesaredispersalof
the tail.After capacitation,the rate and amplitude
the cumulus oophorus and local lysis of the zona
oftheflagellarbeatgreatlyincreasesand therate of
pellucida;althoughithasbeenquestionedrecently
energy usage by the sperm is correspondingly ele-
whether thelatterfunctionisindeedafunctionof
vated(Yanagimachi 1981).The motilityofthecell
thereleased acrosomal enzymesper se.Theinner
iiselfprobablyhaslittlerolein themovement of
membrane ofthe acrosome isrelatively stable and
spermatozoa through the cervix and uterus,for this
remainsintactaftertheacrosomereactionhas
isaccomiplishedmainlythroughcontractionsofthe
occurred, and some of the acrosomal enzymes are
female genital tract (Hunter 1980).However, pas-
probablyboundto theinner acrosomalmembrane.
sage through the uterorubal junction and within
Penetrationofthezonapellucida andfusionwith
theoviductdoesrequirespermmotility,whilethe
theoolemma arebothreceptor-mediatedevenis,
enhanced,whiplash motility of the capacitated
with specificareas of the spermheadbinding to tar-
sperm is necessary for penetration of the cumulus
get componenis of the oocyte(Wassarman 1990).
andzonapellucida
Table 29.1 Accessory sex glands of the main domesticspecies
Species
Ampulla
Prostate
Vesicular gland
Bulbourethral gland
Cat
++
++
Dog
(+)
+++
Horse
++
+
++
Cattle
(+)
++
+++
+
Sheep
(+)
++
+++
+
Pig
+
++
+++
anatomically prominent.
685
Part
6
Themaleanimal
Acrosome
Perioralorium
Acrosomal ridge
Head
Equatorial segmenl
Postacrosomalregion.
Nuclearenvelope
Neck or connecting piece
Acrosome
Plasma membrane
Midpleceof tail
Postacrosomalsheath
Posteriorring
Capitulum
Ceniricle
Miochondrion
Axoneme
Densefibres
Principaipieceoftail
Plasma
membrane
Densefibres
Sheathof
principal piece
Axoneme
Centraltubules
Subfibre
B
Cross-bridge
Outer
Dyneinarm
Nexin link
inner
D
A
Fig.29.5 Diagram of theultrastructure ofa spermatozoon.(A)Main structural regions asrevealed by light microscopy.
(B)Generalized ultrastructural features of the head and connecting piece.(C)Ultrastructure of the proximal principal piece of the tail.
(D)Generalized detail of theultrastructure of the axonemeof the tail.(Redrawn and adapted fromBedford&Hoskins1990.)
686
Chapter
291
Normal reproduction in male animals
Development of the male
testis development (Wilhelm et al 2007). The onset
of sry expression is associated with migration of fur-
reproductive system
thercellsfrom themesonephros thatwill become
the myoid cells of the seminiferous tubules (Capel
Very early in embryonic development, primordial
etal 1999). Differentiation of Sertolicells and migra-
germ cells start to develop in the yolk sac,under the
tion of myoid cells results in the development of tes-
control of growth factors from the bone morphogenic
tis cords, which initially appear as groups of germ
protein (BMP) series (Itman et al 2006). Invagination
cells surrounded by Sertoli cells,further surrounded
of the hindgut during embryonic differentiation
by peritubular nyoid cells. It appears that both
brings the cells passively into the body cavity of the
Sertoli cells and myoid cells are needed for the nor-
embryobut thereafter theystart tomigrateby anoe
mal development of testis cords(Buehr et al 1993)
boid movement into the developing urogenital
These cords will eventually become the seminifer-
ridge. Quite small numbers of primordial germ cells
ous tubules of the mature testis (Tilmann & Capel
enter the genital ridge, where they cease migration,
1999). It is importani to note that the only criti-
cal effector of the XY germ cell is its spermatogen-
lication (Wilhelm et al 2007). In rodents, replication
esis gene,which lies on theY chromosome and is
of these gonocyies is arresied during the latter stages
responsible for thepubertal onset of spermatogen-
of fetal development (Yao et al 2003), resuning
esis(Burgoyne1988,Mclaren 1988).Many of these
after birth; whereas in the fetal ram, there appears
processes of replication and differentiation of germ
tobecontinuousreplicalion of gonocytesfromDay
cells and Sertoli cells are locally regulated through
42until birth (Hochereau-de-Reviers et al 1995).
altocoids of the transforming growth factor (TGF)β
Resumption of gonocyle replication in therodent
superfamily, particularly BMP, TGFβ and activins/
testis is accompanied by differentiation of gonocytes
inhibins (Itman et al 2006). It is interesting to note
intospermatogonia(Itman etal 2006).Meiosis does
the similarity between the germ and support cells of
notcommence until the onset ofpuberty(McLaren
the testis and those of the ovary in this regard: simi-
1995).The somatic cells that will form the future
lar autocoids also regulate tie dialoguebetween the
Sertoli cells also migraie into the gonadal ridge
oocyte andgranulosacells (McNatty et al 2003).
from thecoelomicepithelium,whiletheprecursors
Different populations of Leydig cells, which are
of the interstitial and Leydig cells are derived from
dissimilar to each other in termsofthesteroidsthat
the underlying mesonephros (O'Shaughhnessy et al
they produce and the regulation of their steroido
2006). At this stage the gonad is bipotential, with
genesis, are present in the fetus and adult. Precursors
its somatic components being capable of differen-
of fetal Leydig cells appear to co-migrate from the
tiating into the support and steroidogenic cells of
mesonephros with the cells that will become the
either ihe male or female gonad (Merchant-Larios
steroidogenic cells of the adrenal (O'Shaughhnessy
etal1993).
et al 2006). Multiplication and differentiation ofthese
Inmale embryos,development of thepresumptive
precursor cells are under the control of the Sertoli
gonad into a testis is stimulated by the activation of
cells, through signalling molecules (such as des-
tlie sex-determining gene of the Y chromosome (sry)
ert hedgehog (Yao et al 2002) and platelet-derived
in pre-Sertoli cells (Sinclair et al 1990).Activation
growth factor:Brennan el al 2003). Myoid and
of the sry gene initiates expression of a series of fur-
endothelial cells also play a role in directing the dif
ther genes, alihough specific target genes still await
ferentiation of Leydig cells(Kitamura et al 2002].
definitiveidentification.Sry-induced differentiation
Fetal Leydig cells differ from those of the adult, in
of the testis is itself dependent upon insulin recep-
as much as their primary steroid secretion is andro-
tor family function, since genetic defectsin humans
stenedione,rather than testosterone,which has to
and laboratory rodents of many of these receptors
be converted into testosterone in the seminifer-
leads to failure of testis development or sex rever-
ous tubules (O'Shaughhnessy el al 2o00). Also, af
sal (Verma-Kuirvari et al 2005). Sertoli cells are the
least in the mouse,fetalLeydigcell steroid secretion
first cell type to differentiate from bipotential sup-
occurs withouta requireiment for trophic hormones;
porting cell precursors within the gonad,and their
presence is therefore the first indicator that the
hormone (LH) and adrenocorticotrophic hormone
gonad has passed from the inclifferent stage into
(ACTH) (O'Shaughhnessy etal 2005)
687
Part
61
The male animal
Products of ihe Sertoli cells and Leydig cells are
genital tubercle(Jost 1953).It also causes masculin-
thereafter responsible for differentiation of the
ization of the hypothalamo-piiuitary endocrine axis
remainder of themalereproductivetract.Pre-Sertoli
(Robinson etal2003).Evidence of this masculiniza-
and Sertoli cells produice anti-millerian hormone
tion can be seen in genotypic female animals that
(AMH, also known as millerianinhibitingsubstance),
have been exposed to androgens in utero (e.g. the
which prevents development of the female genital
freemartin ewe: Parkinson et al 2001).
tubular genitalia from the paramesonephric ducts
Leydig cells additionally produce insulin 3, which,
(George & Wilson 1994). AMHI is a large (=140kDa),
in conjunction with testosterone,controls the
dinmeric protein (George& Wilson 1994) that belongs
descent of the testis. As the testis develops in the
to the TGFβ superfamily (Wilhelm et al 2007).Its
mesonephros, differentiation of the definitive kid-
actions are primarily paracrine, acting through recep-
ney (the metanephros) begins and,as it grows, the
tors in the mesenchymal cells that surround the
metanephrosreplaces thiemesonephros as the organ
paramesonephric duct, resulting in apoptosis of
of osmoregulation. The testis then migrates from its
the epithelial cells of the paramesonephric ducts
position within the abdomen towards its defini-
(Roberts et al 2002).AMH also affects male gonadal
tive position in the scrotum,ina processreferred t
development, being required for norimal develop-
as the descent of the testis.The testis traverses the
ment of the efferent ducts (Behringer et al 1994).
abdomen(Gier&Marion 1970,Fig.29.7A,B)partly
Secondly, Leydig cells produce androgens, which
as a result of differential growth between the pelvis,
stimulate development ofthe mesonephric(wolf-
abdomen,kidney and testis and parily as a result
fian) ducts (Fig. 29.6) to form the tubular parts
of the tension exerted upon the testis by the guber-
(including epididymis, ductus deferens, ampulla,
naculum.It is this part of the descent of the testis,
vesicular gland and prostate) of the male genital
particularly the development ofthegubernaculun,
tract. Androgens are also responsible for the differen-
that is regulated by insulin 3 (Verma-Kurvari et al
tiation of the penis from the genital tubercle (George
2005). Genetic deficiencies of insulin 3 production
&Wilson 1994).Exposure ofthe female fenus to
at the time of the desceni of the testis appears to be
androgens results in masculinization of the inter-
a major component of the inherited basis of ciyp-
nal genitalia,with development of themesonephric
torchidism, while oestrogen-induced impairment
ducts and atrophy of the paramesonephric ducts and
of insulin 3 may be of significance as an environ-
a greater or lesser degree ofmasculinization of the
menntal cause.Before the testis itself passes thiroughi
Undifferentiated gonad
Anti-mullerian hormone
Differentiationo
Regression of
Sertoli gells
paramesonephric
ducts
Masculinizationof
Mesonephras
the mesonephric
Androgen
ducts
Mesonephric
duct
Vesicular gland
Paramesanephric
Differentiation of
Epididymis
pnp
Leydiggells
Urogenital
snuis
Prostate
Penis
Fig.29.6 Development of the male reproductive tract
688
Chapter
29
Normalreproductioninmaleanimals
MesD
Mes
MetD
Table 29.2Age at which testes descend into the scrotum
ure
Species
Time of testicular descent
Met
Cat
2-5 days afterbirth
Dog
Between the lastfew daysofgestation and the
firstfewdaysafterbirth
Horse
Between9monthsof gestation anda fewdays
afterbirth
Cattle
3.5-4manths of gestation
A
Sheep
Midgestation(=80 days)
ure
vg
MeiD
Pig
After 85daysof gestation
SpA
PP
gubernaculum and pressure from the abdominal
bla
viscera （Fig.29.7C).The times at which the testis
is first present within the scrotum are given for the
main domestic species in Table 29.2.
B
Physiology of the testis
MetD
Endocrinology
SpA
Malereproductive physiology is under the primary
endocrine control of the pituitary gonadotrophins,
bla
LH and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH),both
ofwhich are synthesized and secreted in response
to gonadotrophin-releasing hormone(GnRH).Ata
pam.p
local level,manyofthefunctions ofthetestis are
alsoregulatedbyintratesticularparacrine andauto-
uad
Epi
crinefactors aswell asbeinginfluenced byanumber
ofendocrine metabolicregulators.
The secretion of LH is pulsatile,in response to epi
C
sodicstimulation ofthe pituitaryby GnRH,result
G
inginirregular episodesofLHsecretionoccurring
Fig.29.7 Descent of the testis in the bull.(A)65-day fetus,(B)
every 2-4 hours.The primary action of LH is upon
96-day fetus and(C)140-dayfetus.The changing relation-
Leydigcells,in which it controls testosterone syn-
ships between the gubernaculum(G),testis（T) and vaginal
thesis.Infact,it appears thatregulation of testoster-
tunics willbenoted.bla,bladder;dd,ductus deferens;Epi
one synthesis is the only indispensable function of
epididymis; g, gubenacular cord; Mes,mesonephros; Met,
metanephros;MetD,metanephric duct;pam.p,pampiniform
LHwithin the testis(Holdcraft &Braun 2004).Peak
plexus; pen, shaft of penis:pr, prostate; Sc, scrotum; SpA.
testosterone concentrations follow those of LH by
spermatic artery;ure,urethra;vg,vesicular gland.(Redrawn
about40minutesanddeclinebacktoprestimula-
withpermissionfromGier&Marion1970.)
tion values over afurther40-80minutes(D'Occhio
et al 1982a; Fig. 29.8).
the inguinal canal,thecanal is distended bya thicl
Ll receptors are primarily present on Leydig cells,
ening of the gubernaculum and by the passage of
although there is also evidence oftheir presence
the tail oftheepididymis.Thus,thegubernaculum,
in germ cells (Lei et al 2001).Experiments upon
tail of epididymis and tip of the vaginal process pre-
hypophysectomized rams suggest that the role of
cede the testis through the inguinal canal.Final pas-
these receptorsmay be to control the rate of divi-
sageofthe testis is achievedby tension from the
sion of stem spermatogonia is controlled by LH
689
Part
6
Themaleanimal
10
9
Testosterone
LH
08
6
20-
0
LH
0
0800
1200
1600
2000
0
0400
0800
Time of day(h)
Fig.29.8Typicalprofile of thepatternsof LH and testosterone secretionin theram.(RedrawnfromD'Occhio et al 1982a.)
（Courot&Ortavant 1981）.The actionsof LHupon
glands and for the development of masculine sec-
the Leydig cell are primarily mediated through ade-
ondary sexual characteristics. Within the testis,
nylate cyclase,which,through a series of intermedi
androgen receptors are present in LeydigSertoli and
atesteps,regulatessteroidogenesisbycontrollingthe
myoid cells(Holdcraft & Braun 2004） but not in
conversion of cholesterol into pregnenolone(Hall
germ cells.Testosteroneis converted by 5o-reduction
1994),whichis therate-limiting step of testosterone
into5o-dihydrotestosterone（DHT)intheSertoli
steroidogenesis.A number ofgrowth factors and
cells and in accessory sexglands(Bardinet al 1994).
cytokines have been demonstrated to have positive
DHT,whichisnotsusceptibletoaromatization and
andnegativemodulatoryeffectsupontheactionof
is a more potent androgen than testosterone itself
LH upon Leydig cells(Bornstein et al 2004).Among
appears io be the primary androgen controlling
these, the positive effects of growth hormone (Colon
accessorysexglandactivity,whereastestosteroneis
et al 2005), insulin-like growth factor(IGF)-I(Abo-
the primary androgen involved in spermatogenesis
Elmaksoud &Sinowatz2005）and insulin(Ballester
(Walker&Cheng2005).BothtestosteroneandDHT
et al 2004) appear to be of particularimportance.
are bound within the tubule lumen by the secretory
NegativefeedbackregulationofLH secretion is
product of the Sertoli cells,androgen-binding pro-
mediated by the effects of testosterone upon hypo-
tein (ABP).The role of ABP therefore appears to be
thalamicGnRHandpituitarysynthesisandsecretion,
tomaintainhigh androgen concentrations in the
both direculyandafterconversion todihydrotestos-
luminaof the seminiferoustubuleand epididymis.
teroneoraromatizationtooestradiol[Meisel&Sachs
The main target of FSH is the Sertoli cell, where
1994). Curiously, in long-term castrated ruminants,
it also acts through adenylate-cyclase-linked enzyme
neithernegative feedbacknor libidocan berestored
systems. Under the influence of FSH, Seroli cells
by testosteroneadministration,forbrain aromatase
secreteABP(Gunsalusetal1981)andaromatize
activity is eventually lost and oestrogen itself has to
testosterone into oestrogens (Setchell et al 1983),
begiven fortherestorationoftheseeffects(D'Occhio
while FSH is also responsible for switching on a
etal1982b).
greatmany genes in the Sertoli cell that regulate or
Testosteroneis required for the production of
support spermatogenesis(Walker &Cheng2005).
sperm and their subsequent maturation in the
Most aspects of spermatogenesis require support by
epididymis,for the function ofihe accessory sex
FSHI and/or testosterone.However,it appears from
690
Chapter
291
Normalreproductioninmale animals
geneticandpharmacological studiesinrodentsthat
the primary role of FSH in spermatogenesis is stimu-
Hypothalamus
lation ofSertoli cell proliferation duringprepuber-
taldevelopment（Hleckert&Griswold 2002）and,
sincethenumberofSertolicellslargelydetermines
GnRH
the numberofgermcells(Sharpe1994),this action
Anterior
pituitary
matogenic yield (Holdcraft & Braun 2004).
It is generally considered that the secretion
of FSH lacks the episodic pattern that is charac-
teristic of LH, exhibiting longer-term fluctuations
instead.However,there aresomereports ofa more
LH
FSH
T/E
clearly pulsatile pattern of FSH secretion.Negative
feedbackisbybothgonadalsteroids andinhibin.
Inhibin is produced by Sertoli cells (Baird etal
1991)and causes negative feedback on FSH secre-
tion,directly atthelevelof thepituitary（Tilbrook
etal 1993),but it has littleeffect on LH（Tilbrook
etal 1995).Inhibin B is thepredominant form
(Phillips 2005) in themales of most domestic spe-
cies,although in theram itis inhibin A (McNeilly
et al 2002).Activin,which is also produced by the
abp-
Sertoli cell, stimulates FSH production in the pitu-
itary,althoughmostofitsfunctionsactuallyseem to
abp
be as a paracrine agent within the testis (de Kretser
Sertoli
cell
etal2004).
Aschematicsummary ofthemainendocrinerela
惊
tionships of the testis is given inFigure 29.9(Amann
&Schanbacher 1983).
r
Spermatogenesis
Leydigcell
Spermatogenesis is thebasic process ofmalerepro-
Epididymis
duction,resulting in the production of spermato
zoa.Itis carriedoutin theseminiferous tubule of
the adult testis and comprises three main processes:
Fig.29.9Diagramof the endocrine relationships control-
ling the testis.abp,androgen-binding protein;E,oestrogen;
mitoticreplication or spermatogonia,meiosis and
GnRH,gonadotrophin-releasing hormone;1,inhibin;T,testos-
postmeiotic differentiation into spermatozoa.
terone.(Redrawnand adapted fromAmann&Schanbacher
These processes of spermatogenesis are reflected
1983.)
in the functional morphology of the seminiferous
tubule (Courot et al 1970). Fibroblasts and myoid
cellssurround thebasement membrane of the semi-
fetal and prepubertal life(Wilhelm et al2007),with
niferous tubule externally.The blood supply is lim-
the full complement being present at the time of
ited by the basement membrane and does not pass
puberty.There is evidence that there is an annual
into the tubuleitself.Within the tubule there are
cycle ofloss andreplication ofSertoli cells in at
somatic Sertoli cells and the various stages of the
least some seasonally breeding species (Johnson &
seminiferous cell line,which together form the semi-
Thompson 1983, Hochereau-de-Reviers et al 1987).
niferous epithelium.Sertoli cellsrest upon thebase-
Sertoli cells extend through the entire thickness
ment membrane, are irregularly cylindrical in shape
of the seminiferous epithelium,so that the ger-
and have large,variably shaped nuclei situated close
minalcellsin all stages ofspermatogenesis are in
tothebasement membrane.They multiply during
close coniact with them.As Sertoli cells are the
691
Part
61
The male animal
only somatic cells that are in direct contact with
）Aspermalogcnia
differentiating germ cells, they have to provide both
physical andnutritional support for spermatogen-
esis (Griswold 1998). The seminiferous tubules
are divided into basal and luminal comparments
natoqonie
by ‘junctional' complexes (tight cell junctions)
)Intermedalespermatogonia
between adjacent Sertoli cells (Setchell et al 1994).
These junctions form the blood-testis barrier
Bspermalogonia
(Hochereau-de-Reviers et al 1990),whichi main-
oooo
tains the specialized environment of the lumen of
Bspermalogonia
the seminiferous tubules and separates meiotic and
Primary spermatocyles
postmeiotic cells from the immune system. They
forin at around the time of puberty.Development
Secondaryspermatocyles
of these junctions is androgen-dependent, as is
the adhesion beiween germ cells and Sertoli cells
oSpermatids
(Holdcraft&Braun2004).
FSH and tesiosterone are essential for the normal
（)Spermatozca
activity of Sertoli cells.Fetal and prepubertal mnl-
tiplication of Sertoli cells is dependent upon FSH
and independent of testosterone, whereas many
aspects of Sertoli cell support of spermatogenesis
Fig.29.10 Multiplication of cels durirg spermatogenesis
can be maintained by cither hormone(Walker &
in the bull. A1 spermetogonia undergo a series of mitotic
Cheng 2005), probably though activation of similar
divisions to produce A2,A3,intermediate,B1 and B2
intracellular pathways. There are,however, aspects
spermatogonia. The final mitetic division produces primary
of Sertoli cell function that appear to require FSH
spermatogonie,whichentermeicsis,producing secondary
since,in the sheep, some spermatogonial divisions
after the second. Spermatids then differentiate into spermato-
can only be supported by FSH (Kilgour et al 1998).
zoa without further cellular division.
However, the main hormone responsible for main-
lenance ofspermatogenesis in the postpubertal
animal is testosterone (Sharpe 1994).Many other
substances contribute to the regulation of Sertoli cell
nia are the least differentiated and form the reser-
activity, particularly IGFs, activins and inhibin and
voir of stem cellswithin the seminiferous tubule.It
BMPs (ltinan et al 2006). In response to stimulation
islikely ihat stem cells areregenerated by asymmet-
by these agents, Sertoli secrete: oestrogens, inhibin,
rical divisions of early A-series spermatogonia; with
a GnRH-I-like peptide, proteins [inclucing ABP), lac-
one daughter cell remaining as an uncommitted
tate, pyruvate and tubule fluid. Significant changes
stem cell, the otherbeing committed to undergo fur-
to the morphology and activity of Sertoli cells occur
ther mitotic and meiotic divisions. All spermatogo-
in theperipubertal period,associated with the onset
nia remain in contact with the basement membrane,
of spermatogenesis, while there are also annual
but the area of contaci is significantly reduced in B
changes in their norphology in seasonally-breeding
spermatogonia (deKretser&Kerr 1994）.However, as
species according to the activity of the gonadotro-
the final meiotic division of spermatogonia give rise
phic axis(-lochereau-de-Reviers et al 1985).
to the primary spermatocytes, the cytoplasm of the
As described above, primordial germ cells migrate
Sertoli cells intervenes beiween thebasement mem-
into the genital ridge, replicate and differentiate
brane and theprimaiy spermatocytes.DNA synthe-
into spermatogonia. In the mature animal, sper-
sis occurs during mitotic divisions and then, to its
matogonia are divided into A, intermediate and B
greatest extent, during the formation of tetraploid
classes,with eachi class further subdivided accord-
nuclei during meiosis (Hlochereau-de-Reviers el al
ing to morphology and degree of differentiation
1990).RNA synthesis occurs during preleptotene
(Fig.29.10).Thus, in the bull and ram,A0, A1,A2,
and late pachytene (Kierszenbaum & Tres 1974).
A3,intermediate,B1 and B2 spermatogonia occur
The first meiotic division then proceeds through the
(Hlochereau-de-Reviers 1976).A-series spermatogo-
highly sensitive zygotene and pachytene stages. The
692
Chapter
29
Normal reproduction inmale animals
pachytene stageisparticularly sensitive tonoxious
seminiferous epithelium （Fig.29.1l).Each genera
damage, such as by high testicular temperature or
tion of seminiferous cellsis linked by cyioplasmic
inadequate hormonal support.During the firstmei
bridges, so that developmental stages are synchro-
oticdivision,lhie cellsmovedeeper into the semi-
nouswithineach generation and substantialareas
niferousepithelium andthetightcell junctions of
ofseminiferousepitheliumexhibitcellsatasimilar
theSertolicellsformbeneath thespermatocytes and
stage of development. Cellular associations are gen-
degenerate above them (Russell 1977, 1978), so that
erally classifiedinto typeI,where twogenerations
the cells effectively pass through theblood-testis
barrier. Thus, the progeny of the first meiotic divi-
presentand typeIwherehereisnlynegena
sion,thesecondaryspermatocytes,movefroimthe
tionofprimaryspermatocytesbuttwoofsperma-
basal totheluminal compartmentoftheseminif
tids(Hochereau-de-Reviers etal 1990).Transition
erousepitheliumandarethereafterseparatedfrom
between typeIandtypelloccursafterthematu
the general tissue fluid compartment.The second
ration divisions,while type ll changes into type 1
meiotic division produces spermatids,which do
withthereleaseofspermatozoa andthearrivalofa
not dividefurther.Attheend ofmeiosis,spermatids
new generation of spermatocytes from thelast sper-
are round cells with round nuclei.Thereafter, they
matogonial division.
undergo marked changes in cell function and mor-
phology that are associatedwithdifferentiationinto
Spermiogenesis
spermatozoa(spermiogenesis).
The seminiferous epithelium appears as concen-
Immediately after completion ofmeiosis,thesper-
tric layers of spermatogonia, sperimatocytes and
spermatids,withcharacteristicassociations between
thenfollowedbythebeginningsofnuclearchroma-
generations of cells throughout the depth of the
tincondensation(Monesi1971).Acrosomalconlents
M
REG
M
REG
M
EG
M
R
EG
M
R
EG
Cryp
Q
$
nterc
mmm
13.5
27
40.5
54
67.5
Fig.29.11Spermatogenesisin thebovine testis.Stem cells undergomitotic(m)divisionsproducing successive generationsof
diploid spermatogonia(A1,A2,A3,intermediate（n),B1and B2),before entering the first meiotic division(me1）.Preleptotene
primary spermatccytes（PL)pass through the successive stages of thelong first meiotic prophase(L,leptotene;Z,zygotene;P,
pachytene:D,diakinesis),becoming short-lived secondaryspermatocytes.Theseproceed through thesecond meioticdivision
of theblocd-testis barrier.Fourmajorgroupingsof celscan bedetermined,basedupon themorphoicgy cf the spermatids
drawingbyBrianSetchell.)
693
Part
61
Themale animal
areconcurrently synthesized in the Golgi complex.
Golgiremnant
VesiclesderivedfromtheGolgifuseoverthenuclear
membrane overlyingthe basal pole of the nucleus
(Courtens1979),withfurthermaterialsubsequently
being transported into the developing acrosome
(deKretser&Kerr 1994).Thenucleus moves from
a central position toward the margin of the cell, at
Microtuoular
the point at which the acrosome is developing.As
body-
the nucleus condenses and elongates,it shrinks sig-
Annulus
nificantlyin size,resultingin redundancy ofnuclear
Centriole
membrane.The manchette,a transient microtubular
associatedbody
structure that appears in the postnuclear cytoplasm
Neck
sation (Fawcett 1970,Zirkin 1971), may be associ-
ated with thereshaping of the nucleus,although this
isbyno meanscertain(Fawcett et al1971)
A
B
MitochondriaC
The tail is formed from the centrioles, one of
which forms the connecting piece of the neck of
Fig.29.12Formation of spermatozoa within the luminal
the sperm,the other the axial filamentofthe tail
crypts of theSertolicells.After formation of theacrosome
andcondensation ot thenucleus at thebasal pole of the
(de Kretser & Kerr 1994).The manchette ispres-
developing sperm(A),there isa prcgressive alignment of the
ent duringtheearlyformationoftheaxialfilament
mitochcndria around the flagellum (B)until, in the fully-
but disappearsafter itis formed.The structureof
formed sperm(C),the helical sheathof mitochondria that
the axial filament(see below) is common to fla-
makesup the midpiece is fully developed.
gella and cilia. The outer dense fibres are not
derived from the centriole, although they are
Schanbacher 1983).Hence,theinterval between
attached totheoutermicrotubules ofthe axial
damage to the testis and the appearance of abnormal
filament（Fawcett&Phillips 1969).Thedevelop-
spermatozoain the ejaculateis generallybetween 30
ment of themidpiece occurslatein theprocess of
and 60 days, depending upon the site of damage.
spermatogenesis,as a helix of mitochondria con-
densesaroundtheproximalpartoftheflagellum
Physiology of the epididymis
(Fig.29.12). This process cannot take place until
the manchette has disappeared.During formation
of the acrosome and flagellum,the cytoplasm of
When sperm are released from the seminiferous
thespermatidis deeplyinvaded byaprocess ofthe
epithelium,they are immature,lacking normal
Sertolicell,whichextendsbetween theformingfla-
motility and being incapable of fertilizing.They
gellum and the residual cytoplasm.It is suggested
acquirethese abilities in their transit through the
that thisprocess isresponsibleforthereduction in
epididymis (Amann 1987,Eddy & O'Brien 1994).
cytoplasmicvolumeofthespermatidthatoccurs
Spermatozoa takebeiween8and14daystotraverse
during spermiogenesis. Finally, most remaining
the epididymis,according to species.In the bull,
cytoplasm is engulfed bytheSertoli cell(Fouquet
sperm take5 days to pass through the head and
1974)as theformed spermatozoon,with itsrem-
bodyoftheepididymis anda further5-9daysto
nantcytoplasmicdroplet,isexpelledfromthecrypt
traversethe epididymal tail.Movement ofsperm
oftheSertolicell intothelumenof theseminifer-
through the epididymis isapassiveprocess that
ous tubule(spermiation).
reliesontheactivityoftheepididymaltubulerather
The duration of spermatogenesis, i.e. the time
than on themotility of the sperm(Harper 1994).
between spermatogonial divisions and therelease of
Theprotoplasmicremnantwhichisinitially sited
closebehind thespermhead,migrates distally tothe
domestic animals.Epididymal transit takes afurther
endofthemid-piece,before beingfinally shed in
8-14 days.Thus,theintervalbetween themost sen-
thetailoftheepididymis.Spermareimmotilein
sitive stage of spermatogenesis, meiotic prophase,
heheadoftheepididymisbutacquirethecapacity
andejaculation is approximately30 days(Amann&
formotility as they pass through its body.Similarly,
694
Chapter
291
Normal reproduction inmaleanimals
in thehead of epididymis,sperm do not have the
others appear tobe transferredvia the apocrine secre-
ability to fertilize,but this is acquired during pas-
tion ofmembrane vesicles(Cooper 199s),while
sage through the epididymal body.Less obvious,but
otherproteins arelostfrom,ormodifiedwithin,the
ofequalorgreaterimportancetothemorpliologi-
spermaneilalyeisalsrgn
zationoftheacrosomewith,orexample,redistrib
through the epididymis,are the changes in their
tionandmodificationoftheactivityofsome ofits
plasmamembrane,towhich surfaceglycoproteins
contents(Yoshinaga&Toshimori2003).
are added or modified by epididymal secretions and
There is also considerable remodelling of the lip-
luminalcells.Itis likely thatthese act to stabilize
idsofthe sperm membrane (Jones 1998b),with a
the acrosome while the spermiswithin thefemale
nei loss ofcholesterol and a considerable,but selec-
genital tract,toreducethe surface immunogenicity
tive,loss ofphosphiolipids(Hammerstedt&Parkes
ofthespermandtoenhancethe abilityof thesperm
1987),mainly from the inner leaflet ofthe mem-
membrane to bind to the zona pellucida(Amann
brane bilayer. There is also uptake of secreted gly-
1987,Hammerstedt&Parkes1987).
coproteins （Tulsiani et al 1998) and remodelling
Functionally,theepididymisisdivided intotwo
oftheseandendogenousglycoproteinswithinthe
regions:a proximalregion,which isinvolved in
sperm membrane.Thesechangesin the membrane
sperm maturation,and a distalregion,which iscon-
areassociatedwiththeacquisitionofmotilityand
fertilizingability(Jones199sb).The acquisition of
The proximal segment has a relatively narrow
motilityandfertilizingability are,however,not s
lumen, an actively secretory epithelium and rela-
onymous,although motility isrequired for fertil-
tivelysparsespermpopulation.The distal segment
ity (Harper 1994）.Acquisition of motility may also
hasalarger lumen,amuchmoreprominentlayer
require modification to the dyneinATPase,together
muscle surrounding the tubule and a dense popula-
with the uptake ofmotility proteins and modifica-
tion of sperm. The transit time of the proximal seg-
tions tothe inracellular compartmenialization of
ment is fixedbut it isvariable in the distal segment
calcium(Yanagimachi 1994).
oftheepididymisbecause ofits dual functions of
maturation and storage.Hence,in periods of high
Physiology of the accessory glands
ejaculationfrequency,thepassagetimeofthetail
may bereduced and relatively immature sperm may
beejaculated(Setchell etal 1994).
The accessory sex glands (vesicular gland, prostate,
The epididymis is highly androgen-dependent; thus,
ampullaand bulbourethralgland;Table29.1)all
ifandrogen levels are suppressed,epididymal func
haveacriticalrequirementfor androgensfortheir
tion isimmecdiately impaired.Dihydrotestosterone
function.Testosteroneis the prohormoneforthe
appears to be of greater importance than testos-
more active androgen,dihydrotesterone,which is
terone. High levels of 5o-reductase are present in
produced by5c-reduciaseinthe accessory glands.
the epididymis, especially in its initial segment.
Ampullaearepresentasdilationsoftheterminal
Interestingly,however,theactivityof theefferentducts,
portionoftheductusdeferens,justbeforethey enter
inwhichresorptionofseminiferoustubulefluidtakes
thepelvicurethra,where their main functionis to
place, is co-regulated by oestradiol (Lee et al 2000).
act as reservoirs of sperm.In he bull,ram and dog
During transit through the epididymis,sperm
the ampullaryglands,whicharepresent,contribute
undergo changes in morphology, metabolic pro-
slightly to the seminal plasma,whereas their contri-
cesses,activity of the flagellum and the ability to
bution to the cjaculateisrelatively important inthe
bind to the zona pellucida(Eddy & O'Brien 1994).
stallion.Themainconstituent ofampullarysecretion
These changes are largely brought about by changes
in the stallionisergothioneine(Mannetal 1956).
to thesurfacemembrane ofthesperminresponse
Vesicular glands are prominent in ruminants,the
tosubstances,especiallyproteins,thatareproduced
stallionand theboar.They aresac-likeinthestallion
by theepididymis.Themost activesegment of the
and boar and arefirm,lobulatedstructures inthe
epididymis for protein secretion is the initial seg-
ram andbull.Theglandsareadjacent totheneckof
ment(Dacheux etal2003),whereas litle protein
the bladder and lateral to the ampullae. They open
issecretedinitsdistalsegment.Someproteinsare
intotheurethra just distallyto theductusdeferens.
transferred to spermby secretioninto thelumen,
Their secretion,which is generally watery,contrib
695
Part
61
Themaleanimal
utes substantially tothevolumeof the semen.In
The penis
all species its secretion contains large quantities of
citrate,whileintheruminantsit alsocontainsfruc
Erection
tose and in theboar inositol(Maetal 1949,1956,
Mann1954,Marleyetal1977).
Thepeniscomprises three tracts oferectiletissue and
Theprostateis intimately relatedtothepelvicure-
the penileurethra.Theurethra is surrounded by the
thraand,inmost speciessn wpartstsbodys
corpus spongiosunpenis(CSP),which arises at the
rounds theneck of thebladder and its disseminated
bulb of the penis and terminales in the glans penis.
part spreads around the pelvic urethra,into whichi
The erectile tissue of the glans penis is contiguous
has several openings.In the dog,the prostate is the
with the CSP,although the structure of theCSPglan
main accessorygland and isrelatively large,forming
dis differs from that of the shaft of the penis.The
a discrete organ around theurethra.Theprostatic
dorsum of the penis is made up of the paired cor-
secretion is watery and,in the dog,contains large
pora cavernosa penis(CCP;Fig.29.13),which arises
quantities ofchlorideions,butneither citratenor
inthetwo crura(roots)ofthepenis andterminate
fructose nor inositol is present in high concentra-
behind theglans.The blood supply of all three tracts
tion（Huggins1945)
isviabranchesofthepudendal arterybutthevenous
In the stallion,bull and ram,the bulbourethral
drainageoftheCCPismarkedlydifferentfromthatof
(or Cowper's) glands are snall,rounded structures
theCSP.The CCPis drainedvia therootof thepenis,
lyingbetween the anus andurethra.Theirwatery
intothepudendalvein,whereastheCsPdrainsinto
secretion is dischargedprior tocoitus and is consid-
thedorsalveinofthepenisfromits distal extremity
eredto cleansetheurethraofurine.lntheboar,the
(Ashdown&Gilanpour 1974).Thus both the supply
bulbourethral glands are large,cylindrical structures
and drainageofblood totheCCPisviatheroot of
lyingalong each sideofthe intrapelvicurethra.In
thepenis,whereas thesupply of theCSPisthrough
this species,their secretion isvery viscid,because f
thebulb and its drainagefrom its distal part.
its high sialomucin concentration (Boursnell et al
Erection is achieved by raising the haemostatic
1970),and combines with the secretion of thevesic-
pressure within the erectile tissues of thepenis.ltis
ular glands to produce a gelatinous phase of the
mediatedvia areflex that ispredominantly coordi
seminalplasma（Boursnell&Butler1973).
nated atthe spinal level(Andersson2003)butisini-
The physiological functions of the various constit-
tiated andmodulatedcentrally[Andersson&Wagner
uents of seminal plasma remain a matter of debate
1995).Most studies onthephysiology oferection has
(fora review seeBrooks1990).Thereismuch inter-
been undertaken onthe human,laboratory rodents,
speciesvariation inthecomposition ofseminal
the dogand,asitrespondssimilarlytohumanpenile
plasma,so it hasbeen difficult to ascribe absolute
smooth muscle, the bovine retractor penis mus-
functions to many ofits constituents.Provision of
cle.In these species,erection is initiated by relax-
energy, maintenance of osmotic pressure, chela-
ation of smooth muscle within the CCP, leading to
tion of free calcium ions andbuffering are some of
reducedvascularresistanceandincreasedbloodflow
the suggested functions; while other possibilities
(Andersson&Wagner1995）.Thepenis is normally
include immunosuppression in the female genital
maintained inaflaccid statethrough tonicnoradren-
tract and regulation of sperimatozoan motility.
aline(norepinephrine)release fromits sympathetic
Seminal plasma is also responsible for the coagu-
innervation,whichcausescontractionof thesmooth
lation of semen,which occurs shortly after ejacula
muscle of the penile artery and CCP (Simonsen et al
tion in many species. On the other hand, it has been
arguedthatthewidevarietyincompositionof semi-
ated pathways (de Tejada et al 2004).The sympa-
nal plasma between speciesindicates that it hasno
theticstimulus alsohas antivasodilatory effects.
critical role; an argument that is emphasized by the
Erectionisinitiatedvia theparasympathelic sys-
abilityofspermtosurviveinrelativelysimplemedia
tem derived from the sacral plexus. Nitric oxide,
thatbearlittleresemblance toseminalplasma.
produced from theactionofparasympatheticneu-
Paradoxically, the seminal plasma of many species
ralnitric oxide synthetase(nNOS)on 1-arginine
appears to contain spermicidal factors,cspeciallyin
(Andersson&Wagner1995）,raisesconcentrationsof
the post-sperm-rich fraction of the species,which
cyclicguanosinemonophosphate(GMP)in smooth
produce afractionatedejaculate.
musclecells,leading to areducedresponsiveness to
696
dc
VC
Venous drainage
个
Glans
Urethra
Corpuscavemosum-
Corpus spongiosum
Arterial supply
Venous drainage
Rootbulb
Arterial supply
B
Bulbospongiosus muscle
Ischiocavernosusmuscle
Fig.29.13 Functional vascularanatomy of thebovinepenis:(A)representational and(B) diagrammatic.Blood enters and
leaves the corpus cavernosum via the arteries and veins of the crura （roots) of the penis,so that contraction of the overlying
longitudinal canal(dc).Thisgivesoffa seriesof lateral branches in theregion of the sigmoidflexure,whichunite toform
pairedventral canals(vc).The corpusspongiosum is drained from its distal end,so contractionof thebulbospongiosusmuscle
onlyproducesa transientincrease in hydrostaticpressure.Thisisof sufficientmagnitudeto temporarily occlude the urethra,
so thatabolusof semencanbepropelledalong its length.During detumescence,vascularpressureislostand thepenisis
returned to the preputial cavityby theretractor penis muscle.(Redrawn and adapted with permission from Laing et al 1988.)
697
Part
61
Themaleanimal
calcium and hence relaxation(Andersson 2003, de
these various mechanisms,venous occlusion is not
Tejada et al 2004). Cyclic-AMP-mediated pathiways
complete as, while the dorsal vein of the penis is
are also involved in vasodilation,in response to
occluded,sortfedrainage continues through smaller
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), prostaglandins
channels (Carati et al 1988, Ninomiya et al 1989).
E, and E, and noradrenaline (torepineplrine) act-
In humans,venous drainage also continues during
ing through α.,-adrenoceptors(Simonsen et al 2002),
erection and,ifexcessive,can lead to erection failure
Increased flow through thepenile arteries stimulates
(Hisiehi et al 2005).As blood flow in the penile arter-
the endothelium to furtherreleaseof thesevasoac
ies and CCP increases and as the venous drainage is
tive substances, leading to further increases in blood
interrupted, the cavernous spaces of the erectile tis
flow(Kunelius etal 1997).Therole ofeach of these
sue in the blind-ending CCP hecome engorged with
agents in other domestic species is not fully estab
blood,causing stiffening and lengthening of the
lished. For exarmple, while bovine retractor penis
penis（Beckettet al1974).At the peak of erection in
muscle expresses both nNOS and viP, their distri-
the stallion, blood ceases to be able to enter the CCP
bution is different from that in the penile smooth
from thepudendal artery becauseoftheocclusion
muscleofrodents(Vanhiataloet al2000).
of the penile arteries by the action of the ischiocav-
Central nervous control of erection in primates and
ernosus muscles (Bartels et al 1984).
rodents is primarily derived from the hypothalamus
and limbic system,with the medial preoptic hypotha-
Ejaculation
lamic centre having a key-integrating role (Meisel &
Sachs 1994).Coordinationoferection withothercom-
The ejaculation reflex is stimulated by sensory nerves
within the glans penis,which transmit to the spinal
lantroleof theparaventricular nucleus (Swanson&
cord through the dorsal nerve of thepenis,a branch
Sawhenko1983).Theprimary stimulatorypathways
of thepudendal nerve (Johnson& Hlalata1991). The
are mediated by oxytocin,with upstrcam regula-
integrity of thisnerve is essential for theejaculation
tion by the excitatory amino acids (Melis et al 2004)
reflex to take place and, if it becomes damaged,ejac-
glutamic and aspartic acids （and their agonists),
tlation, though not erection, becornes impossible
and dopaminergic pathways (Andersson & Wagner
(Beckett et al 1978).Pressure, tactile sensation and,in
1995).Nitric oxidealso stimulates the activity of cen-
the bull,temperature are the main stimulants to ejac
traloxytocic stimulatorypathways(Argiolas&Melis
ulation. Afferent fibres also pass along the hypogastric
nerve into the spinal cord via the sympathetic chain
gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA), serotonin and
(Baron & Janig 1991).Efferent fibres are derived from
opioids(Argiolas&Melis2005).
the sympathetic and parasympathetic outflows.while
Testosterone has a key role in thie central and periph-
somatic motor fibres innervate the bulbospongiosus
eral modulation of erectile function (Faresta et al
mliscle(Giuliano&Clement 2005).Ejaculationispri-
2004), with a mode of action that is perimissive rather
marily coordinated as a spinal reflex in thelower lum-
han critical.In humans,testosterone may directly
bar and sacral segments of the spinal cord,although
affect erection by acting directly as a vasodilator of
with centralregulationvia themedialpreoptic area
the penile arterioles andcavermous sinusoid(Mikhail
of the hypothalamus and connecting nuclei (Meisel
2006), by inhibiting the breakdown of cyclic GMP
&Sachs 1994).Central controlofejaculation is facili-
or by reguilating the synthesis of nitric oxide (Morelli
tated by dopamine and inhibited by serotonin (Hull
et al 2005).Testosterone is alsoresponsiblefor the
et al 1995,Waldinger&Olivier2004).There are two
centrally mediatedsexual behavioural responses.
components to ejaculation:emission and accessory
Contraction of the ischiocavernosus niuscles at
gland secretion,which are primarily controlled by the
the roots of the penis increase blood flow in the
autonomic nervous system,andpropulsion,which is
penilevasculature and occludetheveins that drain
controlled via somaticnerves.Emission is under the
the CCP. In the dog, the levator ani, the coccygeus
primary control of sympathetic noradrenaline (nor-
epinephrine).Propulsion of semen out of theurethra
is caused by rhythmic contractions of the bulbo-
venules thatdrain the CCPofthehuman penisare
spongiosus muscle that overlies the Csp in the bulb
occluded as a result ofthelengthening that occurs
of the penis and of smooth muscles of the urethira
during erection (Udelson et al 2000).Despite
(Giuliano& Clement 2005).This is accompanied by
698
Chapter
29
Normalreproductioninmale aniimals
proximal closure ofthebladder neck and intermitent
relaxation of the external urethral sphincter and uro-
genital diaphragm.
Contraction ofthebulbospongiosus muscle causes
increased haemostatic pressure in the CSP.However,
Prostale gan
because the CsP drains from its distal end, the high
/asiculargland
Ampuita
pressures achieved in the CCP cannot be attained.
Bulboureihralglanc
Thus, each contraction of the bulbospongiosus mus
cle causes a transient wave of increased pressure in
the Csp which progresses from the bulb to the glans,
Propu
Tailolepilidymis
where it dlissipates by dorsal venous drainage of the
Clans peni
Testis
blood.Because the CCP is turgid, the increased pres-
Scrotum
Urethra
suire within the Csr causes a wave of occlusion of
A
the urethra.This progressive wave of urethral occlu-
sion, assisted by the contraction of the muscle that
surrounds the extrapelvic urethra, causes conduc-
tion of boluses of semen along the urethra.
icularglanc
pepqanoqre
Speciesdifferences
legland
Ouciusdefer
Details of the anatomy of the penis vary greatly
between species and,as a result, details of the fune
tional anatomy oferection are similarlyvariable.
In Artiodactyla (Fig.29.14), the penis has a thick,
Tostis
fibrous tunica albuginea overlying the CCP and sur-
B
rounding the urethra,and theindividual cavernous
spaces within the CCP are relatively small.Thepenis
also has a sigmoid flexure,which is either caudal
(postscrotal), as in the ruminanis, or cranial (pre-
scrotal) to the scrotum, as in the boar. In these spe-
cies,relatively little blood enters ihe penis during
erection,although the blood pressures achieved are
alegland
considerable, exceeding 40000 mmHg during ejacu-
lation.In order that the increased pressure induced
by ischiocavernosus muscle activity can be trans-
Bubusgla
mitted throughout the length ofthe penis, special-
ized artery-like vascular canals and the longitudinal
ailalepiddyms
canals run the length ofthe penis.Paired canals arise
Teslis
C
Scrotum
in the crura of the penis, which fuse shortly after.
wards to produce a single dorsal canal. Either side
Fig.29.14 Comparative anatomy of the penis of (A) the stal-
lion, (B)bullanc (C) dog. (Redrawn and adapted with pemis-
ofthe dorsal canal thereafter givesrise to a series of
sion frcm Laing et al1988.)
branches,which join together to formpairedventral
canals.The dorsal canal runs for the proximal third
of the penis the ventral canals for the remaining
fully exteriorized from the narrow preputial orifice.
distance,with a short distance of overlap with the
Obliieration of the sigmoid flexure and forward
dorsal canal. Lengthening of the penis is achieved
movement of the penis is made possible by the very
partly by longitudinal expansion of the caven-
loose arrangement of the connective tissue thiat sur-
ous spaces between the trabeculae of the CCP but
rounds the penis and prepuce.In the ruminants, full
mainly by straightening of the sigmoid flexure of the
erection is only briefly attained during the single
penis (Ashdown 1970).As a result,the penis.which
ejaculatory thrust,but copulation is more prolonged
is normally carried high in the preputial cavity. is
in theboar.Erection is terminated by cessation of
669
Part
16
Themale animal
ischiocavernosus muscular contraction,and the
development, the connective tissue joining penis
penis is returned to thie preputial cavity by contrac-
and prepuce breaks down and the veins become
tion of the retractor penis muscles, which restores
occluded.Thefrenulum is the most substantial of
the sigmoid flexure.
the connections between the penis and prepuce, fre-
The other domestic species have a musculocav-
quently containing quite large blood vessels.It is
ernous penis, in which the tunica albuginea is less
pronounced and the cavernousspaces of the erectile
quenilypersist into postpubertal life.
tissue larger than in the artiodactyls. In the stallion
(Nickel et al 1973,Amann 1993),tracts of longitu-
Libido and mating behaviour
dinally oriented smooth musclefibres are associated
with the trabeculae of the CCP. These are normally
in a state of tonic contraction,holding the penis in
Libido is primarily dependent upon androgenic ste-
the prepuce. The tone in these muscles falls dur-
roid hormones, which allows mating and aggres-
ing erection and micturition,leading to prolapse
sive behaviour to occur,as well as maintaining the
of the penis from the prepuce. In the stallion and
function ofall parts ofthemalereproductive sys-
dog (Evans & deLahunta 19s8), crertion produces
lem. Libido is seldom expressed in animals that are
increases in both length and girth of the penis and,
castrated before puberty although,if a mature ani-
as there is no sigmoid flexure, the lengthening of the
mal that has learnt to copulate is castrated, erec-
penis is caused entirely by vascular engorgement.
tion and copulation imay persist for long periods or,
Duringejaculation,theglansofthepenisofthebull
occasionally,indefinitely.Despite the dependency
andgoatbecomes coiled[Ashdown&Smith 1969),
of male behaviour upon androgen,there has been
while the vermiform appendage of the penis of the
muchdebate over therelationshipbelween absolute
ram shows a vigorous flicking movement. It is prob-
concentrations of androgen and libido (Foote et al
able that these conformational changes are to assist
1976,Wodzicka-Tomaszewska et al 1981).Some
with deposition of semen inand around theexternal
have argued a permissive role for androgen, while
as of the cervix.The glans penis of the stallion and
others have demonstrated positive correlations
boar engages in the cervical canal,with ejaculation
between testosterone concentrations and meas-
occurringthrough thecervixintotheuterinelumen.
ures of libido. Breeds of bull that are aggressive
Thus, the penis of the boar adopts a spiral confor-
and respond quickly to the presence of an oestrous
mation during copulation,which mirrors that of the
female tend tohave higher testosterone concentra-
cervixof the sow,but thestallionshows only avery
tions than the more phlegmatic breeds, but whether
pronounced enlargement of the glans penis during
this is a causal relationship remains unclear.
ejaculation. The dog is unique among the domes-
Themales of those domestic species that are natu-
tic animals in having an os penis in whose grooved
rally herd animals spend a great deal of time detect-
ventral floor lies the urethra. During copulation, the
ing 0estrus (Chenoweth 1981). Oestrous females
penis of the dog is gripped by the levator vestibuli of
ofmany species secretepheromones to altract males,
the vagina of the bitch, whereupon engorgement of
while others.notably the cow and some breeds of
the bulbus glandis occurs.Ejaculation occurs over a
pig, exhibit homosexual behaviour as a signal to the
prolongedperiod of time,with thebrief production
male of the presence of oestrus.All males smell the
of the pre-ejaculatory and sperm-rich fractions being
perineal region of thefemale and the odour of the
followed by a very protracted deposition of prostatic
oestrousfemale induces theso-called'flehmen'reac-
fluid during the copulatory tie.
tion in the bull, ram, camel and stallion:a charac-
teristicraisedposture ofthehead andelevation of
the upper lip. Females that are not in oestrus signal
Development of the penis
their objection to the advances of the male and, at
Initial development of the phallus from the genital
the least,will respond by movingaway or perhaps
tubercle is similar in both male and female fetuses
by attacking the male in the offensive manner pecu-
but in the male fetus rapid enlargement occurs early
liar to the species. During pro-oestrus, the interest of
in developuent.At birth, the penis isfused with the
the male in the female is increased but, whereas she
prepuce throughout its length, with small lateral
associates with the male,she will ot ernit mout
veins draining the erectile tissue. During prepubertal
ing. Oestrous females signal receptivity by squatting.
700
Chapter
29
Normal reproduction in male animals
Fig.29.15 Signs of oestrus in the mare include squatting
urinaticn and moving the tail to one side.
Fig.29.16The main extermal sign of ejaculalionin the stallion
urinating, moving thie tail to one side and remain-
is taililagging.Peristalticwaves can alsc be palpated in the
ing stationary (Fig.29.15).During this foreplay the
penileurethra.
male becomes progressively aroused; there are fre-
quent erections of the penis, with emission of acces-
sory fluid and many unsuccessful attempts to mount
after puberty,nor does the epididymis reach its full
the female. Finally, mounting and copulation occur.
length until the same time (reviewed by Salisbury
et al 1978). LIntil maturity has been reached, groups
Stallion
of females should be smaller thanfor adult animals.
Following intromission, the stallion performs a
Ifoverused,both the numbers of sperm produced
succession of copulatory movements of the hind-
are too few for adequate conception rates to be
achieved and sperm from the tail of the epididymis
quarters,which,within a minute,culminate in ejac-
ulation. During ejaculation, successive waves of
are ejaculated before their functional maturation is
complete. Thus, sperm numbers and sperm maturity
urethral peristalsis can bepalpated on thelower sur-
face of the penis, while the stallion exhibits a charac-
are both adversely affected,causing severelimitation
terisric ‘flagging' movemeni of the tail (Fig. 29.16).
of the chances of concepiion.
The stallion then dismounts.
Boar
Ruminants
Copulation is relatively prolonged in pigs, lasting
Copulation in all the domestic species of ruminants
for between 5 and 15 minutes. Following intromis-
is brief. After detecting an oestrous female, mount-
sion, the first phase is occupied by a series of vig-
ing is followed quickly by the single ejaculatory
orous thrustingmovemenis ofthehindquartcrs of
thrust. The male then immediately dismounts but
the boar,During this phase, thefist part of the frac
frequent subsequent matings occur. Farm manage-
tionated ejaculate is produced, which comprises
ment of rams and bulls should take this high mating
only accessory fluid. The second phase is quieter
frequency into account.Thus,whereas individual
and accompanied by production of the sperm-rich
sires can service quite large groups of spontaneously
fraction of the ejaculate. This is followed by a final,
cyclic females, the groups of females have to be much
more vigorous phase, in which the third jelly-like
reduced if these have undergone oestrus synchroni-
accessory secretion is discharged.Ejaculation occurs
zation.Furthermore, care has to be exercised in the
directly into the uterus, which is distended with
use of young sires. The testis does not reach its full 
semen immediately after copulation,while the cer-
size and sperm producing capacity until 1-2 years
svix is often sealed with a gelatinous plug. The large
701
Part
6
Themale animal
volume of semen produced by theboar is necessary
the 10 seconds or so for which coitus lasts.The
to convey its spermatozoa through the extensive
queen cries qut during copulation and, as the tom
length of theuterusof the sow.
dismounts, she may strike out at him, display-
ing the typical ‘rage' reaction. This is followed by
a period of frantic rolling and licking at the vulva.
Dog
As soon as the postcoital reaction has ceased, the
The dog achieves intromission by vigorous thrust
tom will attempt to mount again. Several matings
ingofthehindquarters. Onceintromission hasbeen
may thereforeoccurwithin thefirst30-60minutes.
achieved, the bulbus glandis swells considerably.
The cat is an induced ovulator (see Ch.I;Shille
while the constrictor vulvae muscles of the bitch
cl al 1983),so the number and frequency ofmat-
contract behind it,thus forming the'copulatory tie
ings are important in ensuring that the LH surge is
The sperm-rich fraction of canine semen is ejacu-
of sufficient magnitude to cause ovulation (Tsutsui
lated within aslittle as S0 secondsofintromission,
& Stabenfeldt 1993).
so thatconception may occur even if copulation
does not proceed through to its second stage. In this
References
second stage, the dog dismounts but remains con-
nected and faces away from the bitch (Fig. 29.17).
This change of position causes the penis to become
Abo-Elnaksoud A,Sinowatz F 2005Anat Histol Embryol 34:
bent through an angleof18o°;the efferent veins of
319-334
the penis are thereby occluded and the penis remains
Amann RP1987I Reprod Fertil Suppl 34:115
turgid. The function of the tie may be to prevent
Amann RP 1993 In:McKinnon AO,Voss IL (ed)Equine
reproduction.1.ea &Febiger,Philadelphia,p 645-657
penile detumescence during the prolonged second
Amann RP, Schanbacher BD 1983」 Anin Sci 57(Suppl 2):380
stage of copulation, during which some 30ml of
Andersson KE2003 J Urol 170:S6-513
sperm-freeaccessoryfluidispumped iniothevagina
Andersson KE,Wagner G 1995 Physiol Rev 75: 191
and thence to the uterus, where it flushes the sperm-
Argiolas A,Melis MR 2005 Prog Neurobiol 76: 1
rich fraction through the uterus. The sexes remain
Ashdown RR 1970|Anat 106:403
locked until the vulval musclesrelax andpenile erec
Ashdown RR,Gilanpour H 1974 | Anat117:159
Ashdown RR,Smith IA 19691Anat 104:153
tion wanes.
Baird DT,Campbell BK,Mann GE,McNeilly AS 1991 
Reprod Feril Suppl 43:125
Cat
Ballester 1, Munoz MC,DominguezI et al 2004| Androl 25:
706
During mating. the ton mounts the queen and
Bardin CW,Cheng CY,Mustow NA, Gunsalus Gl. 1994 In:
grasps her neck with his teeth.As the tom adjusts
Knobil E, Neill J (ed) The physiology af reproduction, 2nd
his position the queen paddles her hind legs, con-
edn.Raven Press,New York,vol 1,p 1291-1334
tinuing to do so at an increasing frequency during
BaronR,JanigW1991J Conp Neurol314: 429
Bartels JE,Beckett SD,Brown BG1984AmIVet Res 45:1464
Beckett SD,Walker DF Hudson RS etal 1974 An J Vet Res
35:761
Beckeu SD,1udsonRS,Walker DE,Purhoit RC 1978] Am
Vet Med Assoc 173:838
Bedford JM, Hoskins DD 1990 In: Lamming GE (ed)
Marshall's physiology of reproduction,Churchill
Livingstone,Edinburgh,vol 2, p 379-568
Behringer RR,Finegold MI, Cate RL 1994 Cell 79:415
Bornstein SR,Rutkowsk H,Vrezas 12004Mol Cell
Endocrinol 215:135
Boursnell JCButlerE]19731Reprod Fertil34:457
BoursnellJC,Hartree EF Briggs PA 1970 Biochem | 117:981
Brennan J.Tilmann C,Capel B 2003 Gen Dev 17: 800
Brooks DE1990 In:Lamming GE (cd) Marshall's physiology
ofreproduction.Churchill Livingstone,Edinburgh,vol 2,
p569-690
Fig. 29.17 The copulatory tie in the dog
BuehrM, Gu S,Mrlaren A 1993 Development 117:273
Burgoyne PS 1988 Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 322: 63
702
Chapter
291
Normalreproductioninmaleanimals
CapelB,Albrecht KI1,Washbum LL,Eicher EM1999Mech
Harrison RAP1977In:GreepRO,KoblinskyMA（ed)
Dev84:127
Frontiersinreproductionandfertility control.MITPress,
Carati CI,CreedKE,Keogh EJ 1988JPhysiol400:75
Cambridge,MA,p 379-401
ChenowethPI1981 Theriogenology16:155
Harrison RAP,RoldanERS1990J Reprod Fertil Suppl 42:
Colon E,Svechnikov KV,Carlsson-Skwirut C et al 2005
51
Endocrinology 146:221
Heckert LL,Griswold MD 2002RecProg HlormRes57:129
CooperTG 1998 I Reprod Fertil Suppl 53: 119
Hees H,eiserR,KohlerT,Wrobel KH 984 CellTissue Res
CouroiM,OrtavantR1981ReprodFertil Suppl30:47
237:31
Courot M,Hlochereau deReviers MT,Ortavant R 1970 In:
HemeidaNA,SackWO,McKenteeK1978AmJVet Res39:
Johnson AD,GomesWR,VanDemark NL (ed) The testis.
1892-1900
AcademicPress NewYork,vol 1,p339-432
Hochereau-de-Reviers MT 1976Andrologia 8:137
Courtens IL1979 Ann Biol Anim Biochim Biophys 19: 989
Hochereau-de-Reviers MT,Perreau C,Lincoln GA 1985
Cox JE 1982 Surgery ofthereproductive tractin large ani-
JReprod Fertil74:329
mals,2nd edn.Liverpool University Press,Liverpool
Hochereau-de-Reviers MT,Monet-Kuntz C,Courot M1987
Dacheux-1,Gattil,Dacheux F 2003MicroscResTech
JReprod Fertil Suppl34:101
61:1
Hochereau-de-ReviersMT, CotensJL,Coot M,deReviers
De Kretser DM,Kerr JB 1994 In:Knobil E,Neill1 (ed） The
M 1990 In:Lamming GE(ed) Marshalls physiology of
physiologyofreprodutionndednRavenPresew
reproduction.ChurchillLivingstone,Edinburghol 2,
York,vol1,p1177-1290
p106-182
DeKreiser DM.Buzzard J,Okuma Yetal 2004 Mol Cell
Hochereau-de-ReviersMT,Perreau C,Pisselet Cetal1995
Endocrinol225:57
IReprod Fertil 103:41
DeTejada IS.Angulo 1,Cellek S etal2004 J Sex Med 1:254
Hodson H 1970 In:lohnson AD,GomesWR,VanDemark Nl
D'Oechio M),Schanbacher BD,Kinder JE1982a
(ed）The testis.Academic PressNewYork,vol 1,p47-100
Endocrinology110:1547
HoldcraftRW,BraunRE2004IntJAndrol27:335
D'OcchioM,KinderJE,Schanbacher BD 1982bBiol Reprod
Hsieh CH,WangCI.Hsu Gl.etal 2005 IntAndrol28:88
26:249
Huggins C1945 Phys Rev 25:281
Eddy EM,O'Brien DA 1994 In:Knobil E,Neill J (ed) The
Hull EM,Du J,Lorrain DS,Matuszewich L 1995 JNeurosci
physiology ofreproduction.2nd edn.Raven Press,New
15:7465
York,vol 1,p30-77
Hunter RFll 19soPhysiology and technology ofreproduc-
Evans HE,deLahunta A 1988 Guideto the dissectionof the
tion in female domestic animals.AcademicPress,London,
dog.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
p104-144
Fawcen DW1970 Biol ReprodSuppl 2:90
lman C,Mendis S,Baraket B,Loveland KL006
Fawcetu DW1973 AdvBiosci 10:83
Reproduction 132:233
FawcetDW,Phillips DM1969Anat Rec165:163
Johnson L,ThomipsonDl.1983Biol Reprod 29:777
FawcettDW,AndersonWA,PhillipsDM1971DevBiol26:
JohnsonRD,HalataZ1991 J CompNeurol 312:299
220
JonesRC1998aJReprodFeril Suppl53:163
FooteRH,MunkenbeckN,GreenWA1976]Dairy Sci59:
JonesR1998bJReprod Fertil Suppl53:73
2011
Jost A1953Rec Prog Horni Res 8:379
ForesiaC,Carela N,RossatoMetal2004 1 Urol171:2358
KierszenbaumAl,Tres LL 1974JCell Biol63:923
Fouquet JP1974IMicrosc19:161
KilgourR).Pisselet C,Dubois MPCourotM 1998Rep Nutr
George FW,Wilson JD 1994 In:Knobil E,Neill J(ed）The
Dev38:539
physiology ofreproduction,2ndedn.Raven Press,New
Kitamura K,YanazawaM,Sugiyama Netal2002Nat Genet
York,vol 1,3-28
32:359
Gier HT,Marion GB1970 In:Johnson AD,GomesWR,
Kunelius P,Hakkinen], Lukkarinen O1997Urology 49:
VanDemark NL(ed)The testis.AcademicPress,NewYork,
441-444
vol1,p1-46
Laing IA,MorganW)B,WagnerWC19S8Fertility and infertil
GiulianoEClementP2005AnnuRevSexRes16:190
ityinveterinarypracticeBailliereTindallLondon
Griswold MD 1998 Semin Cell Dev Biol 9:411
Lee KH,Hess RA,BahrMet al2000 Biol Rep 63: 1873
Gunsalus Gl. Larrea F, Musto NA etal 1981  Steroid
Lei ZM,Mishra S,ZouWet al2001 Mol Endocrinol 15:184
Biochem15:291
McLaren A 1988TrendsGenet4:153
Hall PF 1994In:Knobil E,Neill1(ed）The physiology of
McLarenA1995 PhilTrans R SocLond B350:229
reproduction,2nd edn.Raven Press,New York,vol 1
McNattyKPJuengel ILWilsonTetal2003Reproduction
p1335-1362
Suppl 61:339
IlammerstedtR,ParkesJE1987ReprodFertil Suppl34:
McNeillyAS,SouzaCJH,BairdDTetal2002Reproduction
133
123:827
Harper MjK1994 In:Knobil E,Neill] (ed)Thephysiology of
MaddocksS,Setchell BP1988|Physiol407:363
reproduction,2ndedn.Raven Press,NewYork,vol 2,
MannT 1954ProcRSocLond B142:21
p123-187
MannT,Davies DV,Humphrey GF1949Endocrinol 6:75
703
Part
61
The male animal
Mann T,Leone E,Polge C1956] Endocrinol 13:279
Setchell BP,Maddocks S,Brooks DE 1994 In:Knobil E,Neill
Marley PB,Morris SR,White IG 1977 Theriogenology 8:
J (ed) The physiology of reptoduction, 2nd edn.Raven
33
Press,New YgA,vol 1, p 1063-1175
Meisel R,Sachs B 1994 In:Knobil E,Neill I [ed) The physiol-
Sharpe RM 1994 In:Knobil E,Neill ) ed）The physiology of
Dgyof reproduction,2ndedn.RavenPress,NewYork,vol
reproduction,2ndednRavenPreNewYork,vol 1,
2,p3-105
p1363-1434
MelisMR,Succu S,Mascia MS etal 2004 Eur |Neurosci 19:
ShilleVM,MunroC,armerSWPapkoff H1983Rrd
2569
Fertil69:29
Merchant-LariosH,Moreno-Mendoza N,BuehrM1993Int
SimonsenUI,Garcia-SacristanAPrietoD2002Penilearieries
IDevBiol37:407
and erection.IVascRes39:283
MikhailN2006Am IMed119:373
SinclairAHI,Beria PPalmerMS,HawkinsJRet al1990
Monesi V 1971J Reprod Fertil Suppl 13:1
Nature 346:240-244
MorelliA,Filippi S.ZhangX-Hetal2005 Int J Androl
SwansonLW,SawchenkeP1983Annu RevNeurosci 6:269
28(Suppl 2):23
TilbrookAl,deKretserDM,Clarke1]1993Endocrinol138:
MortonDB 1977 In:Edidin M,lohnson MH(ed)
181
Immunobiology of gametes.CambridgeLniversity Press,
TilbrookAl,Clarke 1],deKretserDM 1995Biol Reprod53:
Cambridge,p 115-155
1353
Nickel R,SchummerA，SieferleE1973Thevisceraof the
TilmannC,Capel B 1999 Development126:2883
domestic ainals.Paul Parey,Berli
TsutsuiT,Stabenfeldt CH 1993|Reprod Fertil Supp!47:29
Ninomiya H,Nakamura TNizuma I,TsuchiyaT 1989 」pn」
TulsianiDRP,Orgebin-CristM-C,SkudlarekMD1998
VetSci51:765
I Reprod Fertil Suppl 53:S5
O'Shaughhnessy P,BakerPl1eikkilaMMet al 2000
UdelsonD,L'Esperance ,Morales AMet al 2000 Int J Impot
Endocrinology 14l:2631
Res12:315
O'Shaughhnessy PI,Baker PI,Johnson H2005Ann NY Acad
VanhataloS.Parkkisenniemi UM,Steinbusch HWMetal
Sc1061:109
2000]ChemNeuroanat19:81
O'ShaughhnessyPl,Baker Pl,Johnson 1 2006Int」Androl
Verma-Kurvari S,SergeN,ParadaLF2005AnnNY Acad Sci
29:90
1061:1
ParkinsonT1,Snith KC,Long SE etal 2001 Reproduction
WaitesGMH,Moule GR1960|ReprodFertil1:223
122:397
WaldingerMD,OlivierB 2004Curr Opin Invest Drugs5:743
PhillipsDI2005Domest Anim Endocrinol 28:1
WalkerW1,Cheng12005Reproduction130:15-28
Roberts LM,VisserA,Ingraham HA2002Development 129:
WassarmanPM1990]ReprodFeril Suppl 42:79
1487
Wilhelm D,Palmer S,Koopman P2007 PhysiolRev87:1
RobinsonIE,Birch RA,GrindrodJAE etal 2003Reproduction
Wodzicka-Tomaszewska M,Kilgour R.RyanM 1981 Appl
Suppl 6l:299
Anim Ethol7:203
Russell LD 1977Am|Anat 148:313
Yanagimachi R 1981 In:Biggers JD,Mastroianni L (ed) In
Russell LD 1978 Anat Rec90:99
vitrofertilization andembryo transfer.AcademicPress,
Salisbury GW,VanDemarkNL,LodgeIR1978Physiology
NewYorl,p65-100
ofreproduction and artificial insemination ofcattle.
Yanagimachi R 1994 In:Knobil E,Neill  (ed)The physiol-
Freeman,San Francisco,CA,ch 23
ogy of reproduction,2nd edn.Raven Press,New York,vol
Satir P,Wais-Steder l,Lebduska Setal 1981 Cell Moil 1:303
1,p190-317
Setchell BP 1970In:JohnsonAD,GomesWR,VanDemark
Yao HH,Whoriskey W,CapelB2002 Genes Dev16:1433
NL(ed) The testis.Academic Press,New York,vol 1
Yao HH,di Napoli L,CapelB2003Development 130:5895
p101-240
Yoshinaga K,Toshimori K2003 Microsc ResTech 61:39
Setchell BP,LaurieMS,FlintAPFHeap RB1983Endocrinol
Zirkin BR1971 Mikroskopie27:10
96:127
704
30
Chapter
Tim Parkinson
Fertility, subfertility and infertility in
male animals
Fertility andinfertilityareremarkablydifficulttermsto
examinations of their siresbefore theirintroduction to
define inthe context ofmale animals.Simplistically,
herdsorflocksasameans ofreducing thechancesof
fertility is the ability to sire progeny and infertility is
having female animals that do not become pregnant.
the failure to do so.Yet determining what constitutes
Indeed,intheincreasingly demanding economic envi-
a failure to sire progeny is not necesarily straightfor-
ronment faced bylivestock industries,the impact of
ward.Whileitisgenerallyeasy1odeterminewhether
subfertilesires(especiallyiftheyhaveinfectiousciseases
amaleissterile,decisionsoverwhetherfertilityisnor-
that affectfertility)canevenjeopardizetheeconomic
mal'or‘impaired’havetobemadeintheknowledge
survival ofan,enterprise.Hence,prebreeding examina
ofthecircumstances of the animal'suse,and the expec-
tionofsiresisincreasingly seen asintegral towardsthe
tations that havebeen placed upon its performance.
managementof animal healthaspartofthe overall risk
For example,in circumstances in which males are
managementof theenterprise.Likewise,even though
the examination ofmale animals that have demon
offemales over a short period of time(e.g.rams and
strated themselves to be subfertile remains a part of
beef bulls working athighfemale:maleratios in short
veterinarians'involvementwithrecreationalaninal
mating periods),expectations ofnormalfertility can
breedingitisincreasingly commonforstud animals
be demanding indeed.In other circumstances,nota-
（eg.dogs, stallions) to have breeding examinations
blyrereationalanimalreedinganderhapssom
undertaken as part of the purchasing arrangements -
pedigreefarm animal breeding operations,theability
againmovingawayfromdiagnosisofsubfertilityaftr
to occasionally sire some progeny may be all that is
theevent towardsitspreventionbeforehand.
required ofamale.Differentiatingbetweennormal
One of the long-standing goals of breeding sound-
and subnormal male performance in such varying
ness examinations ofproduction animals has been
circumstancesgenerally requiresclinicaljudgement,
tobeabletoprognosticateupontheleveloffertility
rather than being able to rely on hard-and-fast rules.
in terms of per-service conception rates orfinal preg-
Veterinarians are called upon to examine male
nancy rates that individual sires can achieve. This
animals under two main circumstances: for the diag-
is partlya negativeresponseto thecosts ofmaintaining
nosisofinfertility and to ascertainwhetherthe ani-
maleanimals,but alsorepresents a positive intention
mal will havea level of ferility that is adequate for
10increase selection intensitiesfor sires(i.eby allow
the purpose for which it is to be used. The emphasis
ingthemaximumdegreeofdissemination ofhein
in production animal medicine is increasingly mov-
genetics).Selection of sires for use in livestock artifi
ing away from the former towards the latter: farm-
cial insemination (Al) programmes are an extreme
ers are encouraged to undertake breeding soundness
exampleof this,for,inadditiontohavingtomeetthe
705
161
The male animal
normal criteria of malebreeding soundness,such sires
On the other hand, if the animal has already under
also have to produce seimen that can withstand the
gone a seivicetest, a cause of infertility may already
rigors ofextension and preservation.l-lowever,even
have been rerognized, obviating the need for further
wiuhin natural service use,farmeis desire to maxinize
examination. Conversely, in the ram, it is generally
the number of progeny born to high-nerit sires creates
best to examine the external genitalia first,as this
pressure upon sires which, since male:female ratios
frequently obviates the need for causing the animal
and total pregnancy rate tend to be opposed to each
stress bycollectingsemen by electroejaculation.
other,can require some careful clinical judgements on
the part of the examining veterinarian.
Outcomes
Whether it is in fact possible lo predict the
actual fertility level is still, after perhaps 50 years of
The outcome of a breeding soundness examination
research, still open to conjecture.While there arein
shiould be classification of the sire as(Entwisile&
vitro tests and even some aspects of clinical exami-
Fordyce 2003,Parkinson & Bruere 2007):
nationthalprovidesomeindicationofactual fertil-
·Satisfactory. The animal is considered satisfactory
ity levels of specific sires in specific circumstances
in all components of the examination (or areas in
(e.g. service testing of beef bulls orin vitro induction
which it isnot satisfactoryhavebeen considered
ofacrosomie reactions of Al bulls' semen), the most
non-critical)
valuable application of breeding soundness exam-
·Re-evaluate/Temporarily unsound. The sire has
inations of sires is the identification and elimina-
failed to meet a salisfactory standard in critical
tion of subferile and sterile animals. This is closely
areas (or there have been aspecis of its perfor-
aligned with the livestock industries' goals of mini
mance that could not be satisfactorily evaluated.)
mization of animal health-related risk. Even so, it
Are-evaluate outcome should be confined to cir-
is difficult to develop binary (pass/fail) criteria for
cumstances in which there is a reasonable expecta-
many aspects ofmale fertility, largely as a result of
tion of improvement with time
the inherent difficulties in calculating sensitivity and
specificity data for such criteria.
·Unsatisfactory/unsound.A sire that is not satis-
factory in one or more critical components of the
examination is‘unsatisfactory'or'unsound Some
Breeding soundness examination
of these aninals are sterile,but most are consid
ered unlikely to have acceptable fertility in the cir-
cumsiances in which they are expected to work.
The components of a breeding soundness examina-
It is generally best to describe such animals as
tion are:
‘unsatisfactory’ or ‘unsound’ rather than having
·jdentification, history and general clinical exami-
'failed’'or being‘sterile'
nation
·Qualified pass.Animals that are close to the‘cut
·a detailed clinical examination of the genital tract
point', in critical criteria between being classi-
fied as satisfactory or unsatisfactory, may possibly
·observationi ofmatingbehiaviour and coitus
be considered as candidates for a qualified pass.
· collection and evaluation of semen.
In giving such an assessment, it should be made
In practice,which of these procedures are actually
clear that there are significant reservations about
carried out and the order in which they are under-
the animal being usable, but that it may be able
taken depends upon the species and reason for
to manage a reduced work-load or to work under
which the examination is being undertaken.
close observation. This classification should be
For example, it is frequently desirable to observe
used with much caution.
mating or to collect semen before the animal has
undergone the stress of a physical examination.
Identification
Thus,for abull, collection of semen by an artifcial
vagina (AV) might be better undertalen before pal-
ltisaxiomatic thatthe sire shouldbepositively
pation of the genitalia (especially before examina-
identified during the examination. lf a certificate is
tion of the intemal genitalia per rectum);whereas
to be issued that the animal has been judged satis-
collection by electroejaculation is probably best left
factory in prebreeding or prepurchase examination,
until therest ofihe examination has been completed.
the necessity of identification is clear.It is no less
706
Chapter
[30]
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmaleanimals
important when an animal is being examined for
and the system under which mating was taking
suspect infertility,especially if return to thevendor
place must be determined.It should be noted that
or litigation for losses sustained are contemplated. If
mating oestrus-synchronized femalesplaces particu
a service test is to be performed (e.g. on a group of
larlyheavydemandson sires,sofemale:maleratios
bulls), temporary identification marks should also
should be reduced appropriately. Out-of-season
be made, so that individual animals can be identi-
breedingregimes in ewes is an obvious source of syn-
fiedfrom a distance.
chronized females,but so too arereturnsto service
afterwhole-herdsynchronizationoranoestroustreat-
ments of dairy cows.Table 30.1 gives suggested ratios
History
of females tomales for the main agricultural species,
History-takingis an importantpart of theexamina
under variousmating systems.
tion ofa suspected infertilemale animal.Thehistory
Asfar aspossible,management factors should be
mustestablishwhetherornotthesireislikelytobe
ruled out.Forexample,it isnot uncommonfor dogs
thecauseoftheinfertility,theduration ofinfertility
tobepresentedforinfertilityexamination afterfail-
and thecircumstancesofitsonset.Onemayneed to
ure to achieve pregnancies on no more than oneor
establish that thereisgenuinecauseforconcernand
twooccasions,orwithbitchesthat weremated out
that the sirehasnot merely performedwithin the
sidethe fertile period (seeFig.28.12).Such apparent
normallinits of（in)fertilityforthespecies/breed,
infertilityismoreprobablyrelatedtomanagement
particularly with sires used for recreational animal
than to themalebeing truly subfertile.Hence,obser-
breeding.
vationofthenormalenvironmentofthesirecanbe
Thenumberoffemaleswithwhich thesire'sinfertil-
helpful. Seeinghow the animal ishandled,howitis
ityhasbeenmanifestshouldbedetermined,asmust
housed,fdandcleanedbservingheaeainwhih
the conditions under which mating hasoccurred.lt
itisrequiredtoserveowitimovedthereandhow
isimportanttoestablishwhethertheworkloadofa
il is handled during service,all may assist with one's
sirehasbeen appropriateorwhetherthecauseof the
assessmentof theinfertilityof the animal.
infertility wasin fact,overuse.For example,among
Also,where it is possibleto do so,femalefactors
agricultural animalsthe sizes of groups of females
should beruled out.Recordsof the management
Levis 1992)
Species
Mating system
Overall ratio
(females in herd
permale)
Bull
Spontaneouslycyclic
Cestrussynchronized
Inhand*
sdnoib
Immature
10-20
NA
2-4
20-30
Mature
20-40
10
4-12
40-80
Ram
Spontaneously cyclic
Oestrus synchronized
Oestrus synchrenized
groups
(inbreeding season)
(out of season)
Immature
20-30
NA
NA
20-60
Malure
40-80
10-20
5-10
80-120
Boar
Group synchronized
Inhand*
byweaning
Immature
1-2
1-2
20
Mature
2
1-4
20-30
*Inhand:number of supervised double servicesperweek.
Overallratioofboars:ows.Boarswouldberotatedwithlargergroupsofsowswithperiodsfsexualresttogiveanoverall servicefrequencyf
1-4perweek.
707
Part
6
Themaleanimal
andreproductiveperformanceoftheherdcanbe
during rearing may have a body conformation that
valuableinassessingtheoverall levelofthefertility
beliestheirsexual immaturity,while thepresence of
oftheherd.Records may also provide useful com-
excess scrotaffat can even delay the onset of sper-
parative information for otler contenporary sires,
matogenesis.Among production animals,there is
andmayhelptopinpointtheonsetanddurationof
considerable breed-to-breed variation in the age at
theperiodof low fertility.
which sexual maturity occurs.For example,young
It should be determined whether sires arevirgin
bullsof later-maturing breeds (such as the Charolais
Orsexuallyexperienced especiallyinprepurchaseor
and Holstein)may remain relatively subfertilefor
premating examinations).Observation of the con-
longer than their earlier-maturing counterparts (Fig.
ditions under which they were reared may alsobe
30.1; Coulter 1980), Likewise, ram lambs that are
useful.Likewise, determining whether the sire has
born early in the season and have good growth rates
previously performed normally may help in dif
maybecomepubertal in their first autumn,whereas
ferentiating between congenital and acquired con-
those that are born late or do not grow sorapidly
ditions, between managemental and pathological
will not become pubertal until the following year.
causesor between temporary or permanentimpair-
Timing of sexual maturity is an important issue,
ment offertility.One should ascertain whether there
however. There is clear evidence that timing of
is any risk of them having been exposed to infec-
puberty in males is heritable,as both a male and
tious diseases.For example,consideration should
female trait, so selection against (ie.rejection of)
always be given towhether bulls have been exposed
animals with delayedmaturity would be logical.
to classicvenereal diseases or the possibility of an
Secondly,late sexual maturity can cause difficulties
animal beingpersistently infectedwith bovineviral
in procedures such as progeny testing,in which it is
diarrhoea(BVD) virus (see p.503).
imperativeto havesemen availablefromyoung sires
Manyofthecauses ofinfertility donotmanifest
by the time that the majority of females arebeing
themselves until a considerable period of time has
bred. Semen from progeny-test bulls,for example,
elapsedfromtheoriginal insult,sothatcareful ques-
should be available at =12 months of age. whereas
tioning of the owner, often over matters thal may
some Holstein bulls are insufficiently sexually
beconsideredtrivial atthe time oftheir occurrence,
mature toproduce semen thatisfitforuseinAI pro-
maybeneeded toelucidatesuchcauses.
grammes until perhaps 15-18months of age.
General examination
General examination should take into account age.
sexual maturity,body condition,conformation,
-05
Simmental
intercurrentillness and temperament.
42
MaineAnjou
Charolais
88
Angus
Age
34
Hereford
Two aspects of age are important.Firstly, in older
uns
30-
animals,semen quality,libido and theabilityto
copulate are all liable to decline.In older bulls, age
related changes to semen arewell recognized,while
18
upper limb and back problems are increasingly likely
0
100 200300 400500600700800
toimpair libido and coitus.Similar considerations
0
apply tomost domestic animals,especially of com
Body weight (kg)
panion animal species.Secondly,foryoung animals,
themainlimitations tofertility aresexualmaturity
Fig.30.1Relationshipbetweenbodyweightand scrotal
circumferenceofbeefbulls.Britishbeefbreeds initially exhibit
andlearned malebehaviours,suchas oestrusdetec
faster testiculargrowth thantheirContinental counterparts
tion and coitus.
but,astheformerreachmaturebodyweights,testicular
Young males must, of course, be postpubertal.
growthceases.Thelater-maturingContinental sires therefore
Pubertycanbedelayed bypoorgrowthrateslowlive
have alongerperiodof testiculargrowth,relatedto their
weight andinadequatebodycondition.Conversely,
greatermaturebodyweight.(Redrawnwith permissionfrom
Coulter 1980.)
animalswhichhaveachievedveryhighgrowthrates
708
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility andinfertilityinmaleanimals
l is also important to note that the testes of
ability,while congenital defecis with a hereditary
basis (eg. jaw occlusion,hernias) and disorders
productionrateislessthan thatofolder animals.
such ascryptorchidism should precludethe sire
The epididymides are relatively short,so there is
from use.
a greater risk ofejaculation of immature sperm.
Consequently,sires that are within a few months
postpubertal aremost unlikely to achieve highpreg-
Intercurrentillness
nancy rates among large groups of females and are
Diseases of the locomotor system can signifi-
generally unsuitable for use in groups of oestrus-
canilyaffect thereproductive performance of sires.
synchronizedfemales.
In particular,hindlimb pain (mainly foot and
Lnless postpubertal sires have had exposure to
hock)and back pain are generally incompatible
female animals,they may not have learnt to mount
with normalmatingbehaviour.Furthermore,not
and copulate.Moreover,coitus betweenyoung sires
only does locomotor pain linit mating directly,
and fully mature females may not be physically
but also the stress of prolonged,unresolved pain
achievable,and it is not unknown for youngboars
may causecorticosteroid-mediatedimpairmentof
orrams thatarerun withlarge,maturefemalestobe
spermatogenesis.
bullied by these females, to achieve no pregnancies
Other systemic illness can affect male animals
and tolose agreat deal of bodycondition.
reproductive performance.However,it should be
noted that shori-term pyrexia or illness does not
generallyhavethis resulr:prolongedpyrexiais
Bodycondition,liveweightand
required to cause temperature-limited impairment
conformation
of spermatogenesis.
Body condition should be assessed as part of the
general inspection. Spermatogenesis tends to be
Temperament
limited when body condition is poor,and can also
Many veterinarians classify males that are exces-
be limited by specificmicronutrient deficiencies.
sively aggressive as unsuitablefor use asnatural ser-
In general,chronic and continuing deficiencies of
protein and energy are likely tobeof greater over-
vice sires.
all importance than micronutrient deficiencies,
although the effects upon fertility can be severe
Examnination of the genital tract
when these occur simultaneously(Salisburyetal
1978).For most agricultural species,sires should
All parts of the genital tract should be examined
be maintained in moderate condition,although
during a breeding soundness examination.How
rams shiouldstart thebreedingseasonwith ahigh
this is to be achieved depends upon species and
condition scorebecauseoftheconsiderableweight
circumstances.
loss they experience during the season. Conversely,
Penisandprepuce
agecan develop such great rumenfill,that normal
copulation can be physically difficult o achieve.
Forherbivores,itis generally easiest to observethe
Bulls and boars,in particular, can become very
penis during coitus or while collecting semen.The
heavy as they age,to the extent that they can injure
penisof theramcanieasilybeprotrudedfrom the
females during mounting.Hence,there is merit in
prepuce with the ram sitting on its haunches, but
determining that the sizes of sire and females are
is best assessed for normal function during eleciro-
compatible, especially when for example, mating
ejaculation.The penis of the conscious bull is very
15-month-old heifers.
difficult to extrude from the prepuce: sedatives are
Many of the aspects of conformation that are
generally ineffective and the pudendal nerve block,
important to groups suchas breed societies have
that is ecessary trelax he enisis difficlt -
nodirecteffecton reproducliveperformance,so are
form.Hence,itismostcommonforobservation to
beyondthescopeoffertilityexaminations.However,
lake place curing coitus,or during semen collection
conformational defects ofthelimbs,suchashock
withanartificialvaginaorelectroejaculator.Most
angle and foot shape,are likely to impair mounting
stallionswillrelaxtheirpenistoasufficientextent
709
Part
61
The male animal
to allow observationand examinationwithlight to
moderate sedation, although this clearly does not
allow one to ensure that erection is achieved.The
penis of the dog and theboar can be observed dur-
ing manual stimulation.
Palpation of the prepuce and of the more proxi-
mal parts of the penis (e.g. the sigmoid flexures of
ruminants) may add additional information to that
gained during observation of the penis.Adhesions,
trauma and the presence of tumours may be appre-
ciated during such palpation
Scrotum
Examination of the scrotum includes palpation of
the scrotal structures and,mainly in livestock spe-
cies,assessment of the size of the testes.
During palpation, the size, texture, tone and even-
AH
ness of the testes should be assessed.The testes should
14:4644
U.0.B.US897105
firm and resilient.Testicular tone is often scored quan-
BELL
titatively (Table 30.2) during examination of bulls and
rams and included in the pass/fail criteria for breeding
soundness, sincesoftness orflabbiness is often associ-
ated with testicular dysfunction or degeneration. Excess
hardness or an irregular contour may indicate fibrosis
or calcification after degeneration or inflammation.
Increased temperature should be noted, as should any
asymmetry of the testes. Ultrasonography of the tes-
tes of stallions, rams, bulls and dogs to visualize fluid-
filled structures within their substance is proving to be
a valuable additional procedure (Fig. 30.2).
It is generally possible to palpate the head and
tail of the epididymis, but the body is ofien dif-
ficult because of its medial position. The tail
of epididymis should be assessed for turgidity:
a flaccid structure is associated with eithera disruption
ofsperm production or depletion of spern reserves
14:4714
Fig. 30.2 Ultrasonograms of (A) normal canine testes and
Table 30.2 Classification of testicular tonein the bull
(B)a dog with epididymitis.(With permissior from Barr 1990.)
(Bishop 2007)
Score
Description
Semen
Action
through overuse.The examination ofthe epididymis
1
Firm and
Likely to be
Meets
of the ram should be particularly careful in view of
springy
acceptable
standard
the infectious causes of epididlymitis in that species.
Slightly
The ductus deferens should be palpated through-
2
Adequate
Meets
softer
semen
standard
3
Poor tone
Probably
Evaluate
presence or absence ofvasectomy scars confirmed.
The spermatic cord should be palpated up to the
unacceptable
semen
level of the inguinal ring for the presence of abdom-
4
Unlikely to be
Classify as
inal contents (scrotal hernia) or abnormalities of
atrophied
adequate
unsound
spermatic vasculature.Finally, the integument of the
710
Chapter
1301
Fertility, subfertility and infertility inmale animals
scrotum should be observedforsigns of trauma and,
in the ram, the presence of scrotal mange.
larger breeds. Scrotal circumference of rams is also
Testis volume is highly correlated with daily
highly dependent upon season,with a 25-35%
sperm output.Hence, measurement of scrotal cir-
increase in size between the non-breeding and
cumference is a common part of hreeding sound-
breeding season. The texture of the testes and the
ness examination of animals with a pendulous
turgor of the cauda epididymides undergo paral-
scrotum (Fig. 30.3) while, in the stallion, measure-
lel changes, Hence, much care must be exercised in
ment of testis width by callipers or ultrasonography
interpretation of clinical findings in rams during
is similarly valuable.Recommendations for scrotal
the non-breeding season. lt should also be noted
circurmference of bulls of different ages are given in
that, altiough rans continue to produce sperm
Table 30.3,Scrotal circumference of mature rams
during the non-breeding season,it becomes diffi-
depends upon body weight:values over 28cm are
cult to collect semen from them by electroejacula-
tion during that period
Accessory sex glands
Consideration should be given toexaminationof the
accessory sex glands,if otherfindings in the breed
ing soundness examination warrant it,or when a
diagnosis of the cause of infertility is required.
In the bull and the stallion,the prostate,vesicular
glands and anpullae can be palpated per rectum. In
the bull, pathological changes of the prostate and
ampullae are exceedingly rare, but seminal vesiculi-
tis is relatively common.In the stallion,the ampul
lae aremore commonly affected than thevesicular
glands. The bulbourethral glands, although present,
cannot be palpated per recium. In large boars, rec-
tal examination is potentially feasible,but digital
examination ofsmallerboarswillonlyreveal ihe
bulbourethral glands. In smaller dogs, digital cxam-
ination oftheprostateispossiblebutradiography
Or ultrasonography, which is essential when pros-
tatic disease is suspected, is required in any case for
examination of the prostate in larger dogs.
Observation of mating behaviour
Fig.30.3 Measurement of the scrotal circumference of the
bull The tape should be placed around the fullest part of the
and coitus
scrotum while the testes are held in their hase by grasping the
scrotal neck.
Choosing the conditions for the observation of mat-
ing behaviour is important.Where the inherent
libido ofthe animal is high,such as in boars and
Table30.3Recommendedminimum scrotal circumference
dairy bullshe will often bewilling to mount females
for bulis (Parkinson & Bruere 2007)
that are not in oestrus,or even to mount other
Minimum scrotal circumference
males, castrates or dummy animals. Indeed, the will-
Age
ingness of a cow to be haltered andtied is often a
Yearling
32cm
more important criterion for her use than whether
2-year-old
34cm
or not she is in oestrus: few bulls are willing even
38cm (clear pass)
to attempt to mount a fractious cow that is fighting
>2yearsold
36cm (provided testis tone and turgar
against uufaniliar restraint! Rans and beef bulls,
althoughusually ofhigh inherent libido,commonly
of epididymal tail are normal)
refuse to mount an oestrous female in the presence
711
Part
161
The male animal
ofa human observer,andconsiderable tenacity and
Anumberofreportshave shown that high test
patience areoftenrequiredbeforemountingoccurs.
scoresareasspciatedwithgoodreproductiveper-
Animalsthatare stressedbyrecenttransport are
formance（e.g.Makarechian&Farid 1985,Blockey
alsooften unwillingtomount straightaway.Taken
together,these many caveats mean that,although
that high-libido beef bulls achieved higher preg-
theresultsofobservationsofmatingarevaluable
nancyratesovera21-daymatingperiod thandid
andoftenprovidediagnosticinformationin infertil-
low-libido animals (51.5% vs 30.6%).However,
ity examinations, clinical judgement should be exer-
otherreports havebeen more cautious,givingonly
cised before condemning an animal that does not
qualified support for libido testing (Chenoweth
perform straight away under observation.
et al1984).Yetotherstudieshiavefailed to dem-
onstrate a relationship between test scores and
Servicetestingof bulls
fertility（Crichton et al 1987,Farin et al 1989).
Importantly, Coulter & Kozub (1989) suggested
Assessment of libido and serving ability is widely
that moderate numbers of mounts were superior
used intheexamination ofbulls for breeding sound-
tohigh orlow numbers,while theratio ofeffec-
ness(Chenoweth 1986,1997). Subjective observa
tivemounts(i.e.in which intromission andejacu-
tion of the mating behaviour of bulls at pasture is
lation is achieved) to total mounts also appears to
generallyconsidered tobe arelatively poorindicator
be important.Furthermore, where mating periods
ofabulls matingability,but observations ofbulls
arelong,therelationshipbetween performance in
mating behaviour(Blockey1976a,b) suggested that
a service test anid fertility is less clear-cut and over-
servingcapacity testsmightbeapredictorofbulls
all pregnancy rates tend to be similar in high-and
fertility(Blockey1978).
low-scoringbulls(Falcon etal 1981,Hawkins et al
Twotestswereiniiallydeveloped,thelibidotest
1989,Silva-Mena etal2002);although high-scoring
and the serving capacity test.The serving capacity test
bulls achieve more pregnancies in the early part
was developed asa competitive matingtest,inwhich
of the breeding season than do low-scoring
groups offour tosixbulls are acdmitredtorestrained,
animals.
oestrogenized heifers and the numbers of mounts
Amajorcriticismtliathiasbeen levelledatservice
and effective services are recorded.The libido test is
testingis thelowrepeatability ofscores invirgin
an assessment ofindividual bulls'performance.In
bulls.nyearlingbulls,serviceest scores depend on
this test,a single prestimulated bull is introduced
rearingconditions(Lanectal1983)andsexualexpe-
to one restrained heifer.Libido is scored according
rience of the animals(Boyd &Corah 1988),and can
tothenumberandvigourofmatingattempts.More
change markedly after exposure to oestrous females.
subjective assessmentsofoverall sexual interestmay
It has thereforebeen argued that service test scores
also be made during libido testing(Chenoweth
ofvirgin bullsdonotnecessarilyreflect theirtrue
etal1979).
service capability,either as mature animals[Farid
Although libido and service capacity tests assess
et al 1987) or even in their first breeding season
rather different aspects ofbulls'performance,bulls
(Boydet al1991,Carpenter et al 1992).
performanceinthe twotestsishighlycorrelated,
However,recent development and standardiza-
so theyhavenowbeencombinedintoa singletest:
tionofservicetests(Entwistle&Fordyce2003)have
the service test（Entwistle &Fordyce 2003).In the
largely overcomethese issues.Firstly,ithasbeen rec
servicetest,quantitative and qualitativeaspects of
ognizedthat service testingcannot be usedasthe
bulls' performance are emphasized acording lo the
singlemeans ofassessingfertility,sinceitisclear that
type and age of animals under examination. Service
libido is unrelated to sperm production and semen
testingofbeef bulls isverywidelypractisedinmost
quality (Chenowethetal 1988,Coulter &Kozub
of the beef-producing countries of the world. In
1989).Social dominance is also tenuouslyrelated
dairyherds,natural-servicesires areless commonly
tolibido.Hence,service testing is nowregarded as a
assessed inthisway,exceptthatbeef-breedbullsmay
partofthebreedingsoundnessexaminationofbulls,
havebeen testedbythevendorpriortosale.
but has tobe combined with the other components
Despiteitswidespread use,there hasbeena degree
oftheexamination toensurethatanimalsthathave
of controversyoverservicetestingofbullsstemming
good libido but are substandard in other aspects of
fromquestionsover(a)thevalidityofthetestand
reproductiveperformanceareidentifiedandelim-
(b)animal welfareconsiderations.
inated.It has been concduded (Mossman 1983,
712
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmaleanimals
Bertram etal 2002)that theprimary functionof
to that of theAmericanSociety of Theriogenology
service testing is that it allows the examiner to see
guidelines(Hopkins&Spitzer1997)andreinforces
penileandlocomotorproblemsandtoeliminate
the role of breeding soundness examination in
bullswith unacceptably low libido.Since,however
the management of risk of subfertility in breeding
these are themain problems thatimpairreproduc-
herds.
tiveperformanceinbulls(Hughes&Oswald2007,
Tattersfield et al 2007) the value of service testing is
underlined.
Collection and assessmentofsemen
Secondly,theprotocols for service testing have
Collection from the bull
undergone a significant degreeof standardiza-
tion,through publications such as that ofEntwistle
Semen can be collected from bulls using an AV,
&Fordyce(2003)and works derived from it
by electroejaculation,by massage of the ampullae
(Parkinson&Bruere 2007）.Thisincludes the use
orbyrecoveryfromthevaginaofafreshlyserved
of sedated, non-oestrous,‘mount' cows, prop-
coW.
erly restrained in purpose-built bails (Fig.30.4),
Each ofthesemethods has advantages and disad
inlarge,prepared yards,with control of the ratio
vantages. Semen collected by AV is generally con-
ofbulls to‘mount‘cows.Prior sexual exposure is
sidered tobe themostrepresentative andallows
advocatedforinexperiencedbullstocircumvent
issues of testvalidityforsuch animals.Themain
ably assessed.AV collectionalso has the advan-
benefit hasbeenderivedfromtailoring the test to
tages that closeinspection ofthepenis is possible
the type of bull beingexamined.Older bulls,with
and that spontaneous ejaculationcan be observed.
their increased riskof locoinotorandpenileprob-
Ithasthedisadvantage that itrequiresthecollec
lems,canbeexamined overagreater number of
tortocomeintoclosecontactwiththebull,which
mounts than is required for young bulls; while
maybehazardousfor thecollectorormayresult in
inexperienced bulls can be observed for theratio of
thebull beingdisinclinedtomount.Collectionby
mounts to intromissions.
electroejaculation is often consideredless reliable
It should be noted that this use of service testing
thanAVcollection,since it is moredifficulttocol-
has moved away from theoriginal concept of usingit
lectrepeatable samples.However,itisfarsafer han
as a test to predict fertility outcomes,now being
AVcollection'forbullsthatareunused tobeinghan-
regarded as a means of identification of bulls that
dled orhavinghumansincloseproximity.It allows
arelikely tobesubfertile.Thisview isnotdissimilar
observation of the erect penis but,as ejaculation
isinduced,itdoesnot allow observation ofspon-
taneous ejaculation.With experience,ampullary
massage can result in representative semen sam-
ples,but,as this is produced with neither erection
nor ejaculation, these processes cannot be observed.
In thismethod,thevesicular glands are located per
rectum and strokedagainst thepubis,which causes
accessoryfluidtodripfromtheprepuce.Theampul
lae are then located and‘milked'between the fin-
ger and thumb. Success is indicated by the dripping
ofsemenfrom the prepuce.Collection from the
vagina of a freshly served cow should probably be
reservedfor thoseoccasionswhenitisnotfeasible
tohandlethebull.Semen is difficult to both aspi
rate andassess,as it is mixed withvaginal mucus.It
is howeverpossible to observenormal coitus.Both
oftheselast two methods have many disadvan-
tages andreallyonly allow assessmentofmotility
Fig.30.4Service testing of bulls:mount animals are sedated
and morphology of sperm and donot provide accu-
andrestrained inpurposebuiltbailsand usedforcarefully
rateinformation over spermnumbers.Even so,the
limitednumbersofmounts.(Courtesy of JakobMalmo.)
informationyieldedcan still be diagnostic.
713
Part
Themale animal
usually nuzzles the perineum of the cow, then a
pumping actipn of the tail head can be seen as the
ischiocaverrosus muscles start to pump blood into
the erecting penis.As the bull mounts, fuill erection
is achieved and the bull usually makes a single ejac-
ulatory thrust after achieving intromission. Small,
preliminary thrusis occur as the bull locates the
vulva and during these, the collector gasps the re
puce(not the penis) with thelefi hand and deflects
the penis io the right of the hindquarters of the cow,
allowing it to find the entrance to the AV. The bull
will then normally make the ejaculatory thrust into
the AV (Fig. 30.6). The entire procedure must be car-
ried out quietly and methodically, keeping the bull
Fig.30.5 Artificial vagina for usein the bull.
under continual careful observation. It is important
to note that many bulls are at their most aggressive
immediately after ejaculation.
The AV (Fig. 30.5) consists of a strong outer rubber
cylinder containing a latex liner. At one end of the
AV a latex extension cone carrying a graduated col-
lecting tube is attached. The length of the AV should
be adjusted so that the bull ejaculates into the exten-
sion cone, thereby producing semen that is as free as
possible of particulate or bacterial contamination.
The spacebetween the outer cylinder and latexliner
is filled with warm water, so that the temperature in
the lumen of the AV is betwcen 45°C and 48°C. 1f
this temperature falls below about 43°C, ejaculation
is unlikely. The main stimulus to ejaculation is the
temperature of the AV,but its pressure upon the bulls
penis is relatively less important. A litle inert lubri
cant (liquid paraffin or sofi paraffin but not gynaeco-
logical jelly - since this is usually spermicidal) is
placed in the lumen of the AV just prior to use.
Control of the bull and the safety of all person-
nel are of paramount importance during semen col-
lection. A halter-trained, oestrous cow is the ideal
object for a bull to mount, although such an ani
mal is often difficult to provide. A lightly sedated
non-oestrous cow is probably the best alternative.
Where a service crate is available, the cow sheuld be
restrained in this, otheiwise she should be tied to
a post. The buill is led to the cow but not allowed
to mount at once.Rather, he should be allowed to
mounting takes place.This usually causes complete
or partial erection, with production of pre-ejacula-
tory accessory gland secretions, and is considered 1o
cause a better ejaculation of semen when thebull
B
is finally allowed to mount. The bull is led up to
the cow with the collector standing to the right of
Fig. 30.6 Semen collection from the bull by means of an arti-
the shoulder of tliebull.Beforemounting,the bull
ficial vagina.(With permission from Parkinson&Bruere2007.)
714
Chapter
301
Fertility, subfertility and infertility in male animals
Whereolderbullshavebeenusedfornaturalser
The stallion
vice foranumber of years,they may be unwilling to
Semen examination has traditionally been regarded
ejaculateintoanAV.Providingthelibidoof thebull
as the most important aspect of breeding soundness
issufficient,repeatedteasingor allowingthebull to
examination of the stallion. Love (2007), however,
mountbutdeflectinghispenissohedoesnotejacu-
latewillusuallyprovideenoughstimulationforejac-
pointsoutthatthisisamisconceptionand thatitshould
beregarded asbut onepart of the examinationprocess.
ulationtooccurwhenpresentedwiththeAV.More
difficulty is experiencedwithbulls that are unwilling
Thepreferredmethodofcollectingsemen from the
tomount in thepresenceof humansorwhich areno
stallion is bytheuseof anAV.The altermative,less sal
isfactory method is by examining the residual drips of
longerhalter-trained.Somesuch bullscansometimes
semen left in theurethra after dismounting.Collection
bestimulated byallowingthecowtomountthebull
from the vagina of a mare isnot normally possible,
but,formany,plentiful supplies ofbothpatienceand
since ejaculation occurs directly into the uterus.
freshlyheatedAVs arethe onlyroute tosuccess.
ThemainalternativetocollectionbyanAViscol
TheAVforastallionislargerthanthatusedforabull
and,largstalinsayexcdinglyavy
lection of semen by electroejaculation (Fig.30.7).
The equipment is placed into the rectum and is used
stallionispresentedwith amare infull oestrus,which
tostimulate the sacral plexus,hypogastricnerveand
isoftenrestrainedwitha twitchorservicehobbles.
parasympathetic outflowvia the pudendal nerve.
After mounting,thepenis is deflected into theAVand
itslower surfaceispalpatedforthepresenceofperi
Ideally,the equipment provides avariable-voltage,
square-wave pattern of stimulation,which allows
stalticejaculatory waves(Fig.30.s).Stallions can be
low initialvoltagestobeprogressivelybuilt up to
quite fastidious about the temperature andpressure
thethresholdneededfor ejaculation.Machines
intheAVbeforetheywillejaculate,andsomestal
lions object so vehemently to even the sight of an AV
are available with manually controlled or prepro-
grammed stimulation sequences.My preference is 1o
that collection is impossible.Caremustbeexercised
by the collector to avoid getting trapped between the
usethelatter.Inthehandsofan experiencedoper-
forelegs of the stallion and he body of the mare, as
atorthismethodishumane andcausesminimum
theforceoftheclaspingmovementsof thelegsofthe
discomfort tothebull.Occasionally,theremaybe
stallion is quite sufficienttobreakanarm.
stimulationofthesciaticandobturatornerves,caus-
ingstiffeningof thehindlimb,butthisseemstobea
relativelyunusualeventwithmodernequipment.
Theram
Semen is relatively easy to collect from rams by elec-
troejaculationor bytheuseofan AV.Unlikebulls
andstallions,in which it is not uncommon to have
Fig.30.7Electroejaculationequipment foruse in the bull
Fig.30.8Semen collection from the stalion.The urethra is
(WVithpermission fromParkinson&Bruere2007.)
palpated for theperistalticwaves thatcharacterizeejaculation.
715
Part
6
The male animal
poor semen in the absence of other abnormalities of
Electroejaculation is generally well tolerated but,if
the genital tract, it is uncommon for this to occur in
there is widespread stimulation of hindlimb mus-
the ram. Hence, physical examination of the genita-
cles, or if theram does not ejaculate after =4-6
lia should always be undertalen in the ram before
stimulations,attempts should be discontinued for
semen collection is attempted,as most infertile
several minutes.Where rams are taken directly from
rams can be detected without theneed forsemen
pasture,housing them on straw for 12 days before
examination,
attempting collection produces drier faeces in the
Most semen examination in the field is under-
rectum and appears to cause less widespread dis-
taken using samples collected by electroejaculation.
semination of current.
A probe, containing two electrodes (Fig. 30.9), is
One of the problems of samples collected by elec-
placed into the rectum of the ram and located on
troejaculation is that voluime, motility and density
to the brim of the pelvis (Fig.30.10). In many rams,
are not necessarily representative. In particular,
erectionwill occur once theprobe iscorrecilyposi-
sorne samples are either immotile orvirtually asper-
tioned but a proportion of rams will ejaculate with-
mic. Care is therefore needed in the interpretation
out an erection.Ejaculation should occur after four
of such semen samples. It should be noted, however
to six rhythmic stimulations ofthe ampullae and
that,apart from tertiary abnormalities (see p.751),
sacral nerve plexus. Some operators prefer to restrain
morphology is unaffected in such circumstances.
the ram in a standing position; others lay it on its
Hence, it is ofien possible to come to a diagnosis
side and hold the penis in an cxiruded position.
even with a mediocre sample. On the other hand,
a ram should not be classified as unsound on the
basis of low volume,density or motility of semen
samples collected by electroejaculation until one is
certain that the sample is indeed representative of
the ram's performance.
Most rams will not use an AV until trained to
do so, and virtually all tequire a ewe in oestrus to
mount.The AV that is used for rams is, essentially, a
smaller version of the bull AV, except that it is com-
mon to provide some means ofkeepingthe ejacu
lation cone warm. Use of the AV to collect semen
from rams is largely confined to Al centres. Although
sheep are seasonal breeders, semen can be collecied
from most domestic rams throughout the year.
Fig.30.9Electroejaculator for theram.
Semen quality can be maintained to a considerable
extent by regular ejaculation; a phenomenon that is
used to maintain production of （frozen) semen in
sheep Al centres. On the other hand,out of season
collection of semen from farm rams (i.e. not held at
Al centres), is much more difficult than during the
breeding season.
Theboar
Semenis most easilycollectedfrom the boarbyman
ual stimulation of the penis.AVs have been designed
for the boar (Melrose & O'Hagen 1959) but are less
effective than themanual method
Thie main stimulus to ejaculation in the boar
is the locking of the corkscrew-shaped distalpart
Fig. 30.10 Radiograph of the hindquarters of a ram indicating
ofthie penis into the spiral-shaped cervix ofthe
the position of the electroejaculator relative to the brim of the
sow. Hence, after mounting (an oestrous sow
pelvis.
or, if trained, a dummy), the penis is initially
716
Chapter
130
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmale animals
stimulated through the sheath then, when pro-
truded, the corkscrew-shaped glans is firmly grasped
through a warm, lubricated, latex glove, mimicking
the cervical lock. Handling other parts of the penis
shonld be avoided (Althouse2007)
The ejaculateiscollected into a warmed,insulated
containereither directlyorvia a funnelin which gauze
is placed to separate the gel fraction from the remain-
der of the ejaculate. Thrusting is vigorous before the
start of ejaculation but becomes less vigorous as it
begins. The boar begins to thrust again as the post-
tion is not collected and tie gel fraction is retained
by the gauze, in order that the sperim-rich fraction
Fig. 30.11 Digital collection of semen from the dog.
contains minimal quantities of these components.
The dog
required to service.Details of the methodologies
and interpretation of semen examination are given
Semen can be taken fairly readily from most dogs
later in this chapter.
by digital manipulation.The presence of a teaser
bitch, preferably in oestrus, facilitates procedures. It
is generally considered that semen collected by digi-
Reproductive abnormalities of male
tal manipulation is of berter quality and quantity.
animals
probablybecauseofdeleteriouseffectsofthelatex
of the AV upon canine sperm,for this reason they
Reproductive abnormalities causing absolute or rel-
are no longer used.
ative infertility in male animals have classically been
In order to induce ejaculation by digital manipu-
lation, the bulbus glandis may be rhythmically com-
divided into two main classes: conditions causing
pressed (Fig. 30.11), although many dogs will induce
failure ofnorinal service(impotentia coeundi) and
ejaculation by their own thrusting. Before produc-
conditions causing failure of conception after nor-
tion of te pre-sperm accessory fluids quitevigorous
mal service’(impotentia generandi). The first group
can be further divided into, fist, conditions caus-
thrusting occurs, but the dog is relatively quiet dur-
ing unwillingness orinability to mount and, second.
ing the initial phase of ejaculation.First, during this
conditions that prevent normal copulation from
quiescent phase,between 0.5 and 5.0ml of watery,
pre-ejaculatory fluid is produced, over a period of
occurring, despite normal libido. Superimposed
up to 50 seconds. Ejaculation of the sperm-rich frac-
upon both groups are considerations of whether the
infertility represents a pathological condition of the
tion then follows immediaicly,when 0.5-2.0 ml of
thick, creany fluid is produced within a few seconds.
genital (or other) system, or whether infertility is
The dog then attempts to turn and tie, whereupon
primarily managemental in origin and could simply
be alleviated by modifying aspects of the husbandry
the post-sperm, prostatic fluid fraction of the ejac-
of the animal. Much of the differentiation between
ulate is produced. This third component is again
these major groups of conditions can be achieved
watery, comprising up to 30ml of fluid, which is
by careful history-taking. A scheme of diagnosis for
ejacuilated over 3-30 minutes.
some of the major causes of infertility in the bull is
given in Figure 30.12.
Semen examination
The purpose of semen examination is to ascertain
Abnormalities of coitus
whether the numbers of functionally normal sper-
Disorders associatedwith failure of coitus can be
matozoa present in an ejaculaie are sufficient to
considercd under the following headings:
causepregnancy and whether the sirelhas an ade-
quate capacity to produce enough spermatozoa to
·immaturity or inexperience
achieve pregnancies among all the females he is
·inability or unwillingness tomount
717
Part
[61
The male animal
·inabilitytoachieveintromission
causeoflowlibido,littlecanbeachievedotherthan
·failureofejaculation.
bythe exerciseof muchpatienceand theprovision
of a plentifutsupplyof appropriately sized,oestrous
females.
Immaturityandinexperience
Hormonetherapy has been suggested,givinglarge
Young sires may be presented for failure of coitus
doses of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
simply because they are peripubertal and sexually
(5000-100001U)
or
gonadotrophin-releasing
inexperienced.Whereimmaturityissuspectedasthe
hormone(GnRH)inanattempttostimulatelibido
Do1
suqqesta.m
problem?
Discuss with client
No
ction
Apparer
Examino
viour in the
ofsultable teaser
Lame
urreni disoase
?Nutritis
Does mcunting occur?
Yes
No.or only
nesitantly
Examlne genitalla
Appa
No
Age/Soclal/Breed
oenisiprepuce
lserection
achleved?
Penile strangulation
Seminal
?Ncrm
pumping occur?
Abno
No
Consider
Prutruded
Ruplurc ol CCP
condilfons
degoneratiot
Early orchitisg
Feeding
Temperalure/Stressl
Chromosomal
Preputial stenogls
Ventral deviation
Splral deviatlon
Laieraldeviation
Back lesions
Persistent frenulum
Corkscrew deviation
Fig.30.12 Scheme for the diagnosis of the major corditions causingirfertility in the bull.CCP,corpus cavernosumpenis.(With
permission fromParkinson 1991.)
718
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertility in male animals
through the production of elevated testoster-
Inabilityorunwillingnesstomount
one concentrations.Considerable caution should
be exercised in the use of such hormones,how-
Most lesions affecting locomotion impair ability
ever, for the high levels of testosterone they pro-
and willingness to copulate. Lesions of the back and
duce exert as great an effeci upon aggression as on
hindlimbs are the most important of such incapaci-
libido.Moreover,hCG,although having luteiniz-
ties but,rexamleintheboar,wheretheforels
ing hormone (LH)-like properties, is not the same
are used to clasp the female, painful lesions of the
substance as LH and may impair spermatogenesis
carpus can also impair mating.
through thetesticularoedema thatitproduces
Inproduction animals andhorses,footlesions are
prohably of greatest significance. Gross pathology
Ingeneral,the efficacy of such treatments islow.
Most animals fail to respond at all, a few exhibit
of the foot,such as penetrations of the sole,separa
a short period of enhanced libido,while only in
tions of thewhite line,foul-in-the-foot and lesions
such as theinterdigital growths in theHereford bul,
very fewcan success be attributed to thetreat-
ment. It should also be remembered that the cor-
produce pain, so that the sire is unwilling to take
relation between the age of onset of reproductive
his weight on the foot during copulation. Less obvi-
ousbutequallyimportantasacauseof lowlibidois
activity ofsires and their offspring means that it
is positively undesirable to attempt to breed from
poor conformation of the foot. Animals with over-
animals that exhibit a gross delay in the onset of
grownhooves,where thedistribution ofweight has
been adversely affected,arefrequentlyunwillingto
sexual activity.
mount o,if they domount,areunwilling toreain
Youngsiresimayalsolacksexual experience and
the conditions under which a young male has
mounted for long enoughforsuccessful copulation
been reared can affect its behaviour. For exam-
tooccur.For thisreason,valuable siresinl centres
ple, where bull calves are reared in small groups,
receiveconsiderableattentiontotheconformation
of thei feet.Bycontrast,manyfarm sires,specilly
they continuously exhibitmiounting behaviour
bulls, receive little such atention until overt lame
as puberty approaches and usually learn to copu-
late quite quickly. However, where reared in iso-
nesshas developed.
Lesions ofthe joints of the hindlimb areimportant
lation,such mountingbehaviour does not occur
and can seem to takean age tolearn,especially in
locomotor causes ofimpaired mounting behaviour
those Al stations where steers are the sole objects
in all species.Abnormalities of hindlimb conforma-
available for the young bull to mount. Similarly,
tion are also imporiant. Older bulls whose hocks
young colts in racing yards may be violently dis-
are malconformed bybeingover-straight or over-
suaded from exhibiting male behaviour by their
sickled’（Fig.30.13) commonly have degenerative
grooms. Before these animals can become effec-
lesions of the hock and are consequeniially unwill-
tive stud stallions and successful matings occur,
ing to mount. Hock lesions appear to be important
such negative behavioural reinforcements have to
in bulls that are going tobeworkingasnatural ser-
bebroken down.
vice sires in steeply-contoured locations.
Unwillingness to copulate can also result from
poor service management.Slippery floors,roofs
thataretoolow,femalesthataretoobig andstock-
men that are insensitive in their handling of their
charges can all contribute to nwillingness to cop-
ulate. Similar problems pertain among companion
animals.Tom cats frequently become conditioned
tomatinginoneparicularenvironmentand,ifthat
environment should later be changed, an unwill-
ingness to mate ensues.Dogs,wliich arefrequently
C
travelledbeforemating,canalsohave stress-induced
impairment of libido.Finally,young males of many
Fig.30.13Malconformationof thehock aseither(A)too
species,notably the pig,arefrequentlyunwillingto
straight or(C)too sickled in comparison withnormal(B）is a
mateifwithin thesight or soundofan older,ore
common causeof impaired mating ability in older bulls.With
dominant,male.
permissionfrom Parkinson&Bruere2007.
719
Part
61
Themaleanimal
Similarly,anylesionofthetrunkaffects ability to
of bonecanfracure,suallyduringountingcaus
mate.Inyoung bulls that are overzealous in their
inginmediatecute,backpain thatis accompanied
earlyattemptstomate,thelumbodorsalfasciamay
by a completebutusually temporary,unwillingness
rupture,producingthe so-called condition ofhon-
tomouni.However,wherecompletebridgesofbone
eymoon back. In this condition,the pain caused by
form between several adjacent vertebrae,lexing
therupture ofthefascia issuchthat theforelimb
forcesuponthespinecancausefractureswithinthe
cannot be raised in preparation for mounting.It
spinalcolumn,typically straight across a vertebral
can be diagnosed by palpation of crepirus in the
body.Suchfracturestypicallyoccur atthemoment
lumbodorsalregion orbythepresenceofswollen
ofejaculation,whiereupon hebull becomes imme-
musclemasses protruding through the fascia,and is
diately paraplegic by spinal cord severance.The bull
most common in bulls that are 15-2l months old.
therefore collapses off the teaser into a dog-sitting
As bulls age, injury and degeneration of the ver-
position and exhibits completeloss of sensation of
tebral column becomes an increasingly common
its hindlimbs.
causeofimpairedmounting.Bulls that are5years
Abnormalitiesofgait areafiirthercauseofinabil-
oldor more are at greatest risk of these problems
itytomate.Detailsofsucharebeyondthe scopeof
andfrsuchanmalserviceestingisaartculal
thischapter(forareviewseeGreenough&Weaver
valuablediagnostictool.Animalswithbackpain
1997)otherthantomentionfourconditionsofthe
may mount,but frequently dismount again quite
bull:pasticaresis,crampysyndrome,straddlegaits
quickly. Affected bulls are unwilling to make the
andthecongenitalataxia oftheCharolaisbreed.
ejaculatorythrustandmaymountwithoutejaculat-
Attentionisdrawn to theseconditionsbecause of
ing,or they may mount/ejaculate once but are dis-
the importance of their recognition during examina-
inclinedtomountagainthereafter.lfAVcollection
tions of bulls on behalf of prospective purchasers.
However,similar conditions occur in many other
in theAVwithoutthrusting(Almquist&Thomson
domesticspecies.
1977).
Finally,it should be noted that many conditions
A major cause of back pain in bulls is a progressive
deposition ofnewbone around tie intervertebral
other than unwillingness to mount can,if neglected,
joints (Fig.30.14),causing several related syndromes
result in a sexually uninterested animal.Lesions of
of incapacity.These conditions,which are most
thepenis thatpreventnormal coitus(seebelow)are
common in housed bulls receiving diets that are
of particular significance in this regard.
relativelyhighincalcium(Krooketal1969),rarely
present at less than 7years of age(Bane & Hansen
Inabilitytoachieveintromission
1962).Firstly, progressive growth ofexostoses can
merelymakethebull appear'stiffsothatmounting
Inability to copulate is a relativelyfrequent cause
requires increasing effortMoreseriously,spondyles
ofinfertilityin domesticanimals.Conditionsthat
causefailureofcopulation includefailure ofthe
penis to become turgid (i.e.failure of erection),
abnormalitiesoferection thatpreventintromis-
sion,and lesions ofthe penis and prepuce that
prevent protrusion of the penis. Most of the con-
ditions can be differentiatedrelatively easily and a
prognosis can usually be given at an early stage of
investigation.
Failureoferection
Erectionisachieved bytheaction oftheischio
cavernosusmusclespumpingblood into the cor-
pus cavernosum penis (CCP).Because the CCP
Fig.30.14 Radiographof the lumbar spine of anaged bull.
is,essentially, a blind-ending chamber, whose
Severalof thevertebraedisplaysignificantdepositionofnew
venousdrainageisclosetoitsarlerialsupplyinthe
bone.
crura ofthepenis,theeffectof theactivityofthe
720
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertilityinmaleanimals
ischiocavernosus muscles is to occlude theveins
relatively weak.In rams,it is more common to see
and force blood into thie arteries,thereby raising
rupture of the CCP niear to therootof thepenis,
thehydrostaticpressurewithin the CCP.Thehydro-
above theproximal sigmoid flexure,presumably as
staticpressurethusgeneratedproducesthelength-
aresultofbeingbuttedfrombehindatthetimeof
eningandstiffeningofthepenisthatcharacterizes
ejaculation.
erection(Watson 1964,Beckett etal1975).Thus,if
The aetiology of the condition makes it more
any aspect of the vascular system of the CCP is per-
common in young than older bulls,probably due
turbed,failure oferection ensues.Two main classes
toacombination ofvigour and inexperience in
ofabnormalitiesoccur:thoselhatallowblood to
the former.Immediatelyafter rupture,the animal
leak from the CCP so that it is not blind-ending
may be noticeably subdued and may display signs
and thosethatpreventnormalaccessofblood to
of mild discomfort, including shoriness of gait.
the CCP.
Many,but by no means all,affected animals are
Ruptured penis (syn.rupture of the CCP,fractured
unwillingtomount.Haemorrhageoccurs from
penis andbroken penis).Thiscondition has recently
the site of rupture,with haematomata collecting
beencomprehensivelyreviewedbyAshdown
inthesurroundingtissues:cranial tothescrotum
(2006).Ruptured penis and corkscrew penis(see
in ruptures of the distal sigmoid flexure (Fig.
p.724)arethemostcommon abnormalitiesof
30.16A),behind the scrotum with proximal rup-
thegenital system ofthebull(Hughes&Oswald
tures.These haematomata can become very large,
2007).Rupturedpenis alsooccurs sporadically in
especiallyifmatingbehaviourisnotimmediately
boars and rams. Rupture of the tunica albuginea
inhibited.Distal ruptures are also characterized
occurs spontaneouslyifpressures within the CCP
by preputial oedema,which is often sufficiently
rises substantially above the pressures achieved
severetocauseeversionofthepreputialmucosa
during normal copulation (Noordsy et al 1970,
(Fig.30.16C).Occasionally,the penisitself maybe
Beckett etal 1974).Such abnormal increases in
prolapsed (Fig.30.16B). In light-coloured bulls,
pressure can occur if the penis is suddenly sub-
therupture oftheCCPmaybeofsufficiently explo-
jected to shearing forces, for example by the cow
sive nature to cause bloodstaining of the overlying
moving suddenly at the moment of ejaculation of
slin.Urination is not affected.
by theejaculatory thrust beingdirected againstthe
Thehaematoma is initiallysoft and fluctuantbut
escutcheonofthecowratherthanintothevagina.
later,as theclotbecomesorganized,it becomesfim
Rupture(Fig.30.15)occursmostcommonlyeither
andhard.Iisnotpossibletodeterminethe extent
in theregionof theinsertionoftheretractorpenis
of the haematoma during the initial phase,when
muscle or on the dorsalaspect ofthe distal sig-
theprepuce is oedematous,so assessment must take
moidflexurewherethetrabeculaeoftheCCPare
place after theoedena hassubsided.Ifuntreated，a
A
一
Fig.30.15Rupturedpenis.(A)Siteofrupture of the tunica albuginea.(WithpermissionfromParkinson&Bruere2007.)
(B)Peripenilehaematomaresulting from theruptureof theCCP,sitedclose to the insertion of theretractorpenismuscle.
721
Part
6
Themaleanimal
Fig.30.17(A)Secondary abscess formation ina peripenile
haematoma in a bull.(B)Preputial fibrosisina yearling bull
with a small penilehaematoma.The fibrotic lesicnprevented
protrusion and requiredresection.
tumours and urinary infiltration of theprepuce after
urethralrupture.Peripenilehaematomatamayalso
becaused by traumatotheventral abdomenorfrom
peripenile vessels (Noordsy et al 1970).
Thetimetakenforrecoveryissuchthattreatmentis
inappropriatefor all but themostvaluablebullsso
Fig.30.16(A) Prescrotal swelling due tohaematomaforma-
that,in many cases,slaughter for salvage of the car-
tion after rupture of the CCPin a bull.(B)Prolapse of the
casepriceshouldberecommended.Wheretreatment
preputial mucosa afterrupture of thepenisina Herefordbull.
isconsidered,several alternativesneed tobeconsid-
(C)Prolapse af thepenissecondary toruptureof thepenis
ered,whoserelativemerits and demerits arestill the
subject of debate (Pattridge 1953,Vandeplassche
etal1963,Metcalfe1965,Pearson 1972,Walker&
substantialproportionofhaematomatabecome
Vaughan 1980,Cox 1982).Conservative treatment,
infected andproduce abscesses （Fig.30.17A),while
consistingofsexual restfor90days,with initial anti-
others developfibrous adhesions between the penis
biotic therapy to prevent abscess formation in the
andprepuce andwithinthefascial planes of thepre-
haematomaand dailymassageoftheaffectedarea
puce（Fig.30.17B).Diagnosis is relatively straight-
tolimit formationofperipenileadhesions,hasbeen
forward in recent cases,but neglected cases must be
reported in some surveys to allow as many as 50% of
differentiatedfrompreputialiraumaandabscessation,
bullsoregainscrviceability.However,other surveys
722
Chapter
1301
Fertility, subfertility and infertility in male animals
have indicated that a successful response to conser-
forebe teased regularly in order to induce penile
vative therapy occurs in as few as 10% of animals.
movenent and counteract the effect of contracting
Selection of cases to which conservative treatment
srar tissue.Mounting should, however,be prevented.
is applied may account for some of the variation
Initially, protrusion of the penis is limited but, dur-
between surveys,forbullswithrelativelysmall,freely
ing ensuing weeks, a progressively greater length of
movable, circumscribed, haematomata that are lirtle
penis is protruded.
bigger than the diameter of the normal penis respond
Sequelae of rupture of the CCP and complica
best to conservative treatment. Larger haematomata
tions of its surgical repair include abscessation of
carry a greater risk of abscess formation and of result-
the blood clot.Peripenile adhesions arelikely to be
ing in peripenile adhesions.Surgical treatment of
more severeif the clot is not removed but even quite
such cases is best confinied to evacuation of ihe hae-
small areas of fibrosis can prevent penile protrusion.
matoma, with strict attention to asepsis (Fig. 30.18).
A proportion of animals develop ectopicveins that
More radical surgery. in which the site of ruipture of
drain the CCP through the site of rupiure, thereby
the tunica albuginea is isolated,resected and sutured,
preventing vascular engorgement of the CCP. In such
has been suggested (Morgan 2007). In either case, sur-
cases, surgical relocation of the site of the venous
gery should not be delayed for more than 7 days after
drainage and closure of the vein is often feasible, for,
injury, as adhesions can become extensive thereafter.
unlike conigenital venous drainage of the CCP, suchi
Sexual rest after surgery should only last for a few
acquired cases usually only possess a single abnor-
days, for a long period of inactivity also promotes
mal vein. The final sequel is damage to the dorsal
peripenile adhesions.Affected hulls should there-
nerve of the penis, either at the time of injury or dur-
ing surgical repair (Morgan 2007), resulting in an
animal that is unable to ejaculate (even if it regains
the capability of erection).
Abnormal venous drainage of the CcP. This rare
condition (Young et al 1977, Ashdown et al 1979a)
of young buls presents as an animal with normal
libido that is eager io mount but never achieves
erection or intromission. Observation of the mating
behaviour of such bulls reveals excessive ischiocav-
ernosuis muiscle activity before and during mount-
ing, to such an extent that the tail head appears to be
'pumping' up and down, although the penis remains
flaccid throughout its length. The cause of this con-
dition is almost invariably failure of occlusion of the
veins tiat drain the CCP during fetal life(Ardalani &
Ashdown 1988).The CCP is not closed because of
the presence of these, so ihe blood pressures required
toproduce erection cannot be achieved and thepenis
thereforeremains flaccid.A sinilar condition occurs
in boars, in which the CCP drains into the corpus
spongiosum glandis (Ashdown et al 1982).
Diagnosis of lhe condition can generally be made
on clinical signs and history alone. However, if fur-
ther confirmation ofthe cause of the condition is
required, the presence of ectopic veins can be diag-
nosed by injecting radiographic contrast media
into the CCP of the anaesthetized bull then observ-
ing drainage of contrast into the dorsal veins of the
penis (Fig. 30.19). Because there are nearly always
Fig.30.18A,B Surgicalevacuation of a peripenilehaema
many small veins along both lateral edges of the
lomaina bull.
CCP, surgical correction is rarely possible.
723
Part
6
Themaleanimal
B
Fig.30.19Radiographs of the penis of (A)anormal and(B)an impotent bull after the injection of contrast medium into the CCP
near thercot of thepenis.In thenormal animal thecontrastmedium is containedwithin the CCPbutin the impotentanimal
was thereforenot blind-ending and couldnotbecometurgid
Occlusion of the longitudinal canals of the penis.
alongperiod ofnormalservicebehaviour,which
Duringerectionof thebovinepenis,increasedblood
haslatterlychanged intofailureoferection.Libido
sremains normal.The other clinical signs are similar
transmittedthroughoutthelengthoftheCCPbythe
to those exhibited by a young bull. In such animals
longitudinal canals.Congenital absence or acquired
thelongitudinal canals are blocked by fibrinous or,
blockage of these canals therefore prevents erection
moreusually,atheromatous material (Fig.30.20B).
(Ashdown et al 1979b).Bothyoungbulls and ani-
This condition also occurs in rams,in which the
mals that have been successfully used as sires over
CCPcanruptureproximal tothesiteofobstruction,
anumber ofyears can beaflictedwith this condi-
causing a peripenile haematoma in theregion of the
tion.Young bulls present in a very similar way to
escutcheon.Similar ruptures occur infrequentlyin
animalswith abnormal venous drainage of the CCP
affectedbulls.
and,in many ways,differentiation ofthe two con-
ditions is rather academic,the prognosis for both
Deviationsof thepenis
being hopeless.In young bullsthe condition is typi
callycausedbyacongenitalfailureofcannulationof
Corkscrew penis (syn.spiral deviation).This is one
the short segment ofthe single,dorsal longitudinal
of the most common disorders of the bovine penis
canal(betweenthepointoffusionofthetwocru-
(Hughes&Oswald2oo7).Intheconditionofcork-
ralcanalsandtheoriginofthefirstofthelateral
screwpenis,spirallingof thetipof thepenis(which
branches that form the ventral canal).In young bulls,
normally does not occur until the time of ejacula-
the conditionis diagnosed by observation of mating
tion)occurspriortointromission(Fig.30.2lA),usu-
behaviour,when the penisremains flaccid despiteallywhen thepenis firsttouches theperineum ofthe
considerable ischiocavernosus activity.Itcan bedif-
cow（Ashdown&Cooimbs1967.1968,Ashdown
ferentiatedfrom abnormal drainage of the CCPby
et al 1968, Seidel & Foote 1967, 1969) or, occa-
palpation of thebase of thepenis.Although the great
sionally,while the penis is still within the prepuce.
majorityof thepenis isflaccid,ashort length oftur-
Wherepremature spiralling occurs,intromission in
gid tissue is present,in thepart of thepenis proximal
precluded.
to the occlusion (Fig.30.20A). This can be appreci-
LInless a breeding soundness examination is per-
atedbypalpatingtherootofthepenisjustbeneath
formed before the start ofmating,an affected bull
the tail head,wherethepenismaybecomesoturgid
may escape thefarmer's atlentionfor quitelongperi-
thatthe animal mayresent itbeingtouched.
ods of time,forbulls generally mount keenly enough
Olderbullscanbeafflictedwithavery similar
but,unless they are observedcarefully,the character
condition.Such animalsgenerallyhave a history of
isticabsence of theejaculatorythrust maybemissed.
724
Chapter
|301
Fertility, subfertility and infertility in male animals
A
Fig.30.21(A)Corkscrew penis(spiral devation) manifested
after mounting but prior to intromission. (B) Traumatic ulceration
of theglans penis secondary to spiral deviation of the penis.
B
ofuse（Pearson&Ashdown 1976,Hughes&Oswald
2007).Hence, it is common for affected bulls to
achieve normal fertility in their first season ofuse
then to start exhibiting corkscrew penis during their
cm
second season. The condition is progressive, in as
Fig.30.20 B ockage of the longitudinal canals of the penis
much as affected animals become less and less likely
lo achieve a normal erection with advancing age. The
which the lumen of the dorsal longitudinal canal is blockeo.
condition is familial in the Polled Hereford,Angus
(B) Transverse section of the penis, showing occlusion f the
and other breeds and is generally regarded as being
dorsal ongitudinal canal with atheroma-like malerial.
inherited(Ashdown&Pearson,personal communi-
cation,1981,Blockey&Taylor 1984).
Premature spiralling of the penis can be elicited
Moreover,affecied bulls donot exhibitpremature
during breeding soundness examination.However,
spiralling every time they attempt to mateso hey will
it isnot uncominon foraffected bullstomount nor-
achieve occasional normal services.Hlence,affected
mally on their first attempt, so repeated mounts
bulls are not normally sterile but achieve pregnan-
may be necessary. If it is practical, forcing the bull
cies in a low (circa 10%) proportion of cows.
to dismount or preventing him from fully mount-
The onset of the condition may be at any age
ingcanfrustratehimenough that he displays spiral
although it is uncommon in yearlings and most
ling more readily. Affected bulls should generally be
common in animalsin theirsecond or third season
classified as msound.H-lowever,someveterinarians
725
Part
61
The male animal
suggest that a bull that shows a single episode of pre-
mature spiralling that is followed by a number of
normal services can be given a qualified pass (typi
cally with a reduced work-load or group rather than
single-sire mating) and culled at the cndofthe mat-
ing period.
Continual premature spiralling can result in the
penile integument becoming traumatized as it comes
intocontact with the perineum of the cow,The pain
caused by the consequent ulcer on the glans penis
(Fig.30.21B) may, in time, impair the libido of the
bull to the extent that he will notmount.
The cause of premature spiralling of the penis is
not clear. Originally, it was suggested to be due to
deficiency of the dorsal apical ligament of the penis
(Walker1970)but laterinvestigationsindicaled that
this was unlikely(Ashdown et al 1968,Ashdown &
Pearson 1971). Given that spiralling is a normal part
of copulation, it appears more probable that the cause
is neural or behavioural rather than a defect of the
architecture of thepenis.Thecondition canbe allevi-
ated and normal service behaviour allowed by surur-
ing the dorsal apical ligament to the tunica albuginea
with alternating catgut and stainless steel sutures
(Ashdown &Pearson 1973a).However,because of
theevidencefor an inheritedcomponent in the aeti
B
ology of the condition, surgical correction is probably
notjustifiable.
Fig.30.22 (A) Ventral ‘rainbow deviaticn of the penis.This
Lateral deviation of the penis.Lateral deviation of the
can sometimes be caused by localized fbrosis. (With permis-
sion from Parkinson & Bruere 2007.)(B). This animal was
pernis is often attributed to injuries to the tunica but
treated by excision of the lesion.
may arise from inadequate development of the dor-
sal apical ligament of the penis or congenital defects
of the tunica albuginea. Treatment is occasion-
also arisefrom injuries to thepenis that result in scar
ally successful but is generally unrewarding(Milne
formation within the tunica (Fig.30.22B). True ven-
1954,Walker 1970,Boyd&Henskelka1972,Walker
tral deviation of the penis must also be differenti-
&Vaughan 19s0) because of the difficulty in identi-
alcd from partial failure of erection, when the penis
fying the site of the causal lesion.For bulls of mod-
appears deviated ventrally because of its flaccidity.
eratevalue, attempting treatment is therefore rarely
Persistence of the penile frenulum.Persistence
worthwhile, while, for valuable sires, collection of
of the penile frenulum is most frequently encouin-
semen for cryopreservation and artificial insemina-
tered in bulls (Ashdown 1962, Carrol et al 1964;
tion is often the most viable option. It has been sug-
Fig. 30.23) and has occasionally been reported in
gested that right lateral deviation may sometimes be
dogs (Joshua 1962, Johnston et al 2001). It results
an early manifestation of corkscrew penis
in a limitation of the amount of penis that can be
Ventral deviation of the penis. This condition,
protruded or causes the protruded penis to be devi-
which is often referred to as the‘rainbow'deviation
ated ventrally.Transecting the frenulum after ligat
(Fig.30.22A), can arise through a number ofunder-
ing thefrenular blood vessels if they are sufficiently
lying conditions, of which the most common is per-
prominent gives a good prognosis for the recovery of
sistence of the penile frenulum. In the absence of
breeding ability (Elmore 1981, Cox 1982).A familial
a persistent frenulum, the condition usually arises
predisposition has been suggested for the Angus and
fromdefectsin thefibrous architecture ofthe tunica
Beef Shorthorn breeds (Carrol el al 1964), although
albuginea. Such defects can be congenital but can
the lesion occurs in all breeds of cattle.
726
Chapter
Fertility,subfertility andinfertilityinmaleanimals
Itmustbedifferentiatedfromothercausesofadhe
sions between thepenis andprepuce.
Hypospadias. This congenital abnormality of the
penisresultsfrom thepartialorcompletefailureof
the two urethral foldstofuse to form the extrapelvic
urethra and the failure of the median raphe of the
perineum,scrotum,penis and prepuce to develop
(Baskin2000,Yamadaet al2003)
In the most mild cases, the genitalia appear nor-
mal, except for an abnormally sited opening of the
urethra on theglans penis (Ader &Hobson 1978,
Saunders&Ladds 1978).This corresponds to the
classification of McFarland （1958)as a balanitic
hypospadias.McFarland described three further
clinical manifestations of hypospadias: (a) penile,
Fig.30.23Persistent penile frenula in an 18-month-old
inwhich theurethra opensventrally，caudaltothe
Friesian bull.
glans penis and cranial to the scrotum;(b) scrotal,in
which the urethra opens at the scrotum or between
the halves of a divided scrotum; and (c) perineal,
Congenital abnormalities of thepenis
inwhich ieurethra opens ontheperineum.ln
preventingprotrusion
the perineal form,the urethral orifice appears to
Considerable growth of the penis and changes in
resemble a vulva and,because suich an animal also
the relationships between the penis and the peri-
has a scrotum and penis,it may be mistaken for a
peniletissuesoccursduringtheprepubertalperiod.
hermaphrodite.The presence of a cleft scrotum is
Failure of these developmental changes canresult in
often associated with hypospadias, presumably as
failureofnormal erection.Forexample,failureofthe
thepresenceof theurethral defectpreventsthetwo
penisto undergonormalgrowih causes acongeni
halves of the scrotum from fusing.
tal shoriness of the organ such that normal intro-
Hypospadias has been reported in the dog(Ader
mission cannot be achieved.Alternatively,if such
&Hobson1978,Hayes&Wilson 1986),cat(King&
failure ofgrowthisconfinedtothesigmoidflexure,
Johnson2000),boar(Langpap1962),bull (Saunders
it may beimpossible to exteriorize the penis (Roberts
&Ladds 1978, McEntee 1990),goat (Sahay et al
1986). Similarly, abnormalities ofthe retractor
1986,Rajankuttyetal 1994)andram(Dennis1979,
penis musclescancauseinabilitytoprotrudethepenis.
Smith etal2006).
Although treatable by myectonry, such abnormalities
areprobablyinherited(DeGroot&Numans1946),so
Lesionsof theprepucepreventingnormal
correction should,perhaps,notbe undertaken.
erection
Atbirth,the integument ofthe penis and the
penilepart of theprepuce are fused but,duringthe
Adhesions between the peripenile tissues can
prepubertal period,the bridging connective tissue
arise from localized trauma,haemorrhage and/or
normally breaks down(Ashdown 1962).Where the
abscessation in and around the prepuce. Infection
connective tissue remains substantially intact,the
of the penis (balanitis)or prepuce(posthitis) is not
peniscannot properly beprotruded,such thatonly
only painful, causing unwillingness to copulate,
but also can result in development of adhesions
fice.This condition is most frequently encountered
between thetwo organs,preventingprotrusion of
in buls that were reared in isolation,which have
the penis.
never had the opportunity to indulge in the calf
Preputial eversion and trauma.Intermittent protru-
hoodridingbehaviour that normallycauses stretch-
sion of varying lengths of preputial mucosa is a nor-
inganddislocationoftheconnectivetissuebetween
mal occurrence in many bulls,especially Bos taurus
penis and prepuce (Cox 1982).The condition is
of polled breeds or with a pendulous prepuce and
frequently self-limiting once sexual activity begins,
Bosindicuscattle(Long&Higneit1970,Longet al
although it may result in persistence of the frenulum.
1970,Ashdown & Pearson 1973b).Pathological
727
Part
61
Themale animal
eversion of the prepuce is associated with aplasia or
hypoplasia of theretractormuscles of theprepuce,
which normally stabilizethepreputialmucosa dur-
ing penile movement (Long 1969,Lagos &Fitzhugh
1970,Bellenger 1971).
Damage to the prepuce occurs most commonly
in the segment of preputial mucosa that is closest
to thepreputial orifice andthereforemost likely 10
be everted.In such cases, eversion of the preputial
mucosa is followedby acute inflammatory changes,
which cause local hyperaemia and oedema.Unless
replaced soon after eversion,the mucosa may
becomepermanentlyprolapsed,withsevereanddif-
fuse fibrosis and thiclening, often with chronic fis-
sureforimation andgranulation tissue（Fig.30.24).
Penile protrusion is substantially impaired by such
lesions,usuallytotheextent that,atmost,only the
tip of the glans penis protrudes at full erection.
Acutelyaffectedanimalsmaybetreatedbythe
application ofemollient dressings and replacementof
the everted preputial tissueWheat1951,Hattangady
etal 1968,Larsen & Bellenger 1971,Walker &
Vaughan1980,Roberts 1986).Hlowever,chronically
inflamedtissue generally requires surgicalremoval,
with the objective ofrestoringfreemovement of
thepreputialmucosa duringpenileerection.Many
variationsofsurgicalprocedurehavebeendescribed
toremovetheeffeteand fibrosedpreputialtissue
(Wheat 1951,Milne 1954,Walker 1966,Larsen &
Bellenger 1971,Pearson 1972,Walker &Vaughan
1980),which is generally achieved by either sub-
mucosal resection（Fig.30.25)oramputation ofthe
B
prolapse if the fibrotic change extends deeplyinto
C
Fig.30.25(A)Chronicfibrosisinaprolapseof thedistal
Fig.30.24Trauma to theprepuceofaBostaurusbullwith a
prepuce in a Herefcrd bull.(B) Submucosal resection.(C)Final
pendulous prepuce.(Courtesy of J.Malmo.)
repair of thelesion.
728
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertilityin maleanimals
the submucosal tissues.In principle,a circumferen-
with canine herpesvirus or,occasionally,calicivirus
tial incisionismadeintheouter layer ofpreputial
(Johnston et al2ooi).It can alsooccurin animals
mucosa,affer which the dissection is then deep-
with atopic dermatitis(RootKustritz2001).Clinical
enedsoastoexciseall thefibrotictissuebeforethe
signs include purulent preputial discharge,which
inner mucous membrane of theprepuce is cut.The
may alsobebloody,accompaniedbyinflammation
removal of the submucosal lesionsmay cause con-
andulceration of the penile integument,conspicu
siderable venous bleeding such that careful hae-
ouslymphoidnodules and,sometimes,petechialor
mostasis is essential.The inner layer of themucosa
submucosal haemorrhages(Johnston et al2001).
isthen sectioned in quadrants,so that suturing of
Treatment is by intramammary formulations of
mucosal frills can be performedwithoutriskof
appropriate antibiotics and flushing of the preputial
retractionoftheinnermembrane intothe prepu-
cavity withwater or saline.
tial cavity.Interrupted sutures of catgut orpolygly-
In bulls, a severe, ulcerative balanoposthitis is
colic acid are suitable. Resection of lesions around
caused by the genital form of bovine herpesvirus
thepreputialorificeinevitablyreducestheeffective
(BoHIV)-1infection(Studdertetal1964,andsee
lengthofthepenis aterection,so theamount of
Roberts 1986, McEntee 1990). The penile integu-
tissueremovedshould thereforebelimited tothe
ment andpreputialmucosa are initially covered
minimumnecessary torestorepenilemovement
with small necrotic foci,which developinto deep
Postoperative oedema may cause tenporary protru-
ulcers.Inseverecases,thesecoalesceintolarge areas
sion of the sutured tissues,but this soon subsides.
After2weelssexualrest,thebull shouldbeteased
Secondarybacterial infection oftheulcersresultsin
asfrequently aspossibleuntilpenileprotrusion is
a severepurulent balanoposthitis,causingverycon
adequateforintromission.Such teasingshouldper-
siderablediscomforttothebull.Affectedbullsmay
sist forat least 3months after surgerybeforean ani-
exhibit swelling andpainintheregionofthepenis,
maliscondemned.
and are commonly dysuric.There is characteristi-
Balanoposthitis.Infections ofthiepenis and prepuce
cally a fetid,watery,preputial discharge,contain-
are common in the dog,bull and ram,occasional in
ing shreds of sloughed tissue and small amounts
the stallion and rarein theboar and cat.Low-grade
of fresh blood (Fig.30.26). Cows that have been
infectionof thepreputial cavityisverycommon,and
served by bulls with mild or early infection may
rarely causes clinical disease. Severe balanoposthi-
develop signs of infectious pustular vulvovaginitis,
tis can cause pain,unwillingness to mate, preputial
Afewcases havebeenrecorded in which thebull
stenosis,adhesions between penis and prepuce,and
was relatively asymptomatic,despite characteristic
peripenile adhesions.
lesions ofpustular vulvovaginitis in thecows.Itis
Mild balanoposthitisisparticularlycommon in
unusual for animals with genital lesions of BoHV-1
the dog, in which the prepuce almost always con-
to also show upper respiratory (infectious bovine
tains a mild seropuruleni exudate,which is rarely
rhinotracheitis) signs.
indicative of clinical disease.It does cause a great
dealofanxiety tosome dogowners,however,who
findboththedischargeofsuchmaterial from the
preputial orifice and their dog's efforis to cleanse
himself ofit offensive.Prophylactictreatment of
thesemild infections isalso frequentlyrequested by
owners of stud dogs.Such requests should be con-
sideredwith somecaution for,whereastheuse of
mild antiseptic douches or bland antibiotic or anti-
septic ointments rapidly clears any infection,the
lossof the normal bacteriologicalflora from the
preputialcavitycanpredisposetotheestablishment
ofopportunistinfectionsbyorganisms ofclinical
significance.Moreseriouscases ofbalanoposthitis
can occur in conjunction with opportunisticbac
teria (particularly Escherichia coli) and mycoplas-
Fig.30.26Acutebalanoposthitisin thebullcausedby BHV-1
mas(chiefly Mycoplasma canis) andviral infections
infection.
729
Part
6
Themaleanimal
Mild casesofBolV-1 balanoposthitis mayheal
abortion (see p.492).Tuberculous balanoposthitis
withoutcomplicationover1-2weeksbutmore
hasbeendesgribedin areaswherethe diseaseisepi-
severe casescan developadhiesions between the
zootic (Winams 1943). Its signs include enlarged,
penis and prepuce. Adhesions develop quickly,
granulomatous lesions of the penis,which may
appearing within only about a couple of weeks of
bleed, peripenile adhesions and secondary phi-
the onset ofacute symptoms.Adhesions can be
mosis.This condition must be differentiated from
extensive,involvingmostofthefreepart ofthepenis
actinomycosis of the prepuce,which causes a simi-
(Fig.30.27).Affected bullsareunable toachieve a
larsyndrome.
normalerection,with only a fewcentimetresof the
Balanoposthitis is a relatively common condition
tip of the penis being protruded through the pre-
ofmale sheep,inwhichit is colloquiallyknown as
puce.lt is usually possibletopalpate the siteof the
pizzle-rot.Bacierial balanoposthitis is caused by
adhesions through thepreputial skin duringclinical
anumber oforganisms,ofwhich Corynebacterium
examination.
renale, an organism that grows readily in alka-
Thevirus is transmissiblein semen,which pres-
line urine,is the most important. The disease is
entsconsiderableriskifbullsthateither have active
more common in wethers than inrams,because of
infection or are seropositive are used in Al pro-
theincompletedevelopmentofthepenisandpre-
grammes.For thisreason,many regulatory author-
puce in castrates.Thecondition is most common
itiesprecludetheuse ofseropositivebullsin AI
inanimalsthat arefed on lushpasturesthat con-
studs,orinsiston testingthesemenforBoHV-1 by
tainhighlevelsofprotein.From theureacontained
means ofviral culture or polymerase chain reac-
intheurine,thebacteriaproduce ammonia,which
tion(PCR)
scalds ihe preputial region.llcers and scabs develop
Bulls are also susceptible to granulomata forma-
overthepreputialarea,followedbynecrosisof the
tion on the penis,which is a non-transmissible
preputialmucosa.Eventually the preputial orifice
and usually asymptomaticcondition （Cox 1982,
may become blocked, leading to urine retention
Roberts 1986). Occasionally it causes pain, produc-
(Fig.30.28). Treatment of advanced stages of the dis-
ing the clinical sign of unwillingness to mate. The
ease is seldom successful,but mild lesions resolve
condition is characterized by hypertrophy of the
simplyby reducing theurea load in the urine by
lymphoidnodulesofthepenisintheabsenceofan
restricting access to lush grass(Bruere&West 1993)
obvious,purulent balanoposthitis.Sexual rest and
and shearing the underside of the ram.The condi-
prophylactic infusions of oily suspensions of anti-
tion can be prevented in intact rams by keeping the
biotic into the prepuce usually produces a resolu-
tion of clinical signs.However,granulomata of the
penile integument ofbulls are also associatedwith
Lreaplasma diversuminfections,whicharea poten-
tiallyserious infectiouscauseofinfertility and/or
Fig.30.27Severe adhesionsbetweenmostof thefreepartof
Fig.30.28Balanoposthitisin theram.Characteristicstaining
thepenis and the prepuce,as a consequence ofpriorBHV-1
ofwool around thepreputial orifice.(Withpermissionfrom
infection.
Bruere&West1993.)
730
Chapter
301
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmaleanimals
belly and preputialregion shorn.In wethers,espe-
a mucopurulent urethral dischargemay alsobe pres
ciallytheolderanimalsthatarekeptforwoolrather
ent.Death may occur rapidly but a chronic condi-
than for meat,testosterone implants are used pro-
tionismorecommon outsideEurope.Deathoccurs
phylactically,with considerable success.
as theconsequenceofvascular degeneration causing
Generally similar lesions are alsoproducedby
peripheralnervedegeneration,musclewasting,ema
infectionwith theorf(contagiouspustular derma-
ciation and paralysis.The condition can be treated
titis;scabby mouth) virus. Lesions may be present
upon the preputial orifice,prepuce and glans penis,
many countries[i.e.northern and western Europe,
where theshallowulcersaregenerallycoveredbya
theUSA,Canada andAustralasia) controlis through
scab. Lesions may also be present in the other sites
notification and slaughiter policies.
characteristicoforf,namelythelips,nostrilandfeet
InpartsoftheworldwhereHabronema muscae
and,infemalesofthesameflock,thevulvaand teats.
occurs,larval infection produces granulomata in
The diseaseisspread bycontactincludingvenereal
the equine penile and preputial integument.These
contact. Affected rams are generally unwilling to
fungoid growths are infiltratedwitheosinophils,
achieveintromissionbuttheirlibidois oftenmain-
bleedeasily,causepruritus andmay interferewith
tained sufficiently toallowmounting tocontinue.
urination.Incool climates,lesionsmay temporarily
Thus,the condition may escape notice forquitelong
regress during thewinter.Treatment,by administra-
periods of time,untilit isrealized that thereis avery
tion of systemic insecticide and corticosteroids, gen-
highincidence ofreturns tooestrus among the ewes.
erally causes resolution ofthe disease[Wheat 1961,
Inconsequence,theprimarylesionsareoftenhealed
Vaughan1993）.Occasionally,surgery isrequired to
bythetime animals arepresentedforclinical exami-
relieveurethralobstructionortoremovethescartis-
nation,withlittleevidence,other than thescarsleft
sue that may form during healing(Stick1981).
on theglanspenis by thehealingulcers(Fig.30.29),
Amorecommoncondition ofstallionsisequine
thatinfection has occurred.
coital exanthema,orhorse pox′（Cox 1982,Couto
Themost seriouscause ofbalanoposthitisinthe
&Hughes 1993,DeVries 1993) (see p. 607).The
stallion is thenotifiablediseaseof dourine(Bowen
herpesvirus (equine herpesvirus-3) that causes the
1987,DeVries 1993).Dourineis caused by the pro-
disease is dissimilartoboththe equinerhinopneu-
tozoanparasiteTrypanosomaequiperdumandoccurs
monitisvirusandequinecytomegalovirusand,while
in theMiddleEast,NorthAfrica and SouthAmerica.
itsmodeof transmissionispredominantlyvenereal,
Pocketsof infection also occur intheBalkans and
itmayalsobetransmittedbyvectorsorfomites.
SouthAfrica.Infectionispredominantlyvenerealbut
Lesionsoccurmainlyon thefreepartofthepenis
can alsobetransmitted throughinfeciedAlequip-
and prepuce.Afer servinganinfectedmare,vesicles,
mentandcan bepassed to foals throughvaginal dis-
surrounded byhyperaemia andoedema,developin
charges from the mare.The initial sign is oedema of
a few days.These rupture andformtilcers.Where the
the prepuce, penis, scrotum and surrounding skin,
densityoflesionsissufficientlygreat,largeulcerated
mosis.Inguinallymphnodes areoften enlarged and
libido,althoughlesionswithseveresecondaryinfec
tion may do so. Blood may be present in the ejac-
ulate(Ley and Slusher 2007).Control is achieved
by preventing affected animals from mating, while
individual animals may need affected areas to
bewashedweellywith antisepticsolutiontolimit
the establishment ofsecondary infection.lnimunity
is,however,short-term,so reinfection is a distinct
possibility.Stallionscan alsobecome long-term car-
riers and/orexcretersofthevirus.
Other conditionsof the penis and prepuce
Preputial adhesions. In the bull, preputial adhesions
may occur at the siteof thereflection ofthepreputial
mucosaontothepenileintegument(Fig.30.30).This
731
Part
6
Themale animal
usually as a result of the ventral prepuce bursting
during theejaculatory thrust.The siteofsuch lesions
is not always clear on clinical examination,for the
changing relationships between penis and prepuce
makeit difficult to correlate the apparent site of a
lesion with its position when the penis is protruded
under anaesthesia.Intrapreputial lesions present dif-
ficultiesofexposurefor surgery.Evenunder general
anaesthesiaitmaybedifficult toexposethepenis
fullywithout tearing the tissues at the site of fibrotic
changeAfterthepenis is exiruded,forciblyifneces-
A
sary,allfibrotic tissueasses areexcised,downo
the tunica albuginea,between two circumferential
mucosal incisions attheproximalanddistalextrem-
itiesofthelesion.Themucosal edgesarerepairedas
for distal resections and the animals are managed
similarly in the postoperative period.Such surgery
is surprisingly effective, although somewhat unpre-
dictable.Much depends upon the length ofmucosa
that requiresresection.
Phimosis.Phimosis indicates a stricture of the prepu-
tial orifice that prevents the penis from being pro-
truded.It hasbeenrecorded inmost of the domestic
species andmay arisefrom theinjuries described
B
above Itmay alsobeacongenital defectparticularly
in dogsoftheGermanShepherd and GoldenRetriever
breeds.Severely congenitally affected puppiesmay be
unable tourinateadequately,with theconsequen-
tial balanoposthitisleadingtosepticaemia and death
(lohnston 1986).Where dogs are affected by con-
genital lesions or a simple stricture of thepreputial
orifice, they may be treated by removing a wedge of
preputial skin,fascia andmucosa,from justbehind
theventralaspectofthepreputialorifice.Mucosaand
skin are then sutured together.Mild urine scalding
may occuraftersurgery,asurine doesnotrun away
freely（Burke1986,Allen1992).In afflictedbullsand
rams,awedge of tissue should similarly beremoved
Fig.30.30Adhesions between the bovine peris and prepuce
from the ventral aspect of the prepuce.
(A)at thesite of thepreputial reflections and(B)diffusely,fol
Paraphimosis. Inability to withdraw the penis into
lowingnon-specificbalanoposthitis.(C)The adhesions shown
the prepuce results from congenital or acquired
in(A)have been forcibly torn apart as a precursor toresection
of the fibrotic tissues.
strictures of the prepuce,paralysis of the peis and
occasionally,balanoposthitis.Althoughnot stricily
constiuting paraphimosis, some coital injuries 1o
site is lesscommon than at thepreputial orifice but
the penis also prevent its return to the prepuce and
presents greater difficulty in treatment.The cause of
thus, giving similar clinical signs, are considered
suchlesions is not alwaysclear butmay result from
underthe same heading.Theconditionismostcom-
partial or complete avulsion of the prepuce from the
mon in the dog and the stallion but is alsoreported
penis during copulation or AV collection of semen.
occasionally inmost domestic species.
Alternatively, lesions may occur when the prepuce
Paraphimosis following copulation or spontane-
becomes lacerated deep within the preputial cavity:
ouserectionisrelatively common in the dog.Itmay
732
Chapter
1301
Fertility, subfertility and infertility in male animals
alsooccurwhenthepreputialopeningbecomescon-
as along-term treatment for paraphimosis,as the
stricted,preventingreturn ofthe penis to theprepuce
condition also occurs in neutered dogs. However,
(Johnston1986)orasa sequeltofractureoftheos
Root Kustritz(2001) suggests that progestogen ther-
penis,balanoposthitis or penile neoplasias(Root
apymaybebeneficialincastrateswithrecurrent
Kustritz 2001). In cases that have occurred recently.
paraphimosis.
the penis can often be returned to the prepuce with
In stallions,prolapse of the penis is the sequel to
careful manipulation and plentiful lubrication.If
many conditions. For example,it generally occurs
neglected,the penisinitiallybecomesoedematous,
transientlyaftertheadministrationofphenothiaz
then swollen,inflamed and suffers damage to its
idetranquillizers（Pearson&Weaver1978,Lucke&
increasingly friable integument.In such cases,the
Sansom 1979). On occasions,this prolapse is irre-
preputial orifice may need to besurgically enlarged
versible(Fig.30.31A).Penileprolapsecanalsofollow
beforethepeniscanbereplaced(Chaffee&Knecht
exhaustionorseveresystemicillnessandoccurinthe
1975,Walker&Vaughan 1980,Johnston 1986).In
terminal stages of disorders of the central nervous
serious cases, or in animals in which the penis has
system. It may be seen secondary to the preputial
become strangulated,penile amputation may be
Oedema thatfollowscastrationorotheringuinal sur-
required,while phallopexy has been suiccessfully
gery (Vaughan 1993).However,it most commonly
employedasameansofmanagingrecurrentpara
occursafterinjury to thepenis,suchasoccurs during
phimosisin thedog(Somerville&Anderson 2001).
copulation(Fig.30.31B), due to the use of ill-fiting
The prognosis for cases that have not been treated
stallion rings,malicious damage to thepenis,acci-
promptly is therefore guarded,depending upon
dents (Fig.30.31C) orinjuries sustained during fight-
the severity of trauma and the degree ofnecrosis
ingorbeingkicked bytiemare.Thepathologyofthe
the penis has sustained.Unfortunately, the dorsal
condition is similar to that of the dog, namely devel-
nerves of thepenis are highly susceptible to ischae-
opment of swelling,oedema and inflammation,fol-
micdamageand,asthesearerequiredfortheejacu
lowedbytrauma,isciaemiaandnecrosis.
lationreflextobeoperative,inabilitytoejaculate
Theearlier treatmentis instigated,the greater the
isarelatively common sequel ofrelativelyminor
chance ofobtainingasatisfactory outcome.Treatment
penile damage.Castration is not recommended
(Walker&Vaughan1980,Cox1982,Vaughan1993)
C
Fig.30.31(A) Penile prolapse in ahorse afterakick at service.(B)Penile prolapse ina horse after aninguinal stake wound.
(C)Priapism,9 days after administration of neuroleptanalgesia for castration.
733
Part
161
Themaleanimal
mustaim toreduceoedema,prevent traumato the
penileintegument andprovidesupportforthepenis
until it can be returned to the prepuce. In the early
stages,oedema maybe dissipated by theuseof cold
water hosing cold packs and exercise,whereas in
the later stages the use of anti-inflammatory drugs
penismustbeprotectedbytheuseofointmentsthat
prevent drying,orby antiseptic ointments ifopen
wounds are present.Finally,the penis must be sup-
ported.Arguably,providingadequatesupportfor the
penis is the most important aspect of treatment of this
condition; for the drainage of fluid from the penis is
greatly facilitated byreducing the tension on the lym-
Fig.30.32Strangulation of the penisofa ram after long
phaticsthatiscausedbytheweight oftheswollen,
strands of fleecebecame wrapped around the glans during
pendulouspenis.Effective supports havebeen made
successive copulations.
outofnylon stockingmaterial orU-section plas-
ticguttering,appropriately slung aroundthehorse's
hindquarters.
Priapism.Persistent erection in the absence ofsexual
long-haired breeds of dog and long-woolled breeds
stimulation occursmostoftenin the dog.Many pos-
ofsheep （Fig.30.32）.As with paraphimosis,the
sible aetiologies have been suggested but the cause
prognosis depends upon the duration of the vascu-
is generally difficult to pinpoint. Consequences
larconstriction and the degree ofnecrosis that has
ofpriapism are generally similar to those of para-
ensued.Restorationofpenileanatomy isrelatively
phimosis and, as irreversible damage to the penis
easyto achieve,for,providinggrossnecrosis hasnot
rapidly occurs, penile amputation is often the only
occurred, the ability of theorgan to healisrelatively
feasible treatment.The condition has also been
good.However, loss of function,particularly impair-
described in thecat.
ment of theejaculationreflex,occurs afterrelatively
Priapismis alsodescribedinthestallion,although,
short periods ofischiaemia.The prognosis should
inpracticeitisdifficult todifferentiatethisfrom
therefore always be guarded in the first instance.
paraphimosis.Moreover,the main causes,namely
Where grossnecrosishasoccurred,amputation of
traumatic interference with the venous drainage
the penis may be indicated.However,recourse to
oftheCCPor the administrationofphenothiaz-
this option should not be taken at too early a stage
ide tranquillizers, are the same. Management is
for,inthestallionatleast,resolutionofevenasevere
therefore generally similar to that ofparaphimo-
case ofparaphimosismaytakeseveralweeks.
sis,especially inestablished cases.However,where
Necrosisofthepenis,which doesrequireprompt
a primary failure of detumescence (subsidence of
action,occursin theram followingobstruction of
erection) is considered as the aetiology,intravenous
theurethra byurethral calculi.Thiscondition is seen
administration ofthecholinergicblockerbenzat-
mostcommonlyinramorwetherlambsthat have
ropine mesylate,plus adrenaline(epinephrine)or
beengrowingveryrapidlyondietsthatcontaina
phenylephrineinjectioninto the CCParebeneficial
highproportionofconcentratefeeds,butmay occur
inrecently-affected animals(Schumacher &Varner in any male sheep.Atfirst, the calculi may lodge
2007). Surgical drainage or the creation of vascular
in thevermiforin appendage and,if caught at this
shuntsbetween theCCPand CSPhavealsobeen
stage,theconditioncan easily beresolved,without
suggested in cases that are unresponsive to medi-
impairing thefertility oftheanimal,by amputation
of the appendage. However, calculi rapidly build up
and priapism penile arnputation is a very common
thereafterintheurethra,withpenilenecrosisrapidly
outcome.
ensuing.In such cases,amputation of the necrotic
Strangulationand necrosisofthepenis.Strangulation
tissue,often accompanied by perineal urethros-
may occur as a consequence of paraphimosis or
tomy,is often the only recourse.In animals that
as a result of constriction of the penis by hair or
havebeen neglectedfor theregrettably longperiods
maliciously placed objects.lt ismost common in
thatfrequentlycharacterizethehistoryofsuchcases,
734
Chapter
|30
Fertility,subfertilityand infertility inmale animals
urethral rupturemay occur,leadingtoinfiltration of
infected.Multipleorlargelesions cancausecomplete
urineintoperineal tissues,theprepuceand thescro-
irreducible prolapseof thepenis,which then under
tum.Alternatively,rupture of thebladder may ocur.
goes secondary changes ofvenous congestion and
In both situations,extreme uraemia occurs and,
oedema.Rapidgrowth ofpeniletumourswithinthe
whereurinehasinfiltratedintotissue,necrosisand
preputial cavitycanresult incompression oftheure
sloughingofthetissueinvariablyfollows.Thebest
thra,whichmay evenrupture,allowingextensiveinfil
that canbe hoped foris therecovery of the carcase
tration of urine into peripenile tissues.
valueoftheanimal,buteven thisisrarely achiev-
Fibropapillomata sometimes undergo necro-
ablein neglected cases.
sis and sloughing. others become detached during
Penile neoplasia. The only common tumour of the
coitus, while yet other lesions regress spontaneously.
bovine penis is ihevirally induced fibropapilloma.
However such resolutions cannot be assumed,so
Young cattle commonly have papillomata of the skin,
recourse to surgeryis frequently indicated（Pearson
alimentarytractandmucocutaneousjunctions,includ-
1972).Single,pedunculated lesions cansometimes be
ing thegenitalia.Thepenileintegumentparticularly
removedduringcoitus,underlocalinfiltrationoflocal
itsterminal5cm,isacommonsiteforsuch tumours,
anaestheticinthesedatedbullorafter administration
whichmaybe singleormultiple,sessileorpeduncu
of a bilateral pudendal nerve block(Morgan 2007)
lated(Fig.30.33).Tumours can befound in intact and
butmanyumoursrequirecarefulremovalwiththe
castrated animalsbutrarelypersistbeyond3yearsof
bull under general anaesthesia. Pedunculated lesions
age Clinical effects vary according to the size and the
can beligated relatively easilybutexcision of sessile
morphologyofthelesions.Haemorrhageandulcer-
lesions often leads to profuse haemorrhage, which
ationarethemostcommonsequelae;thepaincaused
may be difficult to control if a large area of mucosa
bythelatter sometimesbeingsufficientlysevereto
hashadtoberemoved.However,althoughsuchhae-
impairlibido.Largelesionscanpreventretractionof
morrhagemaypersistforsome time,itisrarelydan-
the protruded penis backinto the sheath,resulting
gerous and,provided the tumour does not recur,the
in the tumour-bearing segmentremaining outside
wounds generallyhealquickly. Cautery to control
thepreputial orifice and becomingtraumatizedand
haemorrhage is a possibility in the anaesthetized bull.
B
covering an extensive area of the tipothepenis.(C)Massive tumour causing penile prolapse,urethral rupture and localized
cellulitis ina10-month-old castrate.
735
Part
6
The male animal
Morgan(2007)hasrecently suggested the useof laser
Peniletumoursarealsocommon inthehorse.
methodstoremovepenilepapillomata.Regardless
Squamouscell carcinomata of theglanspenis(Fig.
of the method of analgesia or surgery,care must be
30.34A)erpreputialringisthemostcommon of
cxerciscd to avoid incisingtheurethra,asitshighly
these, developing in response either to the carcino-
vascularmucosa may continue tobleed at ejacula-
genic properties of the snegma that accumulates
tion for long periods afterwardsPenile fibropapillo-
aroundthe penis（Plaut&Kohn-Speyer 1947）or
mata do not metastasize but a proportionof tumours
tothechronicirritation andbalanitisthatit causes
exhibitaremarkablyaggressiverecurrenceaftersurgi-
(Brinsko 1998).The tumour is therefore encoun-
calremoval.Thereisdebateabouttheincidenceof
tered most frequently in geldings, particularly in
suchrecurrences,butpossibly 10%oflesions recur
aged animals.Schaumacher&Varner(2007) suggest
with sufficientrapidity to be obvious again within
thatitisalsomorecommoninbreedsofhorsethat
3-4 weeks of surgery （Pearson 1977). Cryotherapy
lackpigmentation of the genitalia.Tumours grow
of the affected area usually prevents further recur-
relatively slowly but eventually progress to become
rences（Pearson&Lane,unpublished findings)，while
large,fungating tissuemasses thatmaycausebloody
administration of an autogenous tissue vaccine mark-
preputial discharge or penile prolapse. Metastasis is
edlyreduces theincidence ofrecurrences(Desmet
slow,although the tumour does spread within the
preputial cavityand,eventuallymetastasizesolocal
mals is generallygood,although libido may take
lymph nodes.However,local lymphadenitis may
sometimetorecoverinanimalsthathavehadlong-
alsooccur as aresultofthesecondaryinfectionthat
standing, painful,ulceraled lesions.
invariablyoccurswiththesetumours,socaremustbe
B
Fig.30.34Penile andpreputial tumoursin the stallion.(A)Squamouscellcarcinoma of thepenisinanaged gelding.
(B)Squamouscellcarcinomaof thepenisassociatedwith tissueinfiltration anddestruction.(C)Multiplesarcoidsofthepenis
andprepuce.(D)Multiplemelanomata fcrmationin theprepuceof an agedgreygelding
736
Chapter
130
Fertility,subfertility and infertilityin male animals
exercised in giving a prognosis.Occasionally penile
occasionally,henose,by exfoliationofviable
carcinomatabehaveinamalignant,invasiveman-
tumourcells.Thetumouralsooccasionallyaffects
ner and rapidly destroy the body of the penis (Fig.
mouth or skin(Johnston et al 2001,Levy et al 2006,
30.34B).Early casesandaninalswith small tumours
Marcos etal2006).The causal agent has yet tobe
can be treated by cryotherapy or by repeated topical
identified, although sequence changes in tumour
applications of thiouracil (Fortier&MacHarg 1994)
suppressor proteins associatedwith the tumour have
Somelesionsofthemorelooselyattachedpreputial
been described(Choi&Kim2002).Youngeranimals
mucousmembrane can be dealt with by simple or
(<5years old)aremostoften affected,but thereisno
reefing excision.However,more advanced penile car-
breed predisposition.Growthis rapid,with clinical
cinomata arebest treated by radical amputation of
signs generallybecoming apparent after a short incu-
the penis,with a urethrostomy on the penile stump
bation period (typically 5-6weeks but sometimes
withinthe sheath or directly to thepreputial slin
considerablyless)Afetidbloodyreputialdischarg
(Walker&Vaughan19s0).Therecurrencerateisrel-
mayhepresent and,onexteriorization ofthepenis,
ativelyhigh,around20%,particularly inhorses that
characteristicleshygreyishred,nodularmassesare
had invasion of thetumour alongtheurethra at the
observed (Bloom et al 1951).The tumours ulcerate
time of surgery (Mair et al 2000).
easily and are friable （Fig.30.35),so bleed when
Sarcoidsalsofrequently develop on theskinof the
handled.The tumour is locally invasive in about
prepuce and scrotum and on thepreputial mucosa of
50%of affected animals,with metastases to local
entireand castrated horses, donkeys and other Equidae.
lymphnodesoccurringinasmallproportion.Rarely.
In most circumstances, such lesions can be extirpated
widespreadmetastases throughviscera andnervous
without difficulty using a variety of surgical methods
tissueshavebeenreported.Treatment,where this is
(Vaughan 1993).However,the presence of multiple,
possible,isby removal of the penis and prepuce,but
recurrentsarcoidsontheinnerorexternalsurfacesof
the recurrencerateis relatively high.Alternatively,the
theprepuce(Fig.30.34C)may necessitate its complere
useofchemotherapy（e.g.vincristine)and/orradio-
ablation and amputation of the penis (Cox 1982).
therapy （Cohen 1985,Wittrow& Susaneck 1986,
Greyhorsesmaydevelopmelanomataofthepenis or
Singh et al 1996) or laser therapy (Kangasniemi et al
2004)havealsobeen advocated
and onlyproduceslocal invasion of tissue,but aggres
Penile papillomata (Fig.30.36)also occur in the
sivelesions thatmetastasize arealsoencountered.
dog butunlike thoseofthebullaregenerallyulr
Inthe dog,themostcommonpeniletumour is
ative,locallykeratinizedandpoorly circumscribed
the transmissiblevenereal tumour(Jones &Joshua
1982, Roberts 19s6).This tumour is mostly com-
sessile,with a sharply demarcated,ulcer-likeborder.
monlyfound in tropical/subtropical urban areasbut
Such lesions bleed profusely with sexual or other
occursfromtime totimeintheUSA andelsewhere.
excitemenibuutheirdevelopmentmayberemark
It is spread during coitus into the genitalia and,
ablyslow,even over anumber ofyears.
7A6543210123456799
fleshy,greyish-red,nodularmassesof the tumourarereadilyapparent.(B)Tumourdeveloping inthepreputialfornix
737
Part
61
Themale animal
A
Fig.30.36 Penile papillomata of the dog.(A)Localized lesion.(B) Diffuse,“floridlesion.
Miscellaneousconditionsof thepenis.Complete avul
into the lumen of the urethratypicallyfrom a defect
sion of thepreputialmucosa from its attachment to
in the caudal/ventral wall of theurethra(Ashdown&
the glans penis is an occasional injury of bulls that
Majeed1978,Schaumacher&Varner2007)
usuallyresulis from carelessuse ofan AV(Roberts
1986).Diphallus, or duplication of the penis, is an
Conditions causing failure of ejaculation
exceedinglyrare condition but hasbeen occasion-
allyreported in thebull and dog.Lesionsmay be
Thereareafewconditionsinwhichejaculationdoes
confined to thepenis,ortheremaybemore general
notoccur,despitenormal mounting.Suchconditions
izedurogenitalorskeletal abnormalities.
canbebroadlydividedintothosewheretheejacula-
The retractor penis muscle may undergo disuse
tionreflex isimpaired and thoseinwhichlocalized
atrophy after thepenishasbeen unable to achieve
pain makes the animal unwilling to ejaculate.The
erectionforalongperiod.However,calcification
formerconditionsgenerallyoccurwhensomedam-
of theretractorpenismuscle,which occursin aged
agehasoccurredtotheneuralpathwaysbetweenthe
bulls,doesnot affect erection.
glanspenisand thespinal cord.Strangulation ofthe
Fracture oftheospenis isarelativelycommon
penis,wili ensuing damage to the sensory dorsal
problem in the dog. Clinical signs may be evident as
nerveof the peniscauses ejaculation failure,while,in
animmediateconsequence of the fracture,ormay
olderbulls,compression of thespinalnerveroots by
present later as a cause of penile abnormalities or
age-relatedexostoses can alsopreclude ejaculation.
failure ofcoitus.Thecondition is sometimes asso-
Localized pain is similarly effective in prevent-
ciatedwith trauma to thepenis,but the aetiology is
ingejaculation.Localizedperitonitisin thecaudal
often obscure(Iohnston et al 2001).Manifestations
abdomen of ruminants causes pain during the ejac-
of the condition range from dysuria andhaematuria
ulatory thrust, so affected animals are often willing
throughabnormalitiesoferection andgenitalpain to
tomountbutlesswillingtoejaculate.Animalswith
renalfailure.Treatmentisbyfixation ofthefractureor,
backpain behave similarly，although theymay be
in cases withsevere clinical signs,penile amputation.
less willing tomount.Finally, some painful condi
Haemospermia, dueto leakage of blood from part
tions of the penis,such as orf in rams,make the ani-
ofthegenital tract,is a significant cause ofinfertility
mal unwillingto achieveintromission and ejaculate,
installions and hasbeendescribedinthebull.Some
despitetheirwillingnesstomount.
casesarecaused byobviouslesionsofthepenileinteg-
ument,such as trauma,neoplasia orbalanoposthitis.
Conditionscausing failureof
Seminal vesiculitis can also beassociatedwithhae-
fertilization
mosperinia, although changed (brownish) blood is
moreusually associatedwith this condition,at least
Fertilizationfailure,despitenormal copulation,gen-
in thebull.Profuse haemorrhage,resembling arterial
erally characterizes diseases of the testis (including
blood,occursinbothbull andstallionatthe endof
abnormalities of spermatogenesis),epididymis and
ejaculation,asaresultofleakageofbloodfromtheCSP
accessory glands. Many of the conditions causing
738
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertilityinmale animals
failureoffertilizationcanbediagnosedbyanexami
ruminants,withfiguresof0.1-0.5%beingcommonly
nationoftheexternalgenitaliaofthesire,butothers
reported for bulls, goats and rams (eg. Saunders &
can onlybediagnosedbysemenevaluation.
Ladds 1978,Janardhana etal 1995,Greig 2000).
Moreover,diagnosis offailuireoffertilizationon
Themostcommon causeof cryptorchidisminrumi-
thepartofthemaleanimalrequireseliminationof
nants is iatrogenic,hrough unskilled use ofrubber
femalefactors,throughexaminationeitherofrecords
castrationrings for castration.Misplacement of the
orof thefemales themselves.Likewise,causes of fer-
ring can result in one testis being forcedback either
tilizationfailurethatrepresentpathologiesofthe
into theinguinal canalor,more commonly,into a
reproductive tract must be differentiated fromman-
subcutaneousposition cranial to thescrotum.
agemental factors (e.g. overuse) that adversely affect
Occasionally,a highincidence ofcryptorchidism
fertility.
has been recorded in individual flocks of sheep (e.g.
Claxton&Yeates 1972).Such flocks,togetherwith
the clear breed incidences of the condition in other
Conditions affecting the testis
species(e.g.Red Danish cattle(Blom &Christensen
Cryptorchidism.Periurbation of the normal process
1947);Angora goat (Warwick 1961)), indicate the
oftesticulardescent,suchthatoneorbothtestesfail
probability of an inherited basis for the disease.
tocompletetheirdescentintothescrotum,resultsin
Indeed,Hobday（1903)recognized thatthecondi-
the condition of cryptorchidism.Spermatogenesis is
tionwasprobablyinheritedin thestallion.For this
generally markedly impaired or absent in testes that
reason,theuseofcryptorchid animalsassiresshould
arenotscrotal,sincetheabsenceofcoolingofblood
beavoided andtheircastrationisrecommended.In
inthe spermaticcordresults in abnormallyhigh
the dog and the stallion,retained testes exhibit a
intratesticular temperatures.Animals thathavea
high incidence of neoplasias. In heavy horses,many
singlecryptorchid testisareusually ferile,alhough
ofthese tumours are large teratomas. The risk of
the inhibition of spermatogenesis in retainedtes-
development ofsuchtumoursisafurtherreason for
tes means that the sperm density is likely to be
the castration of affected animals(Willis&Rudduck
subnormal for the species.Where both testes are
1943,Pendergass &Hayes 1975)
cryptorchid, the ejaculate is either aspermic or very
Testesmayberetained in the abdomen oringuinal
severely oligospermic.Testosterone secretion is unaf
canal.Theincidence of different sites ofretention in
fected by cryptorchidism so thelibido ofaffected
the stallion is shown in Table 30.4.In supposedly
animals is normal.Indeed,it is far more common
castraiedanimals,diagnosisofthepresence ofa tes-
for cryptorchid animals to present as supposed cas-
tisin theinguinal canalmaybeachieved bycareful
trates that exhibit masculine behaviour than it is to
palpationof thatregionbutmanycasesrequire dem
beacause of subfertilityinintactmales.
onstration of thepresence of male hormones forcon-
Cryptorchidism occurs most commonly in the
firmation.Allaffectedstallionsexhibittestosterone
stallion（Hayes1986),b0ar（Hustonetal1978)and
concentrationstiatarenotonlyhigher thanincas-
some breeds of dog (Patterson 1977).The reported
trated animalsbut also areresponsive toLH stimula-
incidence in dogs ranges from 1-7% （Priester
tion(Coxetal1973,Cox1975）.Thus,aftercollection
etal1970,Yatesetal2003).Thecondition israre in
ofaninitial bloodsample,300olu of hCGisgiven
Table30.4Sites of testes in the cryptorchid stallion
Position of right testis
Position ofleft
Abdominal
Inguinal
Scrotal
Total
testis
Abdominal
125(7.0%)
12 (0.7%)
545(30.7%)
682
Inguinal
2(0.001%)
69(3.9%)
254(14.3%)
325
Scrotal
291 (16.4%)
446(25.1%)
418
527
1744
Comildfrmobday1914ibsie1937taic1960rthur961Wight963Bishpetl966tickle&Fessr1978andCoxtal979.
739
Part
161
The male animal
intravenously,withafurtherbloodsamplecollected
Raised temperatureinthetestiscanitselfemanate
40minuteslater.Bothare assayedfor testosterone
from many causes.Many animals exhibit a period of
concentrations.In olderanimals(4years and over),
relativeintertility during and after highsummertem-
thepresenceofoestronesulphatein theblood also
peratures.Ihis phenomenon is well recognized in
confirms thepresenceoftesticulartissue.Removal of
theboar(Crabo 19S6),evenin northern European
retainedtestesfromthehorsemaybeeffectedbyini-
conditions,and issufficientlyimportantin thebull
tial surgical exploration of the inguinal canal.Many
forsomeAI studs toprovideair-conditionedaccom
testes will befound in this site,while others can be
modationforthesirestolimit summermaxima of
withdrawnfromanabdominalpositionthroughthe
inguinal ringwithout muchdifficulty.Otherabdom-
summer infertility of maleshasbeenrecognized as a
inal testes canbewithdrawn through aparapenile
significant cause of infertility in European breeds of
abdominalincision(Arthur19Gl,Waller&Vaughan
domestic animal that are imported into tropical and
1980,Cox1982).Providing thegubernacular attach-
subtropical climates.Inrams,raised scrotal tempera
ments of the testis are not disrupted during surgery,
turecanresultfromexcessiveamountsofwool over
itisveryuncommontofindan abdominal testisata
the scrotum,or from leaving animals unshorn dur-
site other than near the internal inguinal ring.
ing the summer (Hulet et al 1956).Thus, showing
Testicular degeneration.The seminiferous epithe-
rams infull fleeceinmidsummer canresult in a sig
lium of the testis is highly susceptible to damage,
nificant proportionof such animalshavingimpaired
withawidevariety ofagents causingreversibleor
semenqualityduringthesubsequent autumnbreed-
irreversible degeneralion.Testicular degeneration
ing season.Excessive deposition of fat in the scro-
occurs inresponse toraisedintratesticular temper-
tum,suchasoccursinrapidlygrownbulls andrams,
ature,toxins,endocrine disturbances and infection
canpreventheatlossfrom thescrotum andresultin
(Humphrey &Ladds 1975,McEntee 1990）. Some of
infertility（lubbetal 1993).Local inflammation to
themain causes of testicular degeneration in thebull
thescrotalskin orother structures inthe scrotum
are summarized inTable30.5.Manycauses of testicu-
can alsoraisethetesticular temperature sufficiently
lar degeneration do not manifest themselves in infer-
to impair spermatogenesis (Rhodes 1976,Burke
tility immediately,as thereis an intervalof4-8weeks
1986, Roberts 1986). In the ram, scrotal mange,
betweenthetime atwhichthesusceptiblestageof
caused by Chorioptes bovis （Fig.30.37) raises scrotal
spermatogenesis(particularly theprimary sperma-
tocyte)is affected and thetimeat which the sperm
arefinallyejaculated.
Table30.5Causesof testiculardegenerationin thebull
(fromParkinson&Bruere 2007)
Temperature-related
Environmental temperature
Scrotal insulation (e.g.fat)
Systemic pyrexia (but only if
prolonged and high)
Localinflamation,including
contralateral orchitis
Scrotal frostbite
Stress
Transport
Infectious agents
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis?,
entericviruses?
Dietary
Zinc deficiency
VitaminAdeficiency?
Age-related
Senile degeneration
latrogenic
Corticosteroid administration,
dehorning prior to mating
Fig.30.37Scrotal mangeof aram.Theinflammatoryreac
tionthatresultsin the crusty lesionsof the scrotal skinraises
Environmental
Radiation
intra-testicular temperaturestoa sufficient degree toresult in
Heavymetals
substantial degeneration of the testis.
740
Chapter
301
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmaleanimals
temperature sufficienily tocause testiculardegener-
presenceofoestrogenictumours,such asSertolicell
ation.Largenumbersoframscan beaffected in a
oradrenal tumours（Roberts 1986).Aged animals
flock,such that examinationfor thepresence of the
undergo a progressive,irreversible degeneration,
conditionbeforethe start ofthe breedingseasonisa
initially characterized by increased percentages of
wise precaution (Bruere &West 1993）.Trauma and
sperm with primary abnormalities,with later oli
abscessation of the scrotum (especially in rams after
gospermia and testicular fibrosis (Bishop 1970,
shearing)and facial eczema lesions on the scrotum
McEntee 1990).
alsocausetesticulardegeneration,whileinflamma-
Many infectious causes of degeneration have also
tionofone testisor epididymisalmostinvariably
been described.Themost severe of such infectious
causes a temperature-dependent degeneration in the
causes,orchitisis considered undera separate head
opposite testis.
ingbut many other, milder conditions affect theeff-
Abnormalities of the testicular circulation,such
ciency of spermatogenesis.Ascending infection by
as occurs in varicocele, perturb the heat exchange
cytopathic bovine enteroviruses (BEV) and infection
mechanismresponsibleformaintainingthe testis at
byinfectiousbovine rhinotracheitis(IBR)or,where
a temperature below that of the body,again resulting
itoccurstheepivagagent hasbeen specifically asso
intemperature-dependent testicular degeneration
ciated with testicular degeneration,although viral
(Ott el al 1982）.This condition is rare in domes-
causes arefrequentlyimplicated evenwhen a causal
ticspecies other than the sheep;however,in the
organism cannot be conclusively demonstrated
Merino breed it is suficiently common towarrant
(Humphrey&Ladds1975,Roberts1986).Bacterial
routine examination of the spermatic cords during
contamination ofsuch testes frequentlyleads an
fertility examinationoframs（Bruere&West1993）.
inherently mild bout of degeneration to progress to
Degeneration results from inguinal or scrotalher-
purulent ornecroticorchitis.
nias,for thesamereason ofthermaldamage.Finally,
Infertilityandoligospermiausuallysupervene4-8
prolonged pyrexia,such as occurs with systemic
weelsaftertheonsetofthecauseofthedegenera-
infections, can cause testicular damage,although
tion.Libido is normally unaffected,as it is the sem-
short periods of illness are unlikely to be detrimen-
iniferous tubules rather than theLeydigcells that
tal. Conversely, scrotal frostbite also can result in
areaffected by degeneration.The testes often feel
testicular degeneration（Faulkner etal1967).
softer than normal,although they may still meet
A number of toxic causes of testicular degenera-
minima for scrotal circumference.Thetailsofthe
tionhavealsobeenrecognized(Humphrey&Ladds
epididymis are typically smaller and softer than nor-
1975).Heavymetal or radiation contamination is
mal. However, the most characteristic changes are in
a well recognized cause of testicular damage but
semen.Ejaculate volume isusually unaffected but
many other materials havebeenimplicated atvari-
thenumberandmotilityofspermatozoafall,while
oustimes.Overrecentyears,therehasbeen increas-
the proportion of sperm exhibiting abnormal mor-
ingconcernthatenvironmentalcontaminationwith
phology rises (Fig.30.38).In severe cases,the ejac-
weally oestrogenicsubstanceshiasbeenadversely
ulatemaybecomehighlyoligospermicwithgrossly
affecting human male fertility (Delbes et al 2006).
Effects of oestrogenic substances (eg. clovers) on
female fertility are well recognized (eg. Shemesh&
2000
90
Shore1994)butasyetthereislittledirect evidence
1800
70
80
ofeffectsonthefertility ofmaledomestic animals.
60
Stress-related degeneration occurs largely as a
1200
50
1000
0
result of the inhibition of LHI secretion by the cor-
5
800
40
40
ticosteroids that are released during stress (Welsh
E
600
30
et al 1981). Stress-related degeneration has been
400
020
200
100
described in beef bulls aftermovement(Knudsen
0
1954,Jaskowski et al 1961) and in other animals
0
12
16
20
24
as a result of chronically unsuitable housing and
Fig.30.38Changes in semen quality of abull duringa period
managemeni (Clarke & Tilbrook 1992). Hormonal
of testicular degenerationand the subsequentrestoration of
degeneration is described in dogs whose gonado-
normal spermatogenesis.The causeof the degeneration was
trophin secretion isimpaired either by a primary
presumedtobehighsummertemperatures:density.
motilityandproportionofabnormal sperm.
lesion ofthe anterior pituitary orbecause ofthe
741
Part
6
Themale animal
abnormally sperm morphology.Mixed,mainly
basement membranes ofthe seminiferous tubules,
major, sperm abnormalities are present,includ
the presenceof spermatogonia within the tubules
ing abnormal heads,detached abnormal heads and
and thepatency ofthelumina of the tubulesall
acrosomal abnormalities;midpiece defects,includ-
indicateagoodprognosis forrestoration offertil-
ingcoiledtails,thickenedmidpieces and dagdefects;
ity(Kenney1970).However,thetechnique should
proximalcytoplasmic droplets;andbizarre forms,
beused withgreat caution in these species,since
including tinyunformed heads,stellateforms and
considerable damage to testicular parenchyma can
undifferentiatedcells（Parkinson&Bruere2007).
result.In ruminants,biopsy is associated with a sig
Theseverityofthecondition,in termsoftheextent
nificantriskofhaemorrhageandwidespreadtis
to which semen quality is affected, is poorly corre-
sue damage(Gassner&Hill 1955）.Hence,it isbest
lated with the prognosis for recovery.Some animals
avoided, or used with great caution.
withseveresemenchangescanrecoverwithinafew
Hence,inpractice,theonlyway thatrecoveryan
weekswhileoccasionalanimalswithrelativelymild
be demonstrated is through repeated semen exami-
changes never fully recover.It is unusual for resolu-
nation at 6-8-weelly intervals.Only whennormal
tiontostartinlessthan60 daysaftertheonsetof
semen ispresent should thesirebeclearedforser-
semen changes.
vice.An early sign ofresolution,which occurs in
When,or if,resolution occurs,it may be partial
some animals,is that the grossly abnormal mor-
or complete.The extent ofresolution depends on
phologyof thespermatozoaisreplacedby relatively
thedegree ofdamage thatispresent inthe semi-
high percentages of cellswith cytoplasmic droplets
niferous tubules.Provided that thestem cells (sper-
at the distal endof themidpiece.
matogonia) and support cells (Sertoli cells) are
Orchitis.Orchitis ranges from a mild infection of the
undamagedandprovidedthelumenisnotblocked
testis,scarcelydistinguishablefromtesticulardegen
with cellular debris,regeneration can take place.
eration,through to gross suppurative or necrotic
Conversely, where such damage has occurred, it
destruction ofthe organ.Orchitis can arisefrom a
cannot.However, it is common for semen quality
primary infection or by haematogenous spread of
never tofullyrecover topreviousstandards.Inmore
bacteria into the testis superinfecting pre-existing
severecases,permanent loss ofseminiferoustubules
traumatic or viral damage.In bullsprimary testicu
occurs,with fibrosis and calcification（Fig.30.39)of
lar damage can arise from BEV infection(Hlumphrey
the testis following. Such animals never regain nor-
&Ladds1975)but in rams it is likely that many
malityutsentwithhunkenmrula
infectionsbecomeestablished after fightinginjury
tes and highly oligospermic semen.
tothe testis.Brucella speciescauseorchitis inmany
In thedog(Soderberg1986)and stallion(Threlfall
domestic animals:B.abortus,B.canis,B.melitensis
&Lopate 1993), testicular biopsy is potentially use-
and B. suis affecting bulls, dogs, sheep and goais,
ful in determining the prognosis for recovery. Intact
andboars,respectively(reviewed by Plantetal1976,
Fig.3o.39(A)Histology of the testisfrcm bull with moderate testicular degeneration.Healing may completelyrestorenormal
sue.(With permission from Parkinson 1991.)
742
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmaleanimals
Jones &Joshua 1982,Roberts 1986,Smith 1986).
Granuloimatous orchhitisinbullscanbedue totuber-
culosis(Adeniran et al 1992,fora relatively recent
example).However,the majority ofisolates from
cases oforchitis areeither non-specificbacteria or
mycoplasmas, or are the particular pyogenic organ-
ism for the animal species(eg.Arcanobacteriu pyo-
genes incattle).Ascendinginfectionfrom the urinary
tractispostulatedbuthaematogenousspreadseems
more probable.
In dogs, in addition to common bacteria (eg.
E.coli,staphylococci,streptococci),Mycoplasmacanis
andcanine distempervirus aresignificant infectious
causes oforchitis.Non-infectious causes,particularly
autoimmunedestruction,are alsoimportantin the
dog.Autoimmuneorchitismayoccurin association
with disruption of the blood-testis barrier,as part
ofageneralizedautoimmunedisorderorfrom idio
pathic causes.However,because of theimportance
ofB.canisasaninfectious cause ofinferility,ogs
with orchitis(in countries where itoccurs) should
routinely be examined for its presence(Johnston
etal2001).Orchitisisrareinthecat,withbitewounds
as the most common aetiological agent.Feline infec-
tiousperitonitisvirus can alsocause orchitis.
Orchitisismorecommonlyunilateral than bilat
eral and may involve the epididymis. During the
acute phase of ihe disease, the affected testis is
inflamed,with consequent hyperaemia,heat and
swelling (Figs.30.40, 30.41). The testis may become
grossly enlarged:up to two or three times itsnormal
size.The testis isoftenvery painful,so that the ani
malresents it being touched.The pain may be suf
ficiently severetoproduce an altered gait;systemic
pyrexia may occur.The localized inflammation usu-
allycauses temperature-dependent degeneration in
theunaffectedtestis.Iftheconditionprogressestothe
chronicphase,the testis becomies shrunken,fibrotic
and adherent to the tunic and scrotum.Abscesses
maybreakthrough thescrotal skin.
Orchitis invariably causes a great deal of destruc-
tion of the affected testis.The infection may be
Fig.30.40 Orchitis in thebull.(A) Simmental bull with acute
purulent,with large, coalescent abscesses occupy
orchitis.(B)Longitudinal sectionof thescrotum,showing
ing much of the testicularparenchyma,oritmay be
inflammationwithinthe substanceof thetestisandin thevagi
necrotic,when the substance of the testis is almost
nal tunics.Degeneration of thecontralateral testis has causeda
reduction in its size.(With permission from Parkinson 1991.)
entirelydestroyed.Because of the degreeof destruc-
tionthatoccurs,theprognosisforsavingtheaffected
testis ishopeless.Antibiotic treatmentisuseless.Ifit
Ifbilateralorchitis occurs,theprognosisforfuture
is hoped to salvage an affected animal for breeding
breedingis hopeless,and castration should be per-
removalofaunilaterallyaffectedtestisshould there-
formed as soon as it is safe to do so.Pre-treatment
forebe advocated at the earliest possible stageof the
withantibioticsmayreducetheriskofhaemato-
diseasetolimitdegenerationof theunaffectedtestis.
genous spread of infection during surgery.
743
Part
161
The male animal
the primitive gonad (Roberts 1986).Mild cases may
exhibitmoderateoligospermia orpoorspermmor-
phology, butsevere cases may be aspermic.
A hereditary form of hypoplasia exisis in Swedish
Highland cattle（Lagerlof1936,1951,Eriksson1950),
affectingtheleft testismorecommonly thantheright.
A high incidence of hypoplasia occurs in theWelsh
Mountain pony (Arthur et al 1989),in which the
right testisismostcommonly affected andinwhich
an inherited aetiology isprobable. Sporadic cases of
hypoplasia occurinall species,occasionally,butnot
often,with a clearfamilial predisposition(e.g.Gunn
elal1942,Holst1949,Soderberg1986,Siliartetal
1993). The condition (Fig.30.42) is relatively com-
mon in rams(Bruere1986).
Klinefelter's syndrome (karyotype XXY) is a spo-
radic cause of testicular hypoplasia in bulls(Logue
et al1979)and hasbeenreportedinrams,boarsand
dogs（Breeuwsma1968,Bruereetal1969,Clough
etal 1970).lt isalsoparticularlyassociatedwith
maletortoiseshell and calico cats(Smith &Jones
1966, Centerwall & Benirschke 1975,Long et al
1981).Thespermatogoniaofsuchanimalsfail to
develop,so the seminiferous tubules are virtually
devoid of spermatogeniccells.The semen ofsuch
animals is therefore aspermic although,the Leydig
cells being unaffected, libido is normal.
Fig.30.41 Orchitis in the ram.(A)Ram with acute orchitis.
(B)The affected testis after removal.
Testicular hypoplasia.Testicular hypoplasia implies
an incompletedevelopment of the germinal epithe-
liumoftheseminiferoustubulesduetoinadequate
numbers ofgerminal cellswithin the testis.Lackof
germinal cells may arise throughpartial or complete
failure of the germinal cells to develop in theyolk
sac,failure to migrate to the genitalridge,failure
Fig.30.42Testicular hypoplasia in aram.Thescrotalcircum-
tomultiply in the developinggonad orwidespread
ferenceof22cmwaswellbelowthe30-35cmexpectedfora
ram during thebreeding seasori.
degeneration of embryonic germinal cellswithin
744
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility andinfertilityinmale animals
Diagnosis of the conditionisbymeasurementof
scrotalcircumference,which is below acceptable
limitsforthespeciesandbreed.Palpationofthetes-
tesrevealsoneorbothtobesmall andflabbybut
regular in outline and freely movable in the scrotum.
Semenanalysismayreveal aspermicoroligospermic
ejaculates,sometimeswithmarkedlyabnormalmor-
phology ormotility characteristics of such sperm as
are present.By contrast,libido is generally niormal
and,for this reason,the condition may escape the
owner's attention until the failure to achieve satis-
factory pregnancy rates is noticed.
Because of the probable inherited basis of tes-
ticular hypoplasia,attempting to breed from an
098765432101234561
affecied animal should beavoided.Attemptsat
treatment with exogenous hormones areinvariably
unsuccessful,so castration and (for meat animals)
Fig.30.43 Testicular teratoma in the undescended testis of a
slaughterforrecoveryofthecarcasevalueshouldbe
shire coli.
recommended.
Testicular neoplasia.Testicular neoplasia(reviewed
byHumphrey&Ladds1975,Roberts1986,McEntee
innocuous in scrotal testes.They often grow slowly
1990,Schumacher & Varner 1993)is rarein the
for long periods,but may undergo a sudden increase
bull,ramandboarand,although common in dogs,
in therate of growth,for no apparent reason.The
rarelypresents as a cause ofinfertility.Interstitial cell
tumoursmaybecome necrotic or haemorrhagic,
tumoursarethemostcommontumourofthedog
whereupon affected dogs may exhibit lameness,
and are recorded occasionally as incidental find-
pain, crouching or hunching. Occasionally they
ings in aged bulls. They are very rare in stallions.
metastasize tolocal lymph nodes.
Seminomata,thenextmostcommon caninetesticu-
Sertoli cell tumoursareusuallycharacterized by
lartumour,arealso occasionallyfoundinbulls(and
feminization,in response to the tumour's oestro-
stallions)while Sertoli cell tumours rarely occur in
gen-secreting properties.Feminization is typified by
species other than the dog. In cryptorchid stallions,
gynaecomastia, symmetrical alopecia, penile atro-
afurthertesticulartumour isfoundrelativelycom-
phy,apendulous prepuce and attraction to male
monly:theteratoma,abenigngrowththatcontains
dogs, and occurs more often and to a greater extent
many different tissue typesincluding hair,bone,
ifthe neoplastic testis is inguinal or intra-abdominal
teeth and cartilage（Fig.30.43).Overall,testicular
than scrotal.If the tumour is unilateral, the con-
tralateral testis is generally markedly atrophied.
dogs, with a considerably increased incidence in ani-
The oestrogenic secretion of the Sertoli cell tumour
malswith cryptorchid testes.
causes squamous metaplasia of theprostate gland,
Interstitial cell rumoursusually occurin scrotal
which may be of sufficient magnitude to cause
testes of ageddogsbut areusuallytoosinall tobe
obstructiveuropathy.Metastases areuncommon
palpated. They may result in increased circulating
but, when they occur, retain the oestrogen-secreting
concentrations of androgen and,thereby,predis-
properties of the parent tumour.
poseto androgen-related disease,such asprostatic
Teratomata (Fig.30.43) occur most frequently in
hyperplasiaandcircumanalglandadenoma.In
the stallion and very occasionally in other species.
bulls, interstitial cell tumours may cause irregular
The tumour ismost commonlyfound in cryptorchid
texture ofthe testis and,sometimes,enlargement.
testes,particularlyofdraughthorses.heyareeither
Thiey cause no clinical signs in bulls and no impair-
solid or cystic and may have many tissue types
ment to fertility.
identifiable within their substance.The tumours
The incidence of seminomata in cryptorchid dogs
can become very large,so that theirremovalmay
is about 20 times that of dogswith scrotal testes.
bequitedifficulttoachieve.However,theyrarely
Seminomasmaybecomelargebutare generally
metastasize.
745
Part
61
Themale animal
Inadditiontotheirhormonalandmalignant
degeneration in the contralateral testis,so early
effects,tumours ofundescended testes predisposeremoval of the affected epididymis and its associ-
the spermaticcord to undergo torsion,whichresults
sated testisshould berecommended.
ingradual testicularinfarction.Inexceptionalcases,
InAustralasia,North and SouthAmerica andcentral
bothspermaticcordsmaybe tightly twisted through
Europe,Brucella oviscauses an epididymitis,which
severalrotations （Fig.30.44).Torsion ofnormal
causesepididymalobstruction andgranuloma for-
scrotal testes occurs occasionally(Young 1979) but
mation(Bruere 1986,Bruere&West1993).In these
theconditionismostfrequentlyassociatedwith
countries,itisasignificantcauseofinfertilityinrams.
neoplasticchangesinundescendedgonads(Pearson
In an Australian (Queensland) survey,epididymi-
&Kelly 1975).The susceptibilityofsuch testes lo
tis was presentin 58% of culled rams (Foster et al
tumourformationisthereforeastrongjustification
1989).Even where B.ovis infection is not associaied
fortieirremoval.
with clinicalevidence ofepididymitis,itspresence
inthe semen oframs is associatedwithimpaired
semen quality (Kou et al 1988). The organism is
Lesionsoftheepididymisandmesonephric
transmittedbetweenramsbyhomosexualbehav-
ducts
iour（Jebsonetal 1954)andmay be transmitted
Epididymitis.Epididymitis can also occur as a pri-
betweenewesandrams asa truevenerealdisease
maryinfection orby spreadfrom aninfectedtestis
(Hartley et al1955).It also affects stagsand canbe
(Humphrey &Ladds 1975）.Orchitis in the asso-
transmittedfromramstostagsbydirect(ratherthian
ciated testis can also occur following a primary
environmental) contact(West et al1999,Riddler
epididymitis.Thegeneral signs ofepididymitis are
elal2000).ControlofB.ovisisbyidentification and
similar to those of orchitis, namely heat, swell-
elimination ofinfected rams(Riddler 2002).False-
ing and pain of the affected organ,Any inflam-
negative serological tests(Robleset al 199s)means
mation of theepididymis causes obstruction of
that repeated sampling and/orculture is needed to
the single,highly convoluted tube of which the
identifyallinfectedrams.Avoluntaryeradication
organ iscomposed,soaloss of functionnorimally
schemeinNewZealand hasbeensuccessfulinelin-
ensues.UInilateral epididymitis therefore results
inating theinfectionfrom alargenumber of flocks
in reduced fertility,whereas bilateral obstruction
(Riddler2002)
results in sterility. Furthermore, as with orchitis,
Ovine epididymitis also occurs as a consequence
unilateralepididymitis causes temperature-induced
ofinfection withthepleomorphic Gram-negative
organisms ofthe Actinobacillus seminis-Histophilus
somnigroup(Walkeretal1988,West2004).Infection
with these organisms is common in virgin rams and
ram-lamb-producing flocks (Bagley etal 1985), typi-
cally affectingrams in theperipubertal period,when
the organism can be recovered from a high propor-
tionoframs(Walker&LeaMaster1986).Fortunately,
only a relatively low proportion of animalsprogress
todevelop epididymitis.Thepossibility ofvenereal
transmission hasbeen suggested and infection has
been establishedbyexperimentalintrapreputialand
intraurethralinoculation(Al-Katib&Dennis2005)
Furthermore,these organisms undoubtedly infect
ewes,causing subfertility (Lees et al 1990),abor-
tion (McDowelletal 1994,Fosteret al 1999)and,
at least experimentally,mastitis(Alsenosy&Dennis
1985).Theinfection is found inAI stud rams(Low
etal1995)and anecdotalevidence existsfor trans-
missionbeiween teaser ewesand Al stud rams.The
Fig.30.44Torsion of the spermaticcorc of an undescended
measures for controlling the disease are poorly
testis
understood.Avoidingholdingramlambsin dirty
746
Chapter
1301
Ferlility,subfertility and infertility in male animals
yards and reducing pasture stoclking densities have
been suggested (Bruere & West 1993), while culling
animals with clinical epididymitis reduces theinci
dence but does not eliminate the disease (Bagley
et al 1985). Lesions are most comnon in he tail
of the epididymis of mature rams and in the head
of the epididymis (Fig. 30.45) in rams, where they
are often associated with spermatoceles (Walker
et al 1986). Recent development of PCR methods
are likely to improve the identification of infected
and carrier animals (Saunders et al 2007).
Histophilus somni.Histophilus somniinfections have
alsobeeni associated with orchitis (Corbel et al 1986,
Fig.30.46Abscess-like sperm granuloma formation in the
Plagemann&Mutters1991) and infertility incattle.
epiclidymal head of a Devon bull after rupture of the epididy-
Sperm granuloma.Obstruction of the epididymis
mal duct.(With permission from Parkinson et al 1993.)
cani occur following localized rupture ofthe duct
and leakageofsperm into thesurrounding stromal
tissue.The granulomata formed in response to the
preseice of foreign (sperm) antigen in the tissue
cause an obstruction ofthe epididymides (Parkinson
et al 1993, Fig. 30.46). Ieakage of sperm into the
tail of the epididymis also occurs in animals that
9
5
Fig.30.47 Multiple sperm granuloma formation in the
epididymal tail of a vasectomized ram.
have been vasectomized.In vasectomized rans, thie
epididymal tail can be nearly as large as the testis
Fig.30.45 Actinobacillus seminis infection of the head of
(Fig. 30.47), where innumerable small sperm gran-
epididymis af a 4-year-old Suffolk ram. Inspissated material
ulomata have formed.Surprisingly, this condition
was present in several large,abscess-like lesions within the
head cf both epididymides.
vasectomized ramsisnormal.
Part
61
Themale animal
Aplasia of the mesonephric ducts. Segmeiital apla-
usually reveals le presence ofA. pyogenes, althougha
sia of the mesonephric ducts(Blom & Christensen
widevariety oforganisms,including Corynebacterium
1951)is most commonly manifested as an absence of
renale,Actinbbacillus actinoides,E.coliPseudomonas
parts of the epididymis (Fig. 30.48). In the bull, the
aeruginosa,sureptococci and staphylococci can be
condition is probably inherited (Konig et al 1972).
recovered.It is,however,unlikely that these are the
Absence of the head or tail of the epididymiscanbe
causative organisms, for these are more commonly
determinedrelativelyeasilyby carefulpalpation of
regarded as secondaryinfections ofapreviously dam
the scrotumbut themedially sited epididymal body
aged organ. Primary causative organisms may include
is rarely palpable.Only in thin-skinned bulls and
B. borus, Chlauydophila sp. and epivag, entero-and
rams can it occasionally be felt; even thien tie scro-
IBR/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis (IBR-IPV)
tum must have little fat within it. Epididymal aplasia
viruses. Mycoplasma bovigenitalium (Al-Aubaidi et al
also occurs sporadically in other species [McEntee
1972)and M.bovis(LaFaunce&McEntee 1982)have
1990). Oligospermia occurs if one epididymis is
alsobeen implicated as primary causes of vesiculitis.
aplastic; aspermia if both are affected.
Seminal vesiculitis occurs most commonly in young
Aplasia of the vas deferens is less common.In
bulls of less than 2 years old and in aged bulls. It has
bulls（Blom&Christensen1951)theconditionmay
been suggested ihat the shape of the pelvis predis-
sometimes be diagnosed by rectal palpation,when
poses to the developinent ofvesiculitis (Blom 1979).
strictures,or dilations distal to the site of stricture,
Curiously, it is not a common disease of younger
may be discerned. As with epididymal aplasia,
mature animals. The disease is rare in rams.
tmilateral aplasia usually does not affect fertility,
In bulls,uring eacutephasefhedisease,local
whereas sterility is the consequence of bilateral
ized peritonitismay occur in the caudal abdomen,
lesions.
producing the signs associated with that syndrome.
One sign of localized peritonitis that itself affects
Lesions of the accessory glands
reproductive performance is the unwillingness of
affected animals to undertale movements thatcause
Vesicular glands. Infection of the vesicular glands
stretching of the area of inflammation.Foremost
(seminal vesicles) is relatively common in bulls.
among such actions aremounting and,more particu
The incidence ranges between 0.2% (Blom 1979)
larly,theejaculatoy thrust.Hence,in the arly stage
and9%(Bagshaw&Ladds 1974),witha recent
of vesiculitis, animals may present with these signs.
study (Scicchitano et al 2006) recording a figure of
Later, animals generally present as infertile despite
0.4%.Bacteriological examination of infecied glands
normal service behiaviour. Occasionally,abscesses
form in infected glands, which can burst, causing
generalized peritonitis, or fistulate, generally into the
rectum. Infection is more commonly unilateral,but
may bebilateral.The main consequence of infection
of the vesicular gland is a decline in semen quality,
which exhibis a decrease in motility, accompanied
by elevated pll, low fructose concentrations and the
presence of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. In mod-
erate or severe cases, the semen may appear overtly
purulent and may be tinged brownishbecause of the
presence of degenerating blood from the damaged
ity lead to a decrease in fertility,although cases have
been reported in which affected bulls have produced
normal conception rates. Diagnosis of the condition
can be confirmed by rectal palpation of the vesicu-
1019817615432110121345678910
lar glands (Fig.30.49),which are characterisiically
enlarged, tense and painful during the acute phase,
Fig.30.48 Aplasia of the mesonephir.c ducts in the bull.
or lobular and fibrous, and sometimes shrunken, in
Absence of the entire epicidymis.
the chronic phase.
748
Chapter
1301
Fertility, subfertility and infertility in male animals
no means always successful (Blanchard et al 1988),
possibly dependingupon thepharmakinetics of the
antibiotic selected. Love (2007) suggests that lavage
followed by direct administration of antibioticsinto
the infected gland via an endoscope is more effective
than parenteral treatment,
Prostate
Prostatic disease is common in the dog (Barsanti
&Finco 1986,Johnston et al 2001) but is exceed-
D801100100264507090
ingly rare in other species. Diseases of the canine
prostate have been classified as: bennign hyperpla-
Fig. 30.49 Seminal vesiculitis in the bull.
sia/hypertrophy, benign haemorrhage, squamous
metaplasia. prostatitis (acute or chronic, or resuilt-
ing in abscess formation), prostatic cysts and neo-
Treatment is sometimes possible if the disease is
plasia(Williams&Niles 1999,Johnston et al 2001)
noticed in its earliest stage,by the administration of
Many of these disorders are androgen-dependent
large doses of bactericidal antibiotics (Roberts 1986,
and accompany the progressive enlargement of
Arthur et al 1989,Vamer et al 1993) or enrofloxa-
the prostate tliat is a norimal part of the aging pro-
cin.However,in many cases antibiotic treatment is
cess of male dogs.Where clinical signs occur,they
ineffective and,in such animals, amputation of a
are relatively similar regardless of the underlying
unilaterallyinfected gland is the onlymeans of resto-
pathology.Signs include urinary tract infections or
rationof fertility(McEntee1962,King&McPherson
dysuria,abnormalities of defecation and haema-
1969).In bilaterally infected animals, the progno-
turia or urethral bleeding.Systemic illness, altera-
sis is hopeless. No treatment should be attempted
tions in gait induced bylocal pain and infertility are
in animals infected with Bncella;instead the bull
less comumon signs (Krawiec & Heflin 1992,
should be slaughtered.
Williams & Niles 1999).Diagnosis is by ultra-
It would be natural to assume that a sire with
sonography or radiography, biopsy or cytology
aninfection of thevesicular glands would transmit
(including collection of fine-needle aspirates) and
thie infection venereally to females. Cases of such
urine abnormalities (presence of polymorphonu-
transmission have been reported in bulls infected
clear leukocytes, bacteria and blood). Prostatitis is
with streptococci (e.g.Webster1932),associated with
probably the most significant of the disorders of
herd inferrility, a yellowish-white postcoital dis-
the canine prostate that interfere with fertility. The
charge and pronounced cervicitis.However, other
routeofinfection isgenerally ascending.with a wide
cases of streptococcal infection have had no associ-
range of bacteria (such as E. coli, Protens spp., staph-
ated signs in cows.Nevertheless,it would be prudent
ylococci,streptococci,enterococci,Pseudomonas
to advisethat a bull with vesiculitis should not be
spp.) and mycoplasmas commonly being recov-
used for service and that a very cautious prognosis
ered.Prostatitis and prostatic hyperplasia often
should be given in the first instance.
Dccur together; the prostate undergoing a diffuse
Infection of thevesicular glands also occurs in the
or local suppurative reaction,with a tendency to
stallion(Blanchard et al 1988,Vamer et al 1993),
abscess formation.Prostatitismay be treatablewith
from whicha similarly mixed series oforganisms
broad-spectrum antibiotics,whereas hyperplasia,
have been isolated （B.aborus, Klebsiella pneumo-
being androgen-dependent, is best treated by the
niae, P. aenginosa, streptococci and staphylococci.
administration of progestogens or by castration.
It may be one of the differential diagnoses of colic
Oestrogens, which were long considered to be of
in the stallion (Freestone ef al 1993). Transrectal
value in the treatment of prostatic hyperplasia,are
ultrasonography is a useful adjunct o, indeed, sub
now regarded as being contraindicated (Willians
stitute for rectal palpation in the diagnosis of such
& Niles 1999).Where maintenance of fertility is
cases.Treatment may beattempted with antibiotics
important, drugs such as the antioestrogen tamox-
(Freesione ct al 1993), although such therapy is by
ifen may be of value (Corrada ei al 2004).
749
Part
6
The male animal
Ampullae.Arelativelycommondisorderofthestallion
many semen assessments are being done, a heated
ispartial or completeblockage of the ampullaewith
microscope stage is an invaluable tool.Altermatively.
sperm(Love 2007).The condition typically occurs at
a simplewarfiplatformonwhichequipmentcanbe
the start of the breeding season,orafter a period of
stoodissecondbessolongasthelenghoftmesis
sexual inactivity,andpresents with oligospermia or
are off theheatedstageiskept to aminimum.
ejaculationofdefectivespermatozoa(immotileand/
Semenisinitiallyinspected forthepresence ofurine,
orwithdetachedheads).Treatmentisbyampullary
freshor changed blood,pus andextraneousmaterial.
massage,oxytocin ormaintaining a very high ejacula
The colourandconsistency arenoted,forwatery sam
tionfrequency.Themainsignificanceof thecondition
ples are usuallyoligospermicand samples that arenot
is as a differential forpermanent causes ofinfertility.
homogeneous often contain pus. Some normal bulls
havesementhatisbrightyellowincolourbecauseof
excretion ofgrasspigmentsintheseminalplasma.
Abnormalitiesofsemen
Motility.Sperm motility is markedly influenced by
Semen examination
temperature, so temperature control during this
stage of semen examinationis,clearly,mostcritical.
Semencanbecollected bythemethods described
Ideally, this is achieved by using prewarmed slides
earlier in this chapter andassessedsoastoprovide
onaheated microscope stage.For the bull and ram,
information about the fertilizingpotentialofthe
a dropofsemenisplacedontheslideandexamined
ejaculate.Aswithother aspecisofbreeding sound-
under low power.Atlow magnification,individual
ness examinations,the main value of semen assess-
sperm cannot be seen but mass sperm movement
mentliesinitsabilitytoidentifysiresthatarelikely
can be observed in the form ofrecurrent swirling
tobeoflowfertility.
waves.Itisimportantto differentiatebetween true
Careisneededinthehandlingofsemen,fheresuls
movementand theapparentmovementexhibitedby
of its examination are to be meaningful. Spermalozoa
dead sperm that are being movedpassively by living
arevery sensitiveto cooling,so temperature control
sperm beneath them.Forother species,it is essential,
of semen duringits evaluation is critical.Temperature
and for thebullandram desirable,that a small drop
shouldbeheldbetween30°and37°Cwhilemotil-
ofsemen,eitherneat or diluted(in warm 0.9%saline
ity is estimated and morphology smears are prepared,
or2.9%sodium citrate solution)isplacedonaslide,
which should alsobedone assoon aspossible after
covered and observed at higher power for assessment
thesemen hasbeen collected.Once smearshave dried,
of individual sperm motility. Progressive,forward
the slidescansafelybeallowed tocool down.
motility,with acharacteristic swingof the head and
Forfielduse,amicroscopewithx100andx400mag-
tail is the ideal,but other forms of motility are seen.
nification and,ideally，alow power lens is needed.
Moderately damaged sperm may swim around in cir-
Sperm morphology needs to be evaluated using a
x1000oilimmersionlens,asx400magnification does
dying sperm roll from side to side, alternately pre-
notprovideadequateresolution.Featuressuchasphase
sentingthebroadandnarrowedgesof theirheads.
contrastordark-groundilluminationarealsouseful
Sperm count.Ranges of sperm densily and ejaculate
but generally not essential for field use.Anymicroscope
volume for themain domestic species are given in
slides ormaterial in which the semen is tobe diluted
Table 30.6.For field use, sperm density can most
mustalsobemaintainedataround30-37°C;when
readilybe estimatedusing ahaemocytometer.
Table 30.6 Semen characteristics cf domesticanimals
Characteristic
Bull
Ram
Stallion
Boar
Dog
Volume(ml)
4(2-10)
1.0(0.5-2.0)
60（30-250）
250(125-500)
10(2-19)
Fractionated
N
N
Y
Y
Density (x10%/ml)
1250（600-2800)
2000(1250-3000)
120(30-600)
100(25-1000)
125(20-540)
Motile sperm (%)
>70
>90
>60
>60
>85
Normal spermatozoa(%)
>75
>85
>60
>60
>90
750
Chapter
|301
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmaleanimals
Ram and bull semen should be diluted 1:100 in
·Site oforigin（Blom 1950):primary(defects of
0.9saline/0.02%formalin solution;other species,
spermatogenesis;testis),secondary (epididymis)
whose semen is lessdense,mayrequirelower dilu-
and tertiary(post-ejaculation,e.g.from inade-
tion factors.The iotal sperm count is then derived
quate temperature,pll or osmotic control dur
as the product of volume and density.Where a large
ing handling of the semen).Thus,defects of the
number of semen samplesrequire evaluation,such
head and midpiece are mostly primary,proto-
as ocurs in Al studs,estimation of sperm density
plasmic droplets secondary and looped tails
can be facilitated by the use of spectrophotometry,
tertiary
inwhichthe optical densityofthesampleiscom-
·Effect onfertility:two classifications arecurrently
paredwith a calibration curve(Salisbury et al 1943).
in use,that of Blom (1983) into major and minor
Alternatively. electronic particle counters can be
defects and the morerecent concept ofcompens-
used,although the small sizeandlattenedshape of
able and uncompensable defects.
the sperm heads make themrelatively difficult cells
In the classification of Blom (1983,Fig. 30.50,
to count.
Table 30.7)major abnormalities include most
Live:dead ratio. A further estimate of the propor-
defects of the head,proximal protoplasmic drop-
tion of dead sperm in an ejaculate can be obtained
lets and congenital acrosomal defecis, while
by the use of a vital stain,such as eosin B (Lasley
most other defects,including,somewhat sur-
et al 1942).This stain is most commonlyused as
prisingly, detached heads,are classified as minor
part of a combined stain,eosin-nigrosin,which is
abnormalities.
used toevaluateboththeproportionofdeadsperm
and sperm morphology (Swanson & Bearden 1951).
For vital staining to be effective, great carehas to be
Normal
talenoftemperaturecontrolandconditionsmust
be standardized.Semen that hasbeen frozenis dif
ficult to assess with eosin,as cryoprotectants such
asglycerol(Mixner&Saroff1954)enhancepenetra-
tion of the vital stain into the cells,thereby giving
artificially high percentages of dead cells.Also,until
considerable experience has been obtained,repeat-
abilityoflive:deadratiocounts is low.
Morphology.Assessment of sperm morphology is
arguably the most usefuland important aspect of
semen examination.Nigrosin,a simplebackground
stain,is adequate for most purposes, but special
ist sperm stains,such as anilineblue plus eosin B
(Casarelt 1953)are also available.Defects of the
acrosome are often difficult to see in stained prepa-
rations,although specialized stains such as that of
Wells&Awa（1970)areused tovisualizeacrosomal
vacuoles.More commonly,phase contrast or dif
ferential interference contrast microscopy of wet
preparations is used to examine acrosomal defects
(Aalseth&Saacke1985).
Sperm abnormalities
Sperm abnormalities are assessed according to three
main criteria:their site on the sperm, their sie of
Fig.30.50 Classification of spermatozoal abnormalitiesinto
origin and theireffectsuponfertility.
major andminor defects according to their effectupon
Siteon the sperm:head，midpiece and tail defects
fertility.SeeTable30.7forkey.(Redrawn and adaptedwith
permission from Blom 1983.)
andspermbearingprotoplasmicdroplets
751
Part
161
Themale animal
Table30.7Majorabnormalities
Majorabnormalities(group l)
1
Underdeveloped cells
6
Small abnormal heads
2
Double forms
10
Detached abnormal heads
3
Acrosome(knobbed acrosome）
11
Corkscrew midpiece defect
defects
12
Other midpiece defects (incl.
4
Diademdefects
tail-stump defect)
5
Decapitated sperm (acive tails)
13
Proximal cytoplasmic droplet
6
Pear-shaped head
14
Other thickenedmidpieces
Head narrow at the base
15
Coiled tails and Dag defect
8
Head abnormal contour
Looped tailenclosed droplet
(=distalmidpiece reflex)(not illustrated)
Minorabnormalities(groupIl)
Other cells(group IIl)
16
Narrow heads
Epithelial cells
17
Small normal heads
Erythrocytes
18
Giant orbroad heads
C
Medusa formations
19
Detached normal heads
Boat cells
20
Detached acrosomal membranes
e
Mononuclear cels
21
Abaxial tails
f
Neutrophil
22
Distal cytoplasmicdroplets
23
Simple bent tail
24
Terminallylooped tails
The classification of sperm defects into compens-
areunable topenetratetheoocyte.Thepresence of
able and uncompensable abnormalities (Table
such abnormalities can be compensated by increas-
30.8)hasbeen developedfromnewmethods(such
ing sperm dose Uncompensable defecis are those
asmating trialsandinvitrofertilization(IVF)with
abnormalities in which sperm are capable ofpen-
semen with high percentages of sperm with indi-
etrating thezona but fail to cause cleavage or result
vidual classes of abnormalities)of assessing their
in non-viable embryos; they cannot be compen-
effects on fertility（Saackeetal1988,Barth 1997).
sated by increasing sperm dose.How these catego
Compensable defects arethose inwhich the abnor-
ries relate tothemajor/minor classificationand
mal sperm arenot transported totheuterinetube or
theireffectuponfertilityremainstobeestablished
Specificabnormalities
Table30.8 Compensable and uncompensable defects
Abnormalities of the sperm head.The sperm head
Compensable defects
Uncompensable defects
consistsofthegeneticmaterial,intheformof highly
Proximal cytoplasmicdroplets
condensed chromosome,andkey effectors offertil-
Distalmidpiecereflex
ization (i.e. binding and passage through the zona
Dag defect
Pyriform heads
pellucida) in the acrosome,inner acrosomal mem-
Abnormalities of the
Chromatin defects
brane and postequatorial zone.Most defecis of the
mitochondrial sheath
sperm head (Fig.30.51A,B)arise as abnormalities
Tail-stump defect
Sperm headvacuoles
ofspermatogenesisandsignificantlyimpairfertility
Taildefects
Macro-andmicrocephalicheads
(Soderquistet al1991)
Knobbed acrosome
Nuclear crest
Abnormal condensation ofchromatin(Johnson
1997) and abnormal nuclear shape (Ostermeier
Swollen acrosome
etal2001)arecloselyassociatedwithreducedfertil-
Loose/detached heads
ity.Chromatin defects were among he first sperm
Compildmvnn99aacl000nwist&Fr
defects tobe unequivocally classified as uncompens-
2003.
able (Evenson 1999, Saacke et al 2000).
752
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertilityinmaleanimals
Fig.30.51Defects of the sperm head.(A,B)Pear-shaped and tapered abnormal head.(C) dwarf and giant heads.(D)‘Knobbed
Sperm'defect.(E)'Diadem'defect.(F) Detached ncrmal heads.
753
Part
161
Themaleanimal
Small changes in theoverall size,acrosomal area
arenot themselves capable offeriilization,in vitro
andwidthatthebaseoftheheadmarkedlyreduce
fertilizationwihapparentlynormalspermfrom the
theabilityofsperm to fertilize(reviewedbyBarth
samesiresproducedembryoswith impaireddevel-
&Oko 1989).The most common ofsuch defecis,
opment (Thundathil et al 2000). It is classified as a
thepyriform head,is readily recognizablebyhie
major abnormality.
narrow,elongated appearance ofthehead and the
Otheracrosomalabnormalities,includingacrosomal
‘pinching'in of its postacrosomal region.Nothling
crests and acrosomal folds,arevariablyassociatedwith
&Arndt（1995)reporiedthat the pregnancy rate
reducedfertility，forexample,Meyer&Barth（2001)
achievedbyabullwith36%pyriformheadswas
found that bulls with high percentages of abnormal
46%, compared with 75% in a bull with normal
acrosomes achieved normal conception rates excep1
semen.Theabnormality impairs bothfertilization
in competitivemating trials.Other acrosomal defects
rate and subsequentfailure ofcleavage,soisboth
were classified by Blom （1983) as major defects,
major anduncompensable.
reflecting the relatively large effects that they have
Most other abnormalities of the head,includ
upon fertility.
ing those that are grossly undersized,pear-shaped,
Detachedandswollenacrosomesmaybeobserved
or bizarre,are also major defects,as are detachied
in wet or nigrosin-stained smears, although observa-
abnormal heads.It is common tofind significantly
tionunderphasecontrast or differentialinterference
raised percentages of these defects during testicu-
contrastmicroscopyoffersthebestmeansofevalu-
lar degeneration (typically accompanied by a wide
atingtheacrosome.Thesiteoforiginofsuchdefecis
range of other primary defects). Abnormalities
is not always clear,for this abnormality may arise
of the head,which are classified as minor defecis
during spermatogenesis, as a degenerative change in
(Fig.30.51C) include giant heads (which have a
thespermofabull that hasnotejaculatedforsome
diploid chromosome complement),double heads,
time.Theymay also occur asa tertiary defect infro-
narrowheadsand small,normallyshapedheads.
zen-thawedsemenofanimalswhosespermdonot
Acrosomaldefectsarevariablyassociatedwith
survive cryopreservation well. Swollen acrosomes
reduced fertility.Many acrosomal defects arise aspri-
are difficult to interpret.At low percentages, detach-
mary abnormalities of spermatogenesis,although
ment of the acrosome hasbeenregardedasa minor
acrosomal damagemayalsoariseduringepididymal
defectwithfertilityonlybeingimpairedwithhigher
transitandstorageorevenafterejaculation.Manyof
levelsof the abnormality.However,recentdatafrom
the acrosomal defects that arise during spermatogen-
the bull indicate that the percentage of detached
esis arepresent at high percentage inthe ejaculate,
acrosomesmayberelated ina linearfashion with
inwhich casethey areusuallyinherited,but identi-
fertility and the significance of this abnormality is
cal abnormalities can be found at low percentages
therefore being reassessed.
in most ejaculates,indicating that they can also arise
Nuclearvacuolesare abnormalitiesofspermato-
spontaneously.Defects of theacrosomecanbediffi-
genesis that arise either as a response toan insult
cult toseeinstainedpreparations,sotheuseofphase
to the testis or as congenital abnormalities.They
contrast or differential interference microscopy upon
arerelatively difficult tovisualizein eosin-nigrosin
wetsmearsis oftenneeded.Some acrosomaldefects
smearsbutcanusuallybeseen inwetpreparations
canbeseenif smearsarestainedwithnigrosinalone,
orwith phase contrast microscopy.Thebest known
whileotherscanbereadilyobservedwhenthestain
is the diadem defect (Fig. 30.5iE), which repre-
ofWells&Awa(1970)isused.
senispouches in thenuclear materialand can be
Theknobbed acrosome defect(Fig.30.51D) is the
seen asa seriesofrefractilelesions atthebase of
bestknownof theacrosomaldefects.ltisrelatively
the acrosome.Othervacuoles can appear assingle
easy to delect in well-made eosin-nigrosin smears.
ormultiplelesionsof thenucleus.Itiscommonto
It is a common incidental finding at low percent-
observeoccasionalspermwithvacuolesinnormal
ages but can occur at high percentages (25-100%)
semen andtheabnormalitycanbetemporarilypres-
as a familial,probably inherited defect.Moderate
ent at highpercentages for a shortperiod after tes
percentages ofabnormal sperm are associatedwith
ticular damage(Barth&Oko 1989)but bulls with
high percentages ofvacuolated sperm heads are
centages are virtually sterile.Interestingly,in the
infertileor sterile.Nuclearvacuolesareclassified as
bull,even though sperm with knobbed acrosomes
major and as uncompensable defects.
754
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertilityinmaleanimals
Abnormalities of the attachmentof the head,the
that the presence of 30-40% of detached heads in an
midpiece and the tail.Abnormalities of attachment
ejaculatewasnotassociatedwithinfertility.Detached
of the sperm head are, generally,primary defects of
heads (often accompanied by weak head-neck
spermatogenesis.Some are inherited defects of the
attachmentsand/or swollenacrosomes)can occur
centriole or axoneme,occurring at high percent-
as degenerative changes in senescent sperm.The sep
ages, while others are sporadic or occur as acquired
arated tails are immotile.Detached heads may be
defects.Surprisingly,many such defectshaveminor
presentinthe semen ofanimals that have notejacu-
effectsupon fertility,unlesspresent at high percent-
latedforaconsiderableperiodoftime,as a senescent
ages.Detached normal heads (Fig.30.51F) occur
changein the sperm.lt is alsorelatively common in
commonly at low tomoderatepercentagesinnor-
the semen ofaged bulls.Sperm with fractures of the
mal ejaculates.The abnormality has been classified
attachment between head and tail ('fracturedneck'
as minor and is only associated with infertility if
Fig.30.52A)mayarisefromsenescentchangesor
due to congenital wealness of the attachment.
C
Fig.30.52Defects of the spermmidpiece and tail(1）.(A）Fracturedneck.(B)Tail-stump defect.(C)Accessory tail.(D)Coiled-
tail',a defect of formationof themidpiece.
Continued
755
Part
6
The male animal
Fig.30.52continued（E)Dag'defect.（F)Terminally coiled tail
Twoconditionsthatseriouslyaffectfertilityneed
with impairedfertility.Sperm with gross deformi-
tobedifferentiatedfromsimpledetachednormal
tiesof thetailandmidpiece areofienfoundin
heads.First, there is the decapitated syndrome,
association with a wide range of other abnormal-
whichisinherited in Guernsey and Herefordbulls
ities (ie. abnormal heads, detached heads, prox-
(Blom&Birch-Anderson 1970,Blom 1977a）,in
imal droplets, etc.) in animals that are suffering
whichmostsperm aredecapitated andthedetached
from testicular degeneration(Parkinson &Bruere
tails aremotile.The semen of such bulls exhibits
2007). The coiled tail (Fig.30.52D) is a primary
apparently normal wave motion.Secondly, the
abnormalitythatiscommonlyfoundduringtes-
'tail-stump'defect occurs asaninherited condition
ticular degeneration.In the somewhat similar
ofseveral breedsofbull(Blom &Birch-Anderson
‘Dag defect (Blom 1966;Fig.30.52E), the appar-
1980),in which morphologically normal heads
ently loose coils of the sperm tail represent a seri-
areattached to avestigialstructurethat appears
ousperturbation ofthegenesis oftheflagellum,
like a protoplasmic droplet(Fig.30.52B).On elec-
resultingin animmotilesperm.Thedefectoccurs
tronmicroscopy,this droplet-like structurecan be
in variable percentages as a temporary acquired
seen to consist of small segments of flagellarmate-
lesion,typically as one ofthe changes associated
rial and represents a vestigial tail.Affected bulls
with testicular degeneration.When the condition
are sterile.
is permanent,itis characteristically present in high
Abaxial implantation of the tail is generally of
(50-100%) percentage;in such animals it is likely
minorsignificanceor shouldnot beregardedas an
tobeinherited.Theinherited form was firstiden-
abnormality(Barth1989,Pantetal2002).Thepres-
tified in theJersey bull,in whichit remains rela-
ence ofaccessory tails isofno significance atlow
tively common.
Other, less spectacular, but neveriheless seri-
causes infertility(Williams&Savage1925).
ous,defects of the midpiece occur.It is common
Some degreeofabaxial implantationmay be
tofindspermwithan abnormallythickenedmid-
regarded as normal in the stallion.Accessory tails, a
piece,particularly atthepoint of attachmentto the
curious additional,vestigial tail (Fig.30.52C)beside
sperm head.This abnormality,which is classified as
the main flagellum,can adversely affect fertility
a major defect,most ofteni appears in conjunction
if the abnormality is present in a high percentage
with mixed abnormalities as a temporary response
(e.g. Wiliams & Savage 1925).
to testicular injury.The corkscrew defect (so-called
Most other defects of development of the mid-
because the loose arrangement of the helixofmito-
piece and tail arise as defects ofspermatogenesis.
chondriagives theappearanceofacorkscrewtothe
Spermwith these abnormalitiesareeitherimmo-
midpiece ofthe sperm),maybe inheritedwhen
tile or have subnormal motility and are associated
present athigh percentages.
756
Chapter
301
Fertility,subfertility and infertility in maleanimals
Tail defects areby contrast,enerally minor fects.
tiary (post-ejaculation) defect in response to poor tem-
These include the terminally coiled tails(Fig.30.52F)
peraturecontrol of the semen,orhypotonicstress such
and thedistalmidpiecereflex abnormality,which
asmayoccurifthesemenbecomescontaminatedby
resemblesaloopedtailwithadropletenclosed
water.Departureof seminal pHfrom itsnormal range
within theloop.ltssignificanceforfertilityisunclear.
canalsocauseloopedtailsandtheymaythereforebe
Classified asminorby Blom,it causes impaired fertil-
ityinnatural-servicesireswhenpresentatahighper-
duringinfectionoftheaccessoryglands.Loopedtails
centage(Fig.30.53A).The sinnplelooped tail(i.e.with
(Fig.30.53B) can alsobepresent with mixed abnor-
no enclosed droplet) mostcommonly occurs as a ter-
malitiesin animalswith testiculardegeneration.
D
Fig.30.53Defectsof the sperm midpiece and tail(2）.(A)Distal midpiece reflex(looped tail withacytoplasmic remnant enclosed
in theloop).(B)Looped tail.(C)Proximal cytoplasmic droplet.(D)Distal cytoplasmic droplet.
757
Part
61
Thie male animal
Protoplasmic droplets. The residual cyioplasm that
Where proximal droplets occur in mature bulls
remains at the end of spermiation is removed dur-
(often with othemixed abnormalities), it signifies
ing the passage of sperm through the epididymis,
the presence of perturhation of spermatogenesis.
asa maturational change. The presence of sperm
Distal and proximal cytoplasmic droplets, some-
with protoplasmic droplets (Fig. 30.53A, B) there-
times accompanied by detached heads, fractured
fore indicates that epididymal maturation is incom-
necks (or sperm that appear to have had head/neck
pletebythe timeofejaculation.Spermwithdroplets
close to the head (proximal droplets) are more
and swollen acrosomes can be indicative of epididy-
immature than thosewith droplets at the distal end
mal dysfunction.
of the midpiece(distal droplers)
Distal cytoplasmic droplets are not generally
Semen changes during testicular
regarded as serious abnormalities.High percentages
degeneration
of distal droplets (usually with a moderate perceni-
age of proximal droplets) are commonly present
The initial changes in semen quality during tes-
in young bulls that are still peripubertal. The pro-
ticular degeneration are a decrease in motility and
portion of sperm with these abnormalities should
an increase in the percentage of abnormal sperm
decline to normal levels shortly thereafier (Evans
(Fig.30.38),particularlyspermwithproxirmaldroplets.
et al 1995, Johnson et al 1998, Arteaga et al 2001.
If the semen is being cryopreserved, a precipitous
Padril&Jaalma20u2).Proximal dropletsaremore
decline in post-thaw motility may occur at this stage.
serious abnormalities, which result from epididy-
Subsequently, sperm numbers generally start to
maldysfunction or(especiallyifpresent with mixed
decline, although ejaculate volume is usually unaf
abnormalities) are a consequence of impaired sper-
fected. As sperm numbers decrease, the proportion of
matogenesis. When present at any more than low
abnormal sperm increases, with high percentages of
percentages, proximal droplets are associated with
primary defects occurring (Fig. 30.54). These include
significant impairment of fertility (Soderquist
abnormalities ofthehead,detached heads and coiled
et al 1991,Saacke et al 1995).For example, Blom
tails. Bizarre abnormalities also occur, including
(1977b), among others, suggested that ejaculates
small, abnormal heads,acrosomal defects and the
containing aslittle as5-10%ofproximal droplets
presence of premeiotic cells and stellate forms in the
areassociatedwithpoorfertility.Furthermore,when
ejaculate. Sperm numbers may decline to the extent
sperm with proximal droplets are used in IVE, cleav-
that the ejaculate hecomes virually aspermic.
age rates of embryos are poor (Amann et al 2000).
Hence, proximal droplets are classified as major
defects and are uncompensable.
Protoplasmic droplets are often present in the cjac-
ulates of young sires that are being overused (Barth
are lower than in fully mature animals and,in addi-
tion,theepididymishasnotfully developed to itsfinal
length.Hence,ifayoung sireisoverused,not nly
does the number of sperm in the ejaculate decline
but also the withdrawal of sperm from the tail of the
epididynis means that the sperm that are ejaculated
are oftenfunctionallyimmature.Thefertility ofsuch
animals can therefore decline spectacularly. Where
young sires are heavily used, as in Al programmes,
carefulmonitoring ofthepercentages ofsperim with
protoplasmic droplets is therefore advisable.
lar degeneration. Many abnormal cells are present, including
The majority of olderbulls displaylowbutrepeat
sperm with abnormal heads,detached heads andvarious
able percentages of proximal droplets (Soderquist
defects of the midpicce, and sperm with proximal droplets.
et al 1996) and the mean percentage of affected
The ejaculatewas alsocharacterizedbyoligospermia and low
sperm miotility.
758
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertilityinmaleanimals
Duringrecovery,spermmorphology andmotility
as single sires).They also proposed that bulls should
tend toimprovebefore spermnumbers.Thepercent-
nothavemorethan30%midpieceabnorinalities,
age of spermwith distal dropletsfrequentlyincreases
tail abnormalities(looped tails),knobbedorswollen
duringtherecoveiypliase.Recovetymay occur almost
acrosomesandlooseheads,andnotmorethan20%
proximal dropleis, pyriform heads 20% nuclear vacu-
may be protracted.The extent and severity of semen
oles or mis-sized heads.On thebasis of such stud
changescannot becorrelatedwith eitherthe duration
ies,Parkinson&Bruere(2007）proposedcriteriafor
of illness or the lilkelihood of recovery.
assessment ofnatural-servicebulls(Table30.9).
In other species, the criteria for acceptance of
semen are different.For example, equine,porcine
Interpretationofspermresults
and canine semen can exhibit quite high percent-
Assessmentofsemen qualityisgenerallyregarded as
agesof abnormal sperm without materially affecting
being poorly correlated with fertility outcomes (i.e.
fertility,whereas in theramonly avery lowpercent
in terms of final pregnancy rates or per-service con-
age of abnormalities is acceptable.
ceptionrates)ofnatural-servicesires,so itisprobably
best to use semen examination as a means of elimi-
Sperm function tests
nating subfertileanimals.Results of semen assessment
during breeding soundness examinations should
Semen analysisprovidesenough informationlorec
probably best be given as a qualitative assessment
ognize sires of very lowfertility but has been increas-
(satisfactory,unsatisfactory,re-evaluate or qualified
ingly consideredtobe a poordiscriminatorbetween
pass categories) rather than in terms of a predicted
moderate and high fertility levels (Watson 1990).
fertilitylevelOnhetherhandevenifthequantia
Inordertoattempttoimprovetheaccuracyofsemen
tiverelationshipbetween semen qualityparameters
assessments,a number oftests ofsperm function
andfertility is tenuous,manysires that arepresented
forinfertilityexaminationhaveabnormalitiesof
Table30.9Semenmorphologystandardsfornatural-service
semen that can explain their poor performance.
beef bulls(from Parkinson &Bruere 2007)
Eachmethodofsemen collectionimposessome
Satisfactory
limitations upon thevalueof the sample.Morphology
is probably the most robust of the characteristics
>60%normal
AND
<20 allmajor defecis
AND
<10% any one class of
thatare assessed and,given the clear relationships
between changes in morphology and underlying
major defects
pathology, can generally be used to provide diagnos-
AND
<20%any one class of
minor defects
tic or prognostic information in even quite medi
Conditional pass
ocre semen samples.Using the principles of theeffect
ofspecificabnormalitiesupon fertility,criteriahave
>60%normal
AND
>20all major defects
been established for maximum percentages of each
OR
>10%anyone classof
class of sperm abnormality in an ejaculate. Bovine
major defects
OR
>20% any one class of
semen that is tobe used forAI isprobably subject
to the most stringent morphology criteria.Examples
minor defects
>50%normal
AND
<20 all major defects
include(a)amaximumof20%total sperm abnor-
malities,withnot more than 5%ofany individual
AND
<10% any one class of
class,or(b)a maximum of10%major abnormalities
major defects
AND
20% any one class of
or20% minor abnormalities.However,inbulls des
minor defects
tinedforuseinnaturalservice,differentcriteriawould
Unsatisfactory
beapplied，whichmightneedtotakeintoaccount
thefrequencyofuseofihesireandthelengthof the
<60%norma
AND
>20allmajor defects
mating period.Entwistle&Fordyce(2003） suggest
OR
>10%any one classof
major defects
thatbullswith at least70%morphologicallynormal
OR
>20%any cne classof
sperm can begiven an unqualifiedpass and those
minordefects
with50-70%morphologicallynormalspermcanbe
%05>
givenaqualifiedpass(reducedworkloadandnotused
759
Part
6
The male animal
have been employed, with varying success. The sim-
Alm et al 2001).Fluorescent stains that define mito
plest ofsuch tests incubate semen at various tem-
chondrial functign have also beenn assessed, but withh
peratures (typically 4°Cor 40°C) and, by relating the
less promising fesulls.
duration of sperm survival under these conditions
The mucus penetration test has also been used to
to survival in female genital tract, produce reason-
predict fertility.This test,which is widely available
able correlations withfertility(Roberis 1956).Early
in human andrology, has been used successfully by
some(Muraseetal 1990),but not all (Sittal Devet al
work examining theconcentrationsofmetabolites,
ions and simple enzymes in semen as indicators
Verberckmoes et al (2002) attempted to substitute
of ferility was largely disappointing in its results
Other tests utilize additional measurenents upon
methyl cellulose for mucus but were unsuiccessful.
the semen, such as pl, adenosine triphosphate
However, the presence of antisperm antibodies in
(ATP)content or aspartate transaminase concentra-
either thebull (Zraly etal2002) or cow(Zharkin
tion (Salisbury et al 1978). These have been mod
1982) has been associated with subfertility.
Of more widespread use in veterinary practice is com-
erately successful but have not been of sufficiently
greater value than conventional semen assessment
puter-assisted analysis of sperm swimming characteris-
to justify their use.
tics.In medical practice, such analyses areregarded as a
More recenily, assessment of the acrosome reac-
usefulprognostictool in assessmentof fertilitybecause
tion and the ability of sperm to fertilize eggs in
high correlations have been demonstrated betweeni
vitro have been studied as indicators of fertilizing
such measurements and fertility. The most important
swimming characteristics are rate of forward progress,
capacity. In vitro induction of capacitation and
lateral movement of the sperm head and characteristics
acrosome reaction with glycosaminoglycans (Ax &
of the flagellar beat.Although the use of sperm motil-
Lenz 1987) and calcium ionophores (Whitfield &
Parkinson 1995)is related to the fertility of semen
ity analysis in veterinary practice at present is largely
in boil IVF and AI (Lenz el al 1988, Whiifield &
confined to Thoroughbred stallions (Amann 1988)
Parkinson 1992). Since these relationships depend
upon the presence of heparin-binding proteins upon
that theuse of such systems will rapidlyincrease as the
cost of analysis programmes decreases.
the sperm, measurement of heparin binding has
also been investigated as a means of in vitro assess-
ment of fertility (Bellin et al 1994, 1996). Merkies
et al (200o) found that the total binding of hepa-
References
rin to thesperm headwaspoorlyrelatedtosemen
fertility. However, one of these heparin-binding
proteins is sufficiently closely related to fertilizing
Aalseth EP,SaackeRG1985 JReprod Feril 74:473
potential to liave been named Fertility Associated
Adeniran GA,Akpavie SO,Okoro HO 1992Vet Rec 131:395
AderPL,Hobson HIP 1978 J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:721
Antigen (IAA;Bellin et al 199s). Several further
Al-Aubaidi JM,MnteeK,Lein DH,Robers S] 1972 Cornell
proieins have been identified on the membranes
Ve162:581
of sperm or in seminal plasma (Parkinson 2004),
Al-Katib WA.Dennis SM 2005 Vet Rec57:143
whichhave variable correlations with fertility.
AllenWE 1992Fertility and obstetrics in thedogBlaclwell
Likewise, fertilization rates in IVF have been corre
Stientfic,Oxford
lated with both non-retirn rateswith cryopreserved
Alm K,Taponen J,Dahlbom M et al 2001 Theriogenology 56:
semen (Marquant-Le Guieine et al 1990,Ward et
AlmquistJO.Thomson RG 1977 I Am Vet Med Assoc
al 2001) and conception rates in natural service
163:163
(Wrigh1 1982,Brahmkshtri et al1999).
Alsenosy AM, Dennis SM 1985 Aust Vet I G2: 234
Differential fluorescence staining and flow cytom-
Alhouse GC 2007 In: Youngquist RS, Threlfall wR (ed)
etry may also be a useful measure of fertility. Using
Current therapy in large animal theriogenology 2nd edn.
supravital fluorescent stains such as carboxyfluores-
Saunders-Elsevier,St Louis,MO,p731-737
cein diacetate (or carboxydimethylfluorescein diar-
Amann RP 1988ProcAmAssoe EquinePract453
etate)to define live cells and a DNA stain such as
1499-1515
propidium iodide to define dead cells, good corre-
Ardalani G,Ashdown RR 1988 Res Vet Sci45: 174
lations have been obtained with non-return rates in
Arleaga A.Baracaldo M, Barth AD 2001 Can Vet I 42: 783
bovine Al (Carner et al 1986, Ericsson et al 1989,
Arthur GH 1961VetRec73:385
760
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertilityandinfertilityinmaleanimals
Arthur CH,Noakes DE,Pearson H 1989Veterinary reproduc-
Reproduction,Ludhiana,p61-81,Cited inBarth &Oko
tion and obstetrics, 6th edn.Bailliere Tindall,London
1989
Ashdown RR1962VetRec74:1464
Blom E1979NordVetMed31:241
Ashdown RR2006 CABRev1(021)
Blom E1983NordVet Med35:105
Ashdown RR.Co0mbs MA 1967Vet Rec80:737
Blom E,Birch-Anderson A1970JReprodFertil 23:67
Ashdown RR,Coombs MA 1968VetRec8l:126
Blom E,Birch-Anderson A1980Acta Pathol Microhiol Scand
AshdownRR,MajeedZZ1978VetRec103:12
A88:397
Ashdown RR,Pearson H 1971 ResVet Sci 12:183
Blom E,ChristensenNO 1947Skand VetTidskr37:1
Ashdown RR,Pearson H 1973a VetRec93:30
Blom E,Christensen NO 1951KVet HojskArsskr 1
AshdownRR,Pearson H1973b Res VetSci 15:13
BloomF,Paff GH,NobackCR1951 AmJPathol 27:119
AshdownRR,RickettsSW,WardleyRC1968|Anat103:567
Bowen JM 1987In:Robinson NE(ed) Current therapy in
Ashdown RR,David JSE,Gibbs C1979a,Vet Rec 104:423
equine medicine,2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
Ashdown RR,David JSE,Gibbs C1979b,VetRec104:589
p567-570
AshdownRR,Barnel SW,Ardalani G1982,VetRec110:349
Boyd GW,Corah LR 1988Theriogenology 29:779
AxRL,LenzRW 1987|Dairy Sci70:1477
BoydCL,HenskelkaDV1972IAmVet MedAssoc161:275
BagleyCV,PaskettME,Matthews NI,Stenquist N] 1985JAm
Boyd GW,HealyVM,MortimerRG,PiotrowskiIR191
VeiMedAssoc186:798
Theriogenology 36:1015
BagshawPA,Ladds PW1974Vet Bull44:343
Brahmkshtri BP,Edwin M),JohnMCetal 1999AnimReprod
BaneA,Hansen H 1962 ComellVet52:362
Sci54:159
Barr F 1990Diagnostic ultrasound in the dog and cat.
BreeuwsmaAj1968ReprodFertil16:119
Blaclwell Scientific,Oxford
BrinskoSP1998Vet Clin NorthAm EquinePract 14:517
Barsanti JA,Finco DR 1986In:Morrow DA (ed) Current
BruereAN 1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapyin
therapy intheriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,
theriogenology.2nd edn.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Philadelphia,p553-560
p874-880
BarthAD1989CanVetI30:G56
BruereAN,WestDM1993Thesheep:health,diseaseand
Barth AD 1997In:Youngquist RS (ed) Current therapy in
production.NZVA Foundation for ContinuingEducation,
large animal theriogenology.WH Saunders,Philadelphia.
Palmerston North,New Zealand
p222-236
BruereAN,MarshallRB,WardDJP1969ReprodFertil19:
BarthAD,OkoRI 1989Abnormal morphologyofbovine
103-108
spermatozoa.lowa State University.Ames, IA
Budworth PR,AmannRP,ChapmanPL1988 JAndrol 9:41
BaskinLS2000JUrol163:951
BurkeT]1986Small animal reproduction andinferility.
BeckettSD,ReynoldsTM,WalkerDFetal1974AmVeRes
Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia
35:761
CarpenterBB,ForrestDW,SprottLRetal19921AnimSci
BecketSD,PurhoitRC,ReynoldsTM1975Biol Reprod
70:1795
12:289
Carrol EJAanesWA.Ball L 1964IAmVetMedAssn
BellengerCR1971 ResVet Sci12:299
144:747
Bellin ME,Hawkins HE,Ax RL 1994IAnim Sri 72:2441
Casarel1GW 1953StainTech28:125
Bellin ME,Hawkins HE,Oyarzo IN et al 1996|Anim Sci
Centerwall WR,Benirschke K1975Am IVet Res 36:1275
74:173
ChaffeeVW,Knecht CD1975VetMedSmall Anim Clin
Bellin ME.OyarzoN,Hawlins HEetal 1998JAnim Sci762032
70:1418
Bertram D,FordyceG,McGowanMRetal 2002Anim
Chenoweth P| 1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy in
Reprod Sci71:51
iheriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,
BirknerJE,CarciaVinentJC,AlberioRHI,BulerH 1984 Rev
p136-142
ArgentProd Anim 4:1149
Chenoweth PJ 1997VetClinNorthAmFoodAnimPract
BishopMHIW1970|ReprodFertil Suppl 15:65
13:331
Bishop MHW,David JSE,MesserveyA1966ProcRSocMed
Chenoweth Pl.BrinksJS.Nen TM 1979 Theriogenology
59:769
12:223
BlanchardTl,Varner DD,Hurtgen]Petal 1988AmVet
Chenoweth P1.Farin PW.Mateos ERet al 1984
Med Assoc192:525
'Theriogenology 22: 341
BlockeyMAdeB1976aTheriogenology 6:387
Chenoweth Pl.Farin PW.Mateos ERet al 1988
Blockey MAdeB1976b Theriogenology 6:393
Theriogenology 30:227
Blockey MAdeB1978JAnim Sci 46:589
Choi YK,Kim C2002JVet Sci 3:285
BlockeyMAdeB1989AustVet166:348
Clarke 11,TilbrookA] 1992AnimReprod Sci28:219
Blockey MAdeB,TaylorEG 1984AustVet I 61:141
ClaxtOn JH,Yeates NTM 1972JHered 63:141
Blom E1950Fertil Steril1:223
Clough E,Pyle RL,HareWCD et al 1970 Cytogenetics 9:71
Blom E1966Nature209:739
Cohen D 1985AdvCancer Res43:75
Blom E1977aNord Vet Med29:119
Corbel M1.Brewer RA,Smith RA 1986Vet Rec 118:G95
Blom E1977b Sperm morphology withreference lo
CorradaY,AriasD,Rodriguez Retal 2004Theriogenology
bull infertility.FirstAll-IndiaSymposium onAnimal
61:1327-1341
761
Part
Themaleanimal
Coulter GH1980 In:Proceedings of he StTechmical
Hartley W), Jebson JL, McFarlane D 1955 NZ Vet J3: 5
Conference on Artificial Insemination and Reproduction,
Hattangady SR, Wadia DS, George PO 1968Vet Rec 82: 666
p160(Absu)
Hawkins DE,Capenter BB,Forrest DW et al 1989 l:
Coulter CH,Kozub GC19891Anim Sci 67:1757
Beef Cattle Research inTexas 1988.Texas Agricultural
Couto MA,Hughes JP 1993 In:McKinnon AO,Voss IL(ed)
Experiment Station,CollegeStation,TX,p 19-21
Equinereproduction.Lea &Febiger Philadelphia,
Hayes HM 1986Equine Vet ]18: 467
p845-854
Hayes HM,Wilson GP 1986Vet Rec 118:605
Cox JE1975EquineVetJ7:179
Hobday FiG 1903 The castration of cryptorchid horses.
Cox JE 1982 Surgery of the reproductive tract in large ani-
W&AKJohnston,Edinburgh
mals. Liverpool Liniversity I'ress. Liverpool
Hlohday FTG 1914 Castration including cryptorchids and
CoxJE,Williams JH,RowePHI,Smith JA 1973EquineVet]
caponing and ovariertomy.W&AKIohnson,Edinburgh
5:85
Holsi SJ 1949 Nord Ve1Med 1: 87
Cox JE,Edwards CB,Neal PA 1979 EquineVet I 11: 113
HopkinsFM,Spitzer JC1997Vet Clin North AmFood Anim
Crabo BG 1986 In: Morrow DA (ed) Current therapy in the-
Pract13:283
riogenology 2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,
Hughes PL,Oswald AWR 2007Proc SocSheep Beef Cattle Vet
p975-978
NZVA37:99-108
Crichton IS,Lishman AW,Lesche SF 1987 S Afr J Anim Sci
Hulet CV,El-Sheikh AS,PopeAL,Casida LE 1956 Anim Sci
17:27
15:617
DeGroot R,Numans SR 1946Tijdschr Diergeneesk 71:732
Humphrey ID,Ladds PW 1975 Vet Bull 45:787
Delhes G,Levacher C,Habert R 2006 Reproduction 132:
Huston R.Saperstein G,Schoneweis D,Leipold HW 1978 Vet
527-538
Bull48:645
Dennis SM 1979 Vet Rec 105:94
Janardhana K, Krishnamacharyulu E, Rao BR, Rao DS 1995
Desmet P,DeMoorA,Bouters R,Meurichy W 1974Vlaams
Livestock Adviser 10:40
Diergeneesk Tijdschr 43:357
laskowski L,Walkowski L,Korycki S 1961In:Proceedings
DeVries PI 1993 In:McKinnon AO,Voss JL (ed) Equine
of the 4th International Congress on Reproduction,
reproduction.Lea &Febiger, Philadelplia, p 878-884
The Hague vol 2,p 801
Elmore RG 1981 Vet MedSmall Anim Clin 76:701
Jebson IL,Hariley W,McFarlane D 1954NZVet J 2:85
Entwistle K, Fordyce G 2003 Evaluating and reporting bull
JohnsonWH 1997Vel ClinNorth AmFoodAnimPract
fertility.AustralianAssociation of CattleVeterinarians,
13:255
Indooroopilly, Qurensland
Johnson KR,Dewey CE,Boho JKeal 1998 JAm Vet Med
Ericsson SA, Garner DL, Redelman D, Ahmad K 1989 Gamete
Assoc213:1468
Res 22: 355
Johnston 5D 1986 In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy in
Eriksson K 1950 Nord Vet Med 2: 943
theriogenology 2nd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
Evans ACO,Davies F],Nasser LFetal1995Theriogenology
p549-551
43:569-578
Johnston SD, Root Kustriz MV, Olson PNS 200i Canine and
Evenson DP1999Reprod Fertil Dev 11: 1
feline theriogenology.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
Falcon C,Warnick AC,Larsen RE,Burns WC 19s1 Mem Assoc
Jones DE,Joshua IO 1982Reproductive clinical problems in
Latinoam Prod Anim 16:132
the dog. John Wrighi, Bristol
Farid A,MakarechianM,PriceMA,Berg RT 1987Anim
Joshua 10 1962 Vet Rcc74: 1550
Reprod Sci 14: 21
Jubb KVFKennedy PC,Palmer N 1993 Pathology of the
Farin PW, Chenovith Pl, Tomly DF et al 1989
domestieanimals,rd edn,vol 3.Academic Press,
Theriogenology 32: 717
San Diego, CA
Faulkner LC,HopwoodML,Masken JF etal 1967 J Am Vet
KangasniemiMMcNicholsRJ,BanlsonJA etal 2004Lasers
Med Assoc 151:602
Surg Med 35:41
FortierLA.MacHarg MA 1994IAmVet Med Assot205:1183
Keney RM 1970 1n: Proceedings of the VIth Annual
Foster RA, Ladds PW, Hoffman D, Briggs GD1989 Aust Vet
Conference on Catle Diseases, Ollahoma, p 295
166:262
King Gl. Johnson EHI 2000 I Small Anim Praci41:508
Foster G,Collins MD,Lawson PA et al 1999 Vet Rec 144:479
King CJ,McPhers0n IW 1969 I Dairy Sci52:1837
Freestone JF Paccamonti DL,Eilts BE et al 1993 J Am Vet
Knudsen O 1954ActaPath Microbiol Scand Suppl 10l: 12
Med Assoc 203: 556
Konig H,WeherW,Kupferschmeid H 1972 Schweiz Arch
Garner DL, Pinkel D,Johnson LA,PaceMM 1986 Biol
Tierheilk 114: 73
Reprod 34:127
Kott RW,Halver GCFirehammerB,Thomas VM 1988
Gassner FX,Hill HI 1955Feril Steril 6:290
Theriogenology 29:961
GreenoughPR,WeaverAD1997Lameness incatle,3dedn.
KrawiecDR,Helin D1992 J Am Vet Med Assoc 200: 1119
WB Saunders,Philadelphia
Krook L,Lutwak L,McEntee K 1969 Am J Clin Nutr 22: 115
Greig A 2000 In: Martin WB,Aitken ID （ed) Diseases of
LaFaunce NA,McEntee K1982 Cornell Vet72: 150
sheep,3rd edn.Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford,
Lagerlof N 1936 Vet Rec48:1159
p 65-70
Lagerlof N 1951 Fertil Steril 2: 230
Gunn RMC,Sanders RN,Granger W 1942Bull CISRO: 148
LagosE Fitzhugh HA 1970JAnimSci 30:949
762
Chapter
1301
Fertility,subfertility and infertility in male animals
LaneSM,KiracofeGH,Craig IV,Schalles RR1983JAnimSci
MuraseT,OkudaK,SatoK 1990 Theriogenology
57:1084
34:801-812
LangpapA1962DeutschTierarztl Wochenschr 69:218
Noordsy IL,TrotterDM,Carnham DL,VestWeberIG1970
Larsen LH, BellengerCR 1971 Ast VetJ47:349
ProrAnn Conf CattleDis,Oklahoma,p333
Lasley IEEasley GI,Mckenzie FF1942Anat Rec82:167
Nothling JO,Armdt EP 1995]SAfrVetAssoc66:74
LeesVW,MeekAH,RosendalS1990Can JVetRes54:331
Ostermeier GC,Sargeant GA.YandellBSet al 2001IAndrol
LenzRW,Martin JL,BellinME,AxRL1988Dairy Si
22:595
71:1073
OuRS,Heath EH,BaneA 1982AmVetRes 43:241
Levis DG1992Vet ClinNorth AmFoodAnim Pract 8:517
PadrikP Jaakma UI 2002Agraariteadus 13:243-256(Cited fom
Levy E,Mylonakis ME,SaridomichelakisMN etal200G Vet
CAB absuracts 2003
Clin Pathol35:115
Pant HCMilalAK.Patel SHIetal 2002 1ndI AnimSci72:
Ley WB, SlusherSH 2007In:Youngquist RS.Threlfall WR
314
(ed) Current therapy in large animal theriogenology.
Parkinson T] 1991 In Pract 13:3
2nd edn.Saunders-Elsevier,St Louis,MO,p23-36
ParkinsonT]2004Vet]168:215
LogueDN,Harvey MJA,Munro CD,LennoxB1979Vet Rec
ParkinsonT],Bruere2007Evaluation ofbulls forbreeding
104:500
soundness.Vetlearn,Palmerston North,NewZealand
Long SE1969Vet Rec84:495
ParkinsonT],BrownPl,Crea PR1993VetRec132:509
Long SE,Hignet PG1970VetRec86:165
PattersonDF1977In:KirkRW(ed)Current veterinary ther-
Long SE,HignetPG,LeeR1970VetRec86:192
apy.WBSaundersPhiladelphia,vol6,p73-89
LongSEGruffydd-Jones TI,David M 1981 ResVet Sci
PattridgePD1953SouthwestVet7:31
30:274
PearsonH 1972 Vet Rec91:498
LoveCC 2007In:YoungquistRS,Threlfall WR(ed) Current
Pearson H 1977Vet Annu17:40
therapy inlarge animal theriogenology,2ndedn.
PearsonH,AshdowRR1976In:Proceedingsofthe9th
Saunders-Elsevier,St Louis,MOp1014
Internaonal CongressniseasesofCatleParisvol1,9
LowJC,SomervilleD,MylneMIA,McKelveyWAC1995Vet
Pearson H,Kelly DF1975Vet Rec97200
Rec136:268
PearsonH,WeaverBMQ1978EquineVet|10:85
Lucke JN,Sansom  1979 Vet Rec 105:21
PendergassTW,Hayes HM1975Teratology 12:51
McDowell SWI,Cassidy JPMcConnellW1994VetRec
Plagemann O,Mutters R1991 Tierarztl Lmschau 46:355
134:504
Plant JW,Claxton D,JakovljevicD,deSaramW 1976AustVet
McEntee K1962In:Proceedings of the66thAnnual Meeting
152:17
of the s LivestockSanitaryAssociation,Washington,DC,
Plaut A,Kohn-Speyer AC 1947 Science 105:391
p160
PriesterWA,GlassAG,WaggonerNS1970AmJVetRes31:1871
McEnteeK1990Reproductivepathologyof domestic
RajanluttyK,BalagopalanTP,AmmaTS,Varkey CA1994
animals.Academic Press,San Diego,CA
JVetAnimSci25:172
McFarlandLZ1958|AmVetMedAssoc133:81
RhodesAP1976AustVet]52:250
MairTS,Walmsley JP,PhillipsT]2000EquineVet|32:406
Riddler AL2002NZVet]50[Suppl):96
Makarechian M,FaridA 1985Theriogenology23:887
RiddlerAL,WestDM,StaffordKIetal2000NZVet|49:57
Marcos R,SantosM,Marrinhas C,Rocha E2006Ve Clin
RobertsSI1956Veterinary obstetrics and geninal diseases.
Pathol35:106
Self-published.lthaca,NY
Marquant-Le Guienne B,Humblot PThibierM,Thibaul C
RobertsSI1986Veterinary obstetrics andgenital diseases,
1990Reprod NutrDev30:259
3rdedn.Self-published,Ithaca,NY
MelroseDR,O'HagenC1959 1n:Proceedingsof the 6th
Robles CA,Uzal FA,Olaechea IV,LowC1998VetResComm
International Congresson Animal Reproduction,The
22:435
Hague,vol4,p855
RootKustritzMV2001VetClin NorthAmSmallAnimPract
31:247
1249-1258
SaackeRG,Nebel DS,Karabinus JH1988 In:Proceeding of
MetcalfeFL1965]AmVe1MedAssoc147:1319
the1zth Technical Conference on Artificial Insemination
MeyerRA,BarthAD2001 Effectofacrosomal defects on
and Reproduction,p7
fertility of bullsused inartificial insemination andnatural
Saacke RG,Nadir S,Dalton J 1995 Proc Soc Theriogenol:73
breeding.Can Vet [42:627
SaackeRG,Dalton JC,Nadir Seal 2000Anim Reprod Sci
MilneFI19541AmVetMedAssoc124:6
60/61:663
MixnerIPSaroff]1954]DairySci37:1094
Sahay PM,DassLL,KhanAA 1986IndianVet63:682
Morgan G2007 In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR(ed)
SalisburyGW,BeckGHElliott IWillettEL1943Dairyi
Current iherapyin large animal theriogenology,2nd edn,
26:69
Saunders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO,p243
Salisbury GW,VanDemarkNLLodgeJR197sPhysiology of
MorrowDA 1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy in
reproduction and artificial insemination ofcalile2ndedn.
theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphin,
Freeman,San Francisco,CA
p1084
SaundersPl,LaddsPW1978AustVetJ54:10
MossmanDH1983NZVe113l:123
SaundersVFReddacliff LA，BergT,HornitzkyM2007Aust
Vet185:72
763
Part
161
Themale animal
Schumacher J.VarnerDD 1993 In:McKinnonAO,Voss IL
Vaughan T 1993 In:McKinnun AO,Voss JL(ed）Equine
(ed)Equine reproduction.Lea &Febiger Philadelphia,
reproduction.Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia,pS85-894
p871-877
Verberckmoes Sfn SoomA,dePauwI etal 2002
Schumacher I,Varner DD 2007 In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall
'Theriogenology58:1027
WalkerDF1966ArburnVet22:56
2nd edn.Saunders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO.p23-14
Waller DF1970In:Proceedings of theVIth Annual
ScicchitanoS,Spinelli R,Campero CM,CrenovichH2006
ConferenceonCatle Diseases,Oklahoma,p322
VetArgeni23:574
WallkerRL,LeaMaster BR1986AmJVetRes47:1928
Seidel GE,Fo0teRH1967IDairy Sci50:970
WalkerDIVaughanT1980Bovineand equine urogenital
Seidel GE,Fo0teRHH1969IReprod Fertil 20:313
surgery. Lea &Febiger,Philadelphia
Shemesh M, Shore LS 1994 In:Fields MJ. Sand RS (eds) Factors
WalkerRL,LeaMasterBR,Stellflug JNBiberstein EL1986
affecting calf crop.CRCPress,Boca Raton,FLp287-297
JAm Vet Med Assoc188:393
SilbersiepeEBerl MunchTierarzi Wochenschr53:432
WallerRLLeaMasterR,BibersteinELStellfug JN1988Am
SiliartB,FontbonneA,BadinandF1993JReprod Fertil
VetRes49:208
Suppl47:560
Ward FRizosD.CorridanD et al 2001 Mol Reprod Dev 60:
Silva-Mena C,Ake-Lopez R,Delgado-LeonR2002
47
Theriogenology53:991-1002
Warwick BL 1961 IAnimSci 20:10
Singh 1,Rana JS,Sood N etal1996Vet Res Comm 20:71
WalsonIW 1964Nature204:95
Sittal Dev,Pangawkar GR,Sharma RK 1996 IndianJAnim Sci
Watson PF 1990 In:Lamming GE (ed) Marshal's physiology
66:1021
ofreproduction.Churchill Livingstone,Edinburgh,vol 2
Smith MC 1986In:Morrow DA (ed) Current therapy in
p747-869
theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,
WebsterWM1932AustVetI8:199
p544-550
WellsME,Awa OA19701DairySci53:227
Smith HAJones TC1966Veterinary pathology3rdedn.
WelshTH,RandellRD,Johnson BH 1981ArchAndrol 6:141
Lea&Febiger,Philadelphia
West DM 2004 In:Coetzer IAW,Tustin RC（ed)Infectious
SmithKC,BrownP,Parkinson Tj2006VetRec158:789
diseases of livestock,2ndedn.Oxford University Press,
SoderbergSF1986In:MorrowDA(ed)Current therapy in
Oxford,vol3.p1655-1660
heriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,
West DM.Stafford KJ,Sargison ND etal 1999 ProcNZ Soc
p544-550
Anim Prod59:134
Soderquist LJanson L,Larsson K,Einarsson S 1991 IVet Med
heatID1951JAmVetMedAssoc118:295
38:534
WheatJD 1961Vet Med56:477
Soderquist L,Janson L,HaardM,EinarssonS1996Anim
WhitfieldCH,ParkinsonTj 1992Theriogenology38:11-20
Reprod Sci 44:91
Whitfield CHParkinsonT1995Theriogenology44:
SomervilleMEAnderson SM2001AmAnimHospAssoc
413-422
37:397
WilliamsWL1943Diseasesofthegenital organsof domestic
StanicMN 1960ModVet Pract41:30
animals,3rd edn.Self-publishedIthaca,NY
StickJA 1981VetMed Small Anim Clin76:410
Williams J,Niles |1999 In Pract 21:558-575
Stickle RL,Fessler JF19781Am Vet Med Assoc172:343
WilliamsWW,SavageA 1925CornellVet15:353
Studdert MH,Barker CAV,SavanM 1964Am JVet Res
Willis RA,Rudduck HB 1943] Pathol Bacteriol 55:165
25:303
Wittrow5),Susaneck SI 1986 In:MorrowDA(ed) Current
Swanson EW,Bearden Hj 1951 IAnimSci 10:981
therapy in theriogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders.
Tattersfield G,Heuer C,WestDM2007ProcSocSheepBee
Philadelphia,p521-528
CattleVetNZVA36:123-126
WrigltIG1963VetRec75:1352
Threlfall WR,Lopate C19931n:McKinnonAO,Voss IL(ed)
WrightRW1982Mod VetPract63:955
Equinereproduction.Lea&FebigerPhiladelphia,
Yamada G,SatohY,Baskin LS,Cunha GR2003 Res Biol
p943-949
Divers 71:445
ThundathilMeyerRPalaszATetal000Therogenlogy
Yatcs D,Hayes G,Heffernan N,Beymon R 2003 Vet Rec
54:921-934
152:502
VandeplasscheM,Bouckaert JH,Oyaert W,Bouiers R1963
YoungACB1979J Small AnimPraci 20:229
In:Proceedingsof the XVllthWorldVeterinary Congress,
YoungSA,Hudson RS,Walker DF1977」Am Vet MedAssoc
Hanover,vol 2,p 1135
171:643
VarnerDD,TaylorTS,BlanchardTL1993In:McKinnon
ZharkinVV1982SbTrBelorusskii Nauchnoissled Inst
AO,Voss IL (ed)Equine reproduction.Lea&Febiger
Zhivotnovodsiva 22:38
Philadelphiap 861-863
ZralyZ,Bendova1,DiblikovaIetal2002ActaVetBrno71:303
764
131
Chapter
Tim Parkinson
Artificial insemination
Thesuccessfuluseofartificialinsemination(Al)as
inseminationsareperformed.Alin salmonid farm-
a meansofanimalbreedingreliesuponthreemajor
ingis alsoverywidespread.ThediscussionofAl in
premises:first,that spermatozoacan surviveoutside
this chapter will be limited to the major domestic
the body; second, that they can be reintroduced into
mammals.
the femalegenital tract in away thatresultsin an
acceptableconceptionrate;and third,that the fertile
period of the female can be identified.
Advantages and disadvantages
The degree to which these underlying premises can
ofartificial insemination
befulfilled dictates thesuccesswithwhich Al can be
applied to an animal species.For example,in cattle,
the spermatozoa can (after cryopreservation) be pre-
Artificial insemination offers several
potential
served outside thebodyalmost indefinitely.A tech-
advantagesovernatural service.Of these,thereason
nically straightforward intrauterine insemination
most commonlyadvocatedis asameansofgenetic
means thatthenumberofspermatozoaneededfor
improvement.In mosi food-producing animals,
each insemination dose is low;hence,cach ejaculate
eachejaculate can be divided into many insemina
can be used forbreedingmany females.Conception
tion doses,such thateachAl sirecanpotentially be
rateswithAl areidenticaltothoseofnatural service,
used tobreed a very large number of females.Hence,
while the oestrous behaviour of cows means that
the totalnumber ofsires needed isreduced,witha
detectionof the fertile periodisnot difficult.Hlence,
consequential increase in the selection intensity
in this species, in which all three premises are ful-
that can be applied to the male side. In dairy cat-
filled,the use of AI is widespread.Conversely,in
tle, only the best 1% of cows are selected as poten-
many other species,whereoneormoreoftheprem-
tial bullmothers,and onlyabout thebest 1-3%of
ises areless adequately fulfilled,Alis less successful
their male progeny eventually become sires of the
and, therefore, less widely used.
next generation. In beef cattle and pigs the selec-
Al regimes havebeen developed for most domes-
tionintensity isnot quite so greatbut,nevertheless,
tic and many semi-domestic species.AI is routinely
isvery muchmoreintense than can be achieved in
practisedinatehepioatwl,rky
naturalbreeding.
salmon and trout,and is used in dogs,domestic
Direct genetic selection of sires is not, however,
foxes,buffalo,horses and evenbees.Ofthese,catle
the most widely used application of Al for achiev-
and sheep/goats account for thevastmajority ofi
inggeneticimprovement.More common is the use
mammalian inseminations.Theuse of Alisessen-
ofAl toallowrapiddisseminationofnewbreeds.
tial in turkey breeding, as natural mating is not pos-
IntheUK,AIwas oneof themain meanswhereby
siblein this species,sothatverylargenumbers of
theFriesianbreedofcattledisplacedtheindigenous
765
Part
61
Themaleanimal
British dairy breeds.Subsequently,Al hasalsobeen
Nevertheless,although AI carries many advan-
themeans bywhichtheFriesian hasbeen displaced
lages over natural breeding, the technique is not
by the H-lolstein.In such breed substitution pro-
withoutdrawBacks.Detectionofthefertileperiod
grammes,Al can be used to change the gene pool of
in the female oestrous cycle is potentially the most
anational herd rapidly,a technique that is also used
problematic aspect of Al programmes.In cattle,
forupgradingunimprovedcattleinremote areas.
the prominent homosexual behaviourofoestrous
In this process,Al has the advantage of being both
females allowsrelatively accuratehumanidentifica-
cheap andsimple,forlocaldistributionofextended
tion of the fertile period,butin most other species
and chilled semen from a small number of imported
its detection isless easy.In such species,detection
siresiswithin theeconomiccapabilitiesofeven the
of oestrus therefore requires the presence of infertile
poorestcountries.
(e.g. vasectomized) males, or the liming of oestrus
International tradein livestockisalsofacilitated
must be controlled by pharmacological (e.g. oestrus
byAl.Improvedstockcanbeimported intheform
synchronization/induction regimens)or manage-
ofsemenforAl,rather than havingtomoveanimals
mental (e.g.timing of weaning in sows) procedures.
themselves.By thismeans,many of theproblems of
Thus,for ewes,which do not normally display any
acclimatization,lackofresistancetolocal diseases,
signs of oestrus n the absence ofa male,Alrequires
etc.can be eliminated.Importing semen also allows
eitherthepresenceofvasectomizedramstodetect
the importingcountry toexert afar greater level of
oestrus orpharmacological manipulation ofoestrus
effectivecontroloverthehealthstatusofthedonor
to define the timing of the fertile period. Hence,
sires thanif thelivestockitself wereimported.
detection ofthefertileperiodoftheeweis,toa
ThesecondmajoradvantageofAlisthereduction
greater or lesser extent,a costly procedure, thereby
in thenumberof sires that individual farmersneed
detractingfrom theappealof AIin that species.It
10 maintain.The males of agricultural species gener-
maythereforebeconsidered thatan economic'trade-
allyrequireaccommodationinwhichtheycan be
off exists in such speciesbetween the genetic advan-
segregated from thebreeding females,so that breed
tages conferred by theuseof superior Al sires on one
ing can be controlled,often in buildings that also
hand and the costs ofmaintaining teaser males or
preclude,as far aspossible,injury to farm staff.The
pharmacological manipulationon the other.
significant housing and labour costs involved in
Once oestrus hasbeen identified,thefemale ani-
keeping such animals can be obviated by the use
mal has toberestrained forinsemination,which gen-
of Al; moreover, farmers generally have access t0
erallyrequires separationfrom the herdorflock and
geneticmaterial through Al centresthiatwould be
holding in specialized pens,The process of insemi
farbeyond theirpocketstobuyoutright.
nation alsorequires trainedpersonnel,whichmay
Thethirdmajor advantagetoAIis thecontrolof
require a limited degree of technical proficiency,as
venerealdisease.Amajorimpetustothedevelop-
with insemination of sowsor maybe demanding
mentofcattleAIintheUKduringthe1940swas
as in the case of laparoscopic intrauterine insemina-
theneedtocontroltheepizooticvenerealpatho-
tion ofewes.
gens Tritrichomonas fetus and Campylobacter felus
Itis alsonecessarytologinseminationdates in an
subsp.venerealis.In theUk,in common withmost
adequaterecordingsysteminordertoallowbirth
countries in which bovine Al was introduced in
dates tobecalculatedandso thatexpected dates of
theface oftrichomonosis and campylobacteriosis,
return to oestrus are known, thus allowing appropri-
thesepathogens werevirtuallyeliminated by the
ateobservationstobemade.Secondly,theidentity
use ofAl(see Ch.23）.However,theconverse is also
of the sire needs to be recorded (and his pedigree
true:uncontrolled use of siresinAl can disseminate
known) to avoid inbreeding. Some form of posi-
disease. Many diseases are transmissible through
tive pregnancy diagnosis is advantageous,especially
semen, including not only the classic venereal dis
where malesare not present in theherd,to ensure
eases but also other conditions that would not gen-
that non-returns to oestrus signify pregnancyrather
erally be regarded as primarily venereal (Roberts
than anoestrus.
1986).Rigorous monitoring of the health of Al
Thevalue ofAlasarapidmeans ofiransmis
donor sires is therefore regardedinmany coun-
sion of the genes ofsuperior sires has alreadybeen
tries as anintegralpart ofnational diseasecontrol
identified.However,a corresponding disadvantage
programmes.
exists:geneticfaultscan alsobewidelydisseminated
766
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
if they are present in an Al sire.Dominant traits
（Kearney etal2004,Colleau &Moureaux2006,
shouldrarelybetransmittedinthiswaybutreces
Haile-Mariam etal 2007).
sive traits may be very widely transmitted, espe-
cially if the recessive gene is present in the general
Preparation of semen for use
population at such a low incidence that many indi-
in artificial insemination
vidualsmayhavetobebredbeforethecondition
is expressed in a homozygous progeny. Hence, AI
programmes should be underpinned by an effi-
Themethodsfor collection of semenfromdomes-
cient reporting system for monitoring abnormali-
ticmammals are described in Chapter30.In most
ties in the progeny, with clearly defined criteria for
Alregimes, semen evaluation is limited to meas-
the withdrawal from use of sires that carry delete-
uring sperm numbers,notility and,usually,mor
rious genes.For example,in cattle,achondroplasia
phology.
More sophisticated analyses maybe
is transmitted as a simple recessive gene(Marlowe
used in determining whether an individual sire
1964)that,when present in the homozygous con-
produces semen of a sufficiently high quality for
dition,causes failure of long bone development,
acceptanceintoanAIprogramme,butsuch evalu-
resulting in the birth of so-called ‘bulldog'(achon-
ations arerarelycarriedout onday-to-daycollec-
droplastic) calves (see Ch.4). The incidence of this
tions of semen.Unlessthe semen is to be directly
gene in the general cattle population isso low that
inseminatedwithoutdelayintoasinglefemale,it
thebirthof one or two calves with this deformity is
is then diluted and eithercooled or frozen.Direct
regarded as suficient reason to slaughter the bull
inseminationsareperformedmostcommonlyin
andwithdraw all stocksofitssemen.Spasticpare-
thebitch,usuallyinresponsetosomeincapacity
sis is similarly transmitted and is dealt with ina
of the sire that precludes normal mating(Roberts
similar manner (Keith 1981）.Moreover,it is pos-
1986),and the mare with chronic endometri-
sible towidely disseminate conformational faults,
tis(Asbury 1986).Even in these circumstances, it
which,whilenotinitiallyundesirable,canstillhave
is more common to place the semen in a diluent
a significant effect upon the progeny (e.g. poor hind
prior toinsemination.
leg/foot conformation orpoorudder attachment
in catle).
Dilution
Concern over the possibility of inbreeding and
reductionoftheeffectivepopulationofabreedhas
Theejaculates ofmostdomesticanimals contain
been suggested as a consequence of widespread use
of Al from a small number of highly selected blood
nancy.Hence,by diluting the semen,it can poten
lines.Thereisevidencethat this maybetakingplace,
tiallybe used forseveral inseminations.Inspecies
particularly within the Holstein breed of cattle.
such as the dog and the horse, the whole sperm-rich
Anumberofstudieshaveidentifiedrealorpotential
fractionoftheejaculateisdilutedandchilled,then
negative effects ofinbreeding on traits such as dysto-
used either forsequentialinseminations of the same
cia andreproduction(Adamecetal2006,McParland
femaleoverherextendedoestrousperiodoraftervar-
etal2007a),cullingrate（Sewalem etal2006)and
iousdeterminationsofthefertileperiod(Jeffcoate&
production traits (Biffani et al 2002, Croquet et al
Lindsay1989,Brinsko&Varner1993).Infoodani
2006) but, generally, not on type/conformational
mal species,the ejaculate is generally diluted so that
traits. Estimates of coefficients of inbreeding in
it can be used to inseminale many females.
Holstein cattle arerelatively lowbut arerisingwhile
In either case, the maximum degree of dilution is
thenumbersofeffectivecontributors to thebreed is
determinedfrom theminimumnumber of spermato-
declining（Sorensenetal2005,Koenig&Simianer
zoaandthevolume ofinseminate that isrequiredto
2006).This trend is also seen in beef cattle such
achieve acceptablepregnancyrates.Thesefactors are
asthe Hereford and Charolaisbreeds(McParland
themselves determinedbythe siteofinsemination,
the survival of sperm in diluent and theidiosyncrasies
whiletheeffectswere statistically significant,they
of individual species and sires.In general,where an
weresmallandwereunlikelytocausegreatfinancial
intrauterineinseminationcanbeachieved,themini-
loss at present levels. However, others advocate a
mumnumbersofspermareoneortwoordersofmag-
more activerolein themanagementofinbreeding
nitudelowerthanforan intracervical insemination,
767
Part
61
The maleanimal
whichisitselfoneor twoordersofmagnitudelower
aminomeihane)is probably the mostwidely
than foranintravaginal insemination.Hence,where
employedofsuchbuffers（Davis etal1963),butthe
widespread use of sires is required a great advantage
successful usef many similar materials (e.g. TES,
exists in devising methods of achieving intrauterine
HEPES Tricene) is described.The proteins contained
insemination,evenwhere,asinheewethisrequiresas
inskimmedmillkproducts alsoprovideconsiderable
complexaprocedureaslaparoscopicinseminarion
buffering capacity to diluents.
The major properties of semen diluents (Watson
1979)are:
Maintenanceofosmoticpressure
Seminal plasma has an osmotic pressure of 285 mos
Addition ofvolume
mol,although spermcan tolerate amoderaterange
Insemination dosesmustbeprepared in avolume
oftonicity(Foote 1969).Some debate has centred
that isacompromisebetween ease ofhandling
and an appropriate volume for the site of insemi-
osmotic(Foote1970)orisosmoticdiluent,withthe
nation.Thus,for ovine intracervicalinseminations,
former being generally favoured. Apart from the
minimizingvolumeis important toreduceretro-
osmoticactivityoftheioniccomponentofdiluents,
gradelossfromthe cervix(Evans&Maxwell1987),
asubstantialcontributionismadebyproteinsand,
while,for porcine intrauterine inseminations,a
minimumvolume of50ml is required to spread
nutrition for the sperm ortocontribute to thecryo-
thesemen throughthecapaciousuterusofthe sow
(Reed1982).
Dilutionofsemenisnotentirelystraightforward,
Provision of an energy substrate
for mammalian sperm placed in simple diluents
exhibits an initial increaseinmotility,whichis then
Most diluents make some provision of energy sub-
rapidlyfollowedbyalossofmotilityandincrease
stratesforsperm.In general,simple sugars suchas
in vital staining (Mann 1964).This phenomenon,
glucose, fructose, mannose and arabinose are suit-
known as the‘dilution effect',represcnts a loss of
able substrates, although the rate at which these
cellviability, probably through leaching of struc-
sugars aremetabolized varies substantially between
tural components of the cell membrane.Although
species （reviewed by Bedford & Hoskins 1990).
it was of great concern among the early practition-
Lactose,which is present in milk-based diluents,
ers ofAl,the useof diluents containingmacromol-
is not metabolizable to any appreciable exient.
ecules suchasproteinsorpolyvinylalcoholwas
However, egg yolk, also a component of many
foundtoabrogatethedilutioneffect[Suteretal
diluentsprovidesmany substrates for sperm metab
1979,Clay et al 1984).
olism(Salisbury et al 1978).The provision of energy
isrelatively less important where sperm are to be
Buffering
frozen,fortheywillonlyremainactivefora few
hours at most before freezing suspends metabolic
Spermaiozoahave anarrowrangeoftoleranceto
activity.However,if semen is to be used chilled,
changes in pH, so provision of buffering capacity is
when sperm metabolism hastobe sustained for
necessary. Buffering is especially important where
several days,provision ofenergyisimportant
the semen is only to be chilled and not cryopre-
served,as the metabolic activity of cooled sperma-
Antimicrobial activity
tozoa remains appreciable(Salisbury et al 1978).
While,in many cliluents, themajor volume compo-
Antibioticsare added tomostsemen diluents as a
nent is also the major buffering agent,buffers are a
prophylactic measure against the transmission of
minor constituentofsome diluents.Simplebuffers
pathogenicbacteria andtoreducetheloadofnon-
areeffective,withciuratebeingwidelyused(Willett&
pathogenicorganisms thatcontaminate thesemen.
Salisbury 1942). Phosphate-buffered saline is
In cattle Al,benzylpenicillin and streptomycin
rather less suitable, as it predisposes to head-to-
(Melrose1962)arethemostwidelyused antibiot-
head agglutination ofsperm.Morerecently,organic
ics,for these are efficacious against C.feus. Most
buffers have been used. Tris (tris(hydroxymethyl)
otherantibioticseitherfailtocontrol thisorganism
768
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
or are directly detrimental to sperm.Concern over
to calcium(Robertson&Waison 1986).The mem-
the potentialtransimission of Mycoplasma and
branes are also more fusogenic, leading to altera-
Ureaplasma species inbovine semen hasled to the
tions in the capacitation process (Johnson et al
incorporation of lincomycin and specinomycin
2000).Species differences,andprobably differences
(Almquist&Zaugg1974)inlosemendiluentsinan
between individual sires,depend upon the compo-
effort to control these organisms.Thereisevidence
sitionofthemembranes:ratios ofdifferent phos-
that theefficiencyofantibioticsmaybereduced in
pholipids and theconcentrationofcholesterolin
the presenceof some componentsof diluents,nota-
themembranesappeartobecritical determinantsof
bly egg yolk (Morgan et al 1959), hence the prac-
the response to cold shock.
ticeinsomebovineAlcentres istopre-incubate the
Themosteffectiveway ofprotectingspermagainst
raw semen with antibiotic cocktails before the main
the detrimental effecisofcoolingisbytheinclusion
dilution occurs.This procedure is commonplace in
of egg yolkormilk in the diluent.Diluents forchilled
theUSA,but israrelyundertaken inEurope.
storage ofsemen thereforetypicallycontain=20%
ofeggyolk plus a buffer.Skimmed milk,whole milk
andcoconutmilkhavealsobeenused successfully,
Extending life-span
although egg yolk is by farthemost commonly used
additive(Vishwanath&Shannon2000).Wholemilk
contains a protein, lactenin, which is spermicidal, so
Thelife spanof spermatozoaofmostother species
can beprolonged moreconvenientlyby:
milkforuseasasemen diluentmustbeheat-treated
(e.g. in the skimming process) to inactivate this toxic
·cooling toa temperature well below ambient
factor(Flipsse et al 1954).Early diluents were based
·freezing (cryopreservation)
onphosphatebufferbutcitratesoonprovedtobe
·suspending themetabolic activity of the sperm
better,probablybecauseitimprovesthesolubilityof
while maintaining it at ambient or cooled
egg yolk proteins. More recently,zwitterion buffers
temperatures.
have alsobeen used:Tris has been the most widely
used but good results have alsobeen achieved with
TES(N-tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl-2-aminoethane
Cooling and cold shock
sulphonic acid)or TEST （Tris titrated with TES)
Semen can be stored in a liquid form,with its
(Holt2000).
metabolicactivityreducedby cooling.Theprocess
Detailedunderstanding of themechanisms by
ofcooling from body temperature to=5°Cresults
whicheggyolk andothernatural productsprevent
inconsiderabledamagetothecellsunless they are
cold shock have been elusive,with the result that
protectedfromtheeffectsoftlie‘cold shockThe
it hasbeen difficult toproducechemicallydefined
development of cold shock is exacerbated by rapid
diluents. Early work identified that the key com-
coolingrates,but cannot beprevented evenby slow
ponents of these materials were lecithins,proteins,
cooling.
lipoproteins and similar complexes of large mole-
Cold shockresultsindamagetocell membranes,
cules(Blackshaw1954,Melrose1956,Blackshaw&
resulting in the leakage of intracellular potassium,
Salisbury 1957), Studies in the 1970s and 1980s
enzymes,lipids,cholesterol,lipoprotein and ade-
（e.g.Watson1976,1981,Foulkes1977) showed that
thelowdensitylipoprotein(LDL)fractionisthekey
How this affects sperm function remains incom-
component of egg yolk,with lipoproteins probably
pletely understood, although it is clear that most
being the most important(Watson 1990)
oftheeffects aremediated through changes in the
Ithas been suggested that LDL stabilizes the
propertiesof cellmembranes.Lowering temperature
spermmembrane(Watson1975)orprotectssperm
causesmembranephospholipidsto changefrom a
by forming a protective layer over the surface of
fuid oagelhase,which,since thisoccursatdiff
the sperm (Quinn et al 19s0) or replacing mem-
enttemperaturesfor different structural lipids,can
branephospholipidsthaibecomelostor damaged
lead tophase separation.Asa consequence,mem-
(Foulkes etal19S0).LDL,glycolipids and choles-
brane proteins becomeirreversibly clustered,lead-
terol become incorporated into membranes,reduc
ing to loss of function (De Leeuw et al 199o).Thus,
ing their tendency to change from a liquid to a
cold-shocked sperm aremore permeable, especially
gelphase during cooling（lsachenko etal 2004).
769
Part
61
Themaleanimal
Afurtherrecenthypothesishasfocuseduponthe
temperatureoftheexternalmediumfallsbelowits
interactionofLDLwithproteincomponentsinthe
freezing point, crystals of pure water start to form.
seminalplasma(Vishwanath etal1992).Bergeron
Theconcentationof solutes in theunfrozenpartof
&Manjunath(2006)developedthis idea further,
the medium hereforerisesasinconsequence,does
basedupontheirworkonbovineseminalplasma
its osmoticpressure.Icecrystals donot extend into
proteins (BSP).They suggested that,in vivo,BSP
the cell at this stage,as they are excludedby thecell
bind to spermmembranes duringejaculation,facili
membrane.Thus,theintracellular contents undergo
tating the process of capacitation in the female tract.
a period of supercooling,during which the cell
Duringstorage,BSPbinds to spermmembranes and
loseswater to the unfrozenpartoftheextracellular
causes loss of phospholipid,and cholesterol;i.e. it
medium by osmosis (Fig.31.1).A variable degree of
inducesoneofthemainmechanism ofcold shock.
cell dehydration follows,whichisterminated by the
It is suggested that LDL,particularly phosphatidyl-
formation of intracellularice crystals.Thus,damage
choline, binds BSP in the diluent, preventing its
can occur tocells in one of two ways.Where a sub-
interaction with the sperm and hence protecting the
stantial degree of cellular dehydration occurs,the
membranes from damage.
high concentrations of solutes in theresidual intra-
Thefertility of bovine semen storedat5Cin such
cellular water can be damaging, whereas, if only
diluents remains acceptable for 2-4 days(Foote
slightdehydrationoccurslargeicecrystalscanform
etal1960),although thatoframsemenonlypersists
within the cell,which causephysical damage to its
for12-24hours(Salamon&Robinson1962,Evans&
internal and bounding membranes.The degree to
Maxwell1987).The decline infertilitythatoccurs
whicheach affectsthecellisdeterminedbytherate
afterthis time isinitiallydue to decreasedmotility
of cooling-the slower the rate,themore dehydra-
andsurvivalinthefemalegenital tractratherthanto
tion, the faster therate, the greater the damage by
sperm deathperse.Short-term storageofsemenby
ice formation-and the size of the cell, such that
chilling to 5°C is,however, a very cheap and effec-
the larger the cell, the slower its inherent rate of
tive way of establishing an Al programme for cattle
dehydration.
and isofvaluefor on-farm collection and insemina-
However, the effects of freezing and thawing also
tion of sheep,while theuse ofliquidboar semen at
need to explained in terms beyond those of osmotic
ambient temperatures remains,effectively,thebasis
and ice crystal damage. Sperm membranes are
ofthetechniqueinthat species.Short-term5°Cstor-
unusualintermsofthelipidsofwhichtheyarecom-
age is also widely used in the horse and the dog as
posed and of the arrangenents of lipids within the
it avoids the unpredictableresponse tofreezing that
membranes.Cooling and cryopreservation causes
characterizes thesemenof thosespecies.
phase changes in membrane lipids,which results
Cryopreservationand
cryoprotectants
Longer-term storage ofsemenis achievedthrough
cryopreservation.Cryopreservation maintains the
Extracellular
ferile life of semen virtually indefinitely,although
a largeproportion ofindividual spermatozoafail
to survive the considerable stresses of freezing and
thawing.For sperm to survive freezing, they need to
-08-
be extended in a diluent that contains not only sub-
stances that protect them against cold shockbut also
Unshrunken cell
Shrunken cellwith
withinternal ice
litleorno internal
cryoprotectants, such as glycerol (Polge et al 1949),
(dead on thawing) Time -
ice (functional on thawing)
which protect them from the deleteriousconse-
Fig.31.1 Shrinkage of cells during cryopreservation.Extra-
quences of freezing.
cellularfreezinginducesconditionsthatallowosmotically
The general responses of cells to freezing (reviewed
induced lossofwater fromcells during slowfreezing.This
byFarrant1980,Watson1990)werenotunderstood
correlates with survival on thawing.Rapidly cooled cells do
until long after empirical methods of cryopreserva-
not have time to shrink,form intracellularice and are dead on
thawing.(With permission fromFarrant1980.)
tionhad becomewidelyadopted.Initially,as the
770
Chapter
31
Artificial insemination
in loss of integrity,loss of control of calcium move-
primary cryoprotectant usedinfreezingmammalian
ment and loss ofmembraneATPase activity (Holt
sperm,has direct toxic effects upon sperin (Watson
2000).Many sperm donot survive theseprocesses:
1979,1990).Concentrations ofglycerol that canbe
typicallyless than50%of theviablesperm thatwere
present before cryopreservation.Moreover,even for
theother componentsof the diluent.For example
the sperm that do survive,capacitation-likechanges
diluentsforbovinesementhatcontaindisaccharides
lothesperm headoccur(Curry2000,Thomaset al
canuselowerpercentages(3-4%)ofglycerolthan
2006),whichalters theduration of their survival in
diluents that lack such disaccharides,which have a
the female reproductive tract.It has been suggested
finalglycerolconcentrationofat least7%(Unaletal
that species-to-species variations inthe ability of
1978).Bull sperm seem to be relatively resistant to
spermto survivecryopreservation,aswell assome
the toxiceffects of glycerol:boar sperm,for example,
sire-to-sire variability within species,can be attrib-
can toleratemuchlowerconcentrationsbeforetoxic
uted to theabilityofmembranesto withstandor
effectsstart tooccur.
accommodate thesechanges.
Whether thetoxiceffecis ofglycerolareexacer-
Responses of sperm to cryopreservation can be
batedathightemperatureshasbeena malter of
improved by the use of cryoprotectants, the compo-
debate.Early studies(Polge1953)showed that the
sition of the diluent and therateatwhich sperm are
addition of glycerol ar 28°Cwas more damaging
frozen and thawed. Cryoprotective agents are classi-
to bovine sperm than its addition at 4°℃, although
fied as those ihat enter thecell (permeating)or that
Salisbury et al(1978),reviewing the(by then) copi-
areretained in the extracellularfluids(non-permeat-
ousliterature,concluded thattheeffects oftempera-
ing).The actionsofcryoprotectantswereoriginally
tureofglycerolizationwereequivocal.Morerecently,
thoughttobemediatedsolelythoughhydrogen-
it has been suggested that multistep addition of glyc-
bonding of water,thereby reducing the availability
erolavoids excessivechangesincellvolume thatcan
of water eitherfor dehydrative loss or for icecrystal
result in membranerupture(Gaoetal 1993,1995)
formation.Penetrating cryoprotectants (e.g. glycerol
Nevertheless,normal practiceincommercial bovine
ordimethyl sulphoxide(DMSO))reduce theloss of
Al centres is that,where the final concentration of
water from the cell,thereby reducing solute dam-
glycerol is high (=7%),a primary dilution of the
age,andbind it in a form that renders i unavailable
semen ismadewith a diluentcontaininglittleorno
for crystal formation,therebyreducing theeffects
glycerol,withglycerolizationbeingcarriedoutafter
of intracellular ice formation.Non-penetrating
reducing the temperature to 4°C.However, diluents
Cryoprotectants, such as disaccharides or proteins,
thatuiselowerfinalconcentrations(<5%)are added
mayhastendehydration duringvery rapid cooling,
inone step,at30°C.Withboar semen,the toxicity
therebyminimizingintracellularice formation.
ofglycerolathightemperaturesismuchlessequivo-
However, other mechanisms are also involved.
cal,and low-temperature glycerolization is desirable
Thus, polar molecules such as glycerol and sugars
(Paquignon1985).
appear to form hydrogen bondswith the polar head
Oxidativedamagealsooccursto sperinmein-
groups of membrane lipids Vishwanath & Shannon
branes during the freezing process,A number of
2000),stabilizing the membranes during transi-
studies have implicated membrane lipid peroxi-
tion throughcriticaltemperaturezones(Woelders
dationas a cause of defective sperm function afier
1997).Lilkewise,insertion ofglycerolinto themeim-
cryopreservation
(Salamon&Maxwell1995）.
brane bilayer also appears to affect stability and
Attemptstoovercomethisproblemhaveincluded
water permeability of the membranes through alter-
the addition of antioxidants (e.g.glutathione per-
ing the physical properties of thie membrane lipids
oxidase;Slaweta&Laskowska1987)andcatalase
(Holt 2000).Sugars,like glycerol,alter the mechan-
(Shannon 1972), while it has also been suggested
ical properties of the diluent by increasing its vis-
that measurement of the degree of oxidation of
cosity.This prevents crystallization of solutes and
membranephospholipids maybe auseful means
increasestheglass-formingtendency of themediun
of assessing the quality of frozen-thawed sperm
(a property that is exploited in vitrificationmethods
(Neild etal 2005).
of freezinglarger cells:Isachenkoetal2004)
The firsi methods for freezing semen involved
Unfortunately, permeating cryoprotectants are rel-
placing diluted semen inglassampoulesforfreez-
atively toxic to sperm.Glycerol,which is themain
inginamixtureofalcoholandsolidcarbondioxide
771
Part
61
Themale animal
at -79°C, or drops of diluted semen were placed
require high concentrations of cryoprotectants,
directly on to the surface ofa blockofsolid carbon
which themselyesimpedecell survival through their
dioxide where they froze in pellet form (Salisbury
toxic effects Vajio 2000). However, recent stucies
have suggested thiat ulira-fast freezing of sperin call
satisfactory, however, as deterioration occurred
result in vitrification without the presence of a cryo-
al that temperature(Pickett et al 1961,Stewart
proteciant (lsachenko ei al 2004) and, providing ice
1964). Storage in liquid nitrogen at -196°C has
recrystallization during thawing is prevented,results
subsequently become established as the standard
in acceptable post-thaw recovery rates.
medium for long-term preservation of semen and,
A further new technique is the development of a
over the 40 years for which it has been practised,
'multithermal' gradient' as a means of controlling
has maintained sperm fertility unscathed.At thie
and optimizing theformation oficeduring thefreez-
present time, semen is frozen in one of two main
ing process (Arav et al 2002). Samples are moved
ways.Diluted semen is packed into thin, plas-
al a constant velocity through a linear temperauure
tic tubes of 0.25or 0.5mlcapacity,then in the
gradient（Gacitua & Arav 2005），which contols
simpler techniques these tubes ('straws’ or ‘pail-
the point at which ice forms and the morpholog-
lettes') are suspended in the vapour of liquid
ical characteristics of the ice crystals. This method
nitrogen, which is at about -120°C, for about 10
appears to result in good post-thaw recovery rates
minutes (Cassou 1964,Jondet 1964).The straws
(ranging from 45% in theboar to 65%in ihebull:
are then plunged into the liquid nitrogen. More
recently. a greater degree of control of freezing rate
can be frozen in bulk, rather than necessitating the
has been exercised by the use of microprocessor-
small volumes ofpellets or paillettes(Gacitua and
controlled freezers. Some studies have suggested
Arav 2005).
that improved sperm survival may be sufficient
to justify the increased cost of the processing (e.g.
Thawing
Landa &Almquist 1979,Parkinson &Whitfield
1987). On the other hand,while ihe control of
Thawing of the semen needs to be rapid, since
freezing rate is not as good in open tank methods
slow thawing allows recrystallization of ice within
as in programmable freezers, the latter are not as
the cells,causing mernbrane damage (Salisbury
amenable to processing large batches of semen or,
et al 1978). In practice, the rate of thawing is rarely
if large batchers are processed, there can be signif-
critical, alihough thawing at 30-37°C for 10-60
icant variation in cooling rate (and hence, post-
seconds is commonly recommended for bovine
thaw survival) across the cooling chamber. Hence,
semen (Fig. 31.2b）. Much higher temperatures
many organizations have chosen to continie to
(eg. 6o°C) for a short period of time have some-
use the less well controlled open tank methods
times been recommended as a mcans of improv-
(Vishwanath&Shannon2000).
ing recovery rates; however, the practical difficulties
ofusing such methods in thefield have meant that
they have not been widely adopted. Of far greater
Newmethodsofcryopreservation
importanceisthietemperatureconirolof thethawed
Vitrification, a process in which a liquid turns into
semen.This should not be allowed to cool below
a solid without the formation of ice crystals,has
the final temperature achieved during thawing: oth-
been evaluated for cryopreservation of cell types
erwisesubstantial sperm losses can occur.Rethawed
that do not survive traditional freezing methods
spermatozoa are as senisitive to fluctuations in tem-
particularly well. Sperm are particularly sensitive to
perature as are their unfrozen counterparts (Roberts
ice crystal formation, sinre their long tail is likely
1986)and cold shock can easily beinduced if post-
to span regions in the freezing diluent that contain
thaw cooling occurs (Nebel 2007).In addition,
both ice crystals and hyperosmotic diluent (Holt
controlling the temperature of semen during with-
2000). These random patterns of extracellular ice,
drawal from storage flasks is important (Fig. 31.2a):
together with the intracellular ice that can also be
temperatures inthe top third of theneckofihe flask
formed during the cooling process, are a significant
are high enough for ice recrystallization to occur in
source of cell damage.In freezing large cells,such as
the straws,resulting in markedly reduced post-thaw
embryos or oocytes, vitrification processes normally
survival(Nebel2007).
772
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
60-
60
Lowlertilzation rate
Highfertilzation rate
High embryo quality
Low embryo quality
50
0
Ovulatior
40
'Optimal'time forAl
20
20
Limitedy sperm
Limiled by oocyle
10-
10
numbers and ageing
quality(ageing)
0-4
4-B
日-1212-1616-2020-2424-26
D
12
24
A
Insaminationfimehours）afferthccnsctofstandingostrus
B
Insemination ima: hours affer the onset of oestrus
Fig.31.2Optimal timing of insemination in cattle(A)derived from observations of the onset of oestrus B)as a compromise
between fertilizationrate andembryo survival rate.(Redrawn from Saackeetal 2000.)
without theneed to lower pH.This is used in the
Ambienttemperaturepreservation
Caprogen diluent.
For sperm to be stored at ambient temperatures
Othercomponents of ambienttemperature diluents
alternativestocoolinghavetobefoundto slow
（simple sugars,buffers,eggyoll/milk,antibiotics,
down theirmetabolicrate.Theremay alsobeadvan-
catalase)are similar to thoseused in diluents for
tages to ambient temperature preservation of semen,
chilled or cryopreserved semen.
sincebothcooling and cryopreservation are associ-
aledwith a significant lossofbotlinumbersand
Microencapsulation
functionality of sperm.Moreover,some species do
not tolerate coolingor cryopreservation well,so,or
Sperm encapsulation has alsobeen investigated as
these, ambient temperature dilution is imperative.
a means of preserving spern without the need for
Strategies thathavebeenused forambient tem-
recourse tocryopreservation.Spermencapsulationis
perature diluents include:
the process ofenclosing spermatozoa within a semi-
·decreasing the proportion of egg yolk to a level at
permeable membrane (Nebel et al 1985). Sperm
whichthebeneficialeffects upon cold shockare
remainviablewithinthemicrocapsulesbecausethe
retainedbut the toxic effects of other yolkcompo-
semipermeable membrane permits the exchange
nents are avoided
oflow-molecular-weightnutrientsandmetabolites
with themedium withinwhich theyare contained
lowering pH to =5.5 results in a reversible inhibi-
（Rocaet al2006a),butprevents transferoflarge
tion of sperm motility; reducing thepH below5.5
molecules
isspermicidal
The process of microencapsulation has been
·saturating the diluent with carbon dioxide
describedbyNebeletal(1993).Afterextensioninan
also causes a reversible inhibition of sperm
ambient temperature diluent,sperm are suspended
motility.Diluents, such as the Illinois Variable
in a sodium alginate solution.Spraying into a high
Temperature (IVT) diluent, that were based on
calcium buffer solidifies droplets of diluted sperm,
this principle were able to maintain sperm via-
after whichi the semipermeable membrane is con-
bilityfor=48 hours.Longer-term maintenance
structed on the surfaceofthe droplet.Polyamines
(up to5 days） is achieved in diluents (e.g. the
such as protamine sulphate, polyvinylamine and
Cornell University Extender (CuE)or Caprogen
poly--lysine have been used successfully. Calcium
diluent)that areself-carbonatingfrom thereac-
isthenchelated,whichrevertsthegelcoreofthe
tionofcitrate and bicarbonate(Vishwanath&
microcapsule back to a liquid phase. Barium has
Shannon2000)
beenusedasanalternarive to calcium,with the
gassingwith nitrogen.This reduces oxygen tension
advantagethatitdoesnotprecipitatepremature
inthediluent,therebyinhibitingspermmotility
capacitation (Torre et al 2007).
773
Part
61
Themaleanimal
Microencapsulation has been used for ram
is stained with the membrane-permeable agent bis
(Maxwell etal 1996),b0ar(Faustiniet al 2004) and
benzimidazole, DNA-binding dye, Hoechst 33342
bull (Vishwanath et al 1997) semen. Sperm are
(Garner 2006), which binds specifically to A-T pairs
released from the capsules over aperiod of at least
alonglheminorgrooveof theDNA(Seidel &Garner
24 hours and, ini the case of tie bull, this may be
2002). Sperm are separated from live cells by fur-
extended to 96 hours.Preliminary resulis show that
ther staining with a food dye, FD&C#40, which per-
acceptable conception rates can be achieved with
meates dead cells and qucnches the fluorescence of
encapsulated sperm and that the timing of insem-
Hoechst 33342 but is excluded fron living cells. The
ination in relation tothetimeofovulation is less
stained cells are then passed through a flow cytom-
critical than with other forms of preserved semen.
eter for sorting.
However, limied development of the technology
After measuring the amount of DNA,the flow
has taken placefor use in insemination, although it
cytometerbreaks thesolution containing thesperm
is more widely used for other forms of cell preserva-
into tiny droplets, most of which contain a single
tion (Torre et al 2007).
sperm (some droplets contain no sperm,a few
contain two sperm) and a charge isplaced on the
droplet as it leaves the sorter, such that droplets
Sexed semen
containing sperm with Y chromosomes are given
a negative charge and thosecontaining sperm with
A long-standing goal of the Al industries has been to
an X chromosome are given a positive charge. The
be able to control the sex ofoffspring,by separating
droplets then pass through electric fields,which
X- and Y-bearing sperm. Many methods have been
deflect droplets with a positive charge (X chromo-
developed in attempts lo achieve this goal:most
somes) lowards the negative side (and vice versa
have proved impractical or ineffective, whereas, in
for negatively charged droplets). Somewhere in the
recentyears,flow cytometryhas been developed to
region of2o% afsperm are suiccessfully sorted as
a point at which sperm sexing is available as a com-
X-bearing.20% as Y-bearing,with the remainder
mercial service.The technique of sexing semen has
unidentified or dead.This process is illustrated in
recently been reviewed by Seidel & Garner (2002),
Figure 31.3.
Garner (2006) and Seidel (2007).
The process is relatively slow,however. Currently,
Separation of sperm on thebasis of surface anti
10 insemination doses of 2x10live sperincanbe
gens is an attractive option,asit would allowbulk
produced per hour. Moreover,the sperm have been
processing of semen. However, early altempts, based
subjected 1o a number of insulis during the separa
on theH-Yantigen,and more recent investigations,
tion process (staining,laset, high pressure, electri-
based on sex-specific proteins, have yet to yield
cal charge),which impair their subsequent function.
practical sorting methods.Major problems with this
There is evidence of more chromatin abnormalities
approach are the limited transcription that takes
in sorted sperm (Bochenek et al 2006) but H33342
placein the haploid cell and the cytoplasmicbridges
does not appear to cause any mutagenic damage
that join sperm until just before their releasefrom
to the genome. Altering the conditions for the cell
the seminiferous epithelium. Electrophoresis meth-
sorting process can reduce the overall level of sperm
ods, based on the principle that X- and Y-bearing
losses(Schenk&Seidel 2007).
sperm may have different surface charges,have also
Sorted sperm can survive cryopreservation but the
only had limited suiccess to date.
low numbers of sperm that are present generally
Hence, most attention has been upon the using
require specialized insemination routes to achieve
the different mass of DNA in the X- and Y-bearing
acceptable pregnancy rates (see below).Alternatively,
sperm as the basis for sorting and separation:
sexed semen can be used inin vitro fertilization for
X-bearing sperm of domestic animals contain =4%
the production of embryos of known sex (Wheeler
more DNA than Y-bearing sperm. The principle of
et al 2006).However, as noted by Garner （2006)
sexing semen is to stain the DNA with a fluores-
the effective use of sexed semen in animal breed-
centdye thatbinds to iheDNAbut doesnotdam-
ing industries requires further development in the
age it. The difference in fluorescence berween the
speed and efficiency of sex sorting, as well as devel-
X- and Y-bearing sperm can then be measured and
opment in the technology of Al in order to utilize
cells sorted accordingly (Johnson et al i987). DNA
such sperm efficiently
774
Chapter
31
Artificial insemination
Sample input
ihe semen of all species that are susceptible to its
infection(Callis& McKercher I980,Radostits et al
2007). indeed, control of foot and mouth transmis
sion has, until recently, underpinned the UK legis-
lation controlling Al of cattle,with broadly similar
regulations in force throughout much of the devel
oped world. Diseases of cattle, small ruminants,
PMT
PMT
horses and pigs for which trade in semen is regulated
by the Office International des Epizootics (OIE; Lists
A and B, OIE 2004) are listed in Table 31.1.
Odetector
g0detector
OlE further stipulates that sires that are to be
used in AI centres for international trade should be
tested for freedom from a number of diseases.Many
Leser excitalion
importing countries also require animals to be free
of additional diseases.Where semen is diluted in
egg yolk, there is generally a requirement that they
are derived from specific-pathogen-free (SPF) flocks.
'These regulations are also applied to use of semen in
domestic trade within the European UInion.
Artificial insemination of cattle
Collection and storage of semen
High voltage
Semen is usually collected by an artificial vagina,
deflectionplates
although electroejaculation is occasionally used (see
Ch. 30). After assessment for motility, density and
morphology the semen is diluted into insemination
doses.The degre of dilution and the diluents with
whichthe semenis diluted dependupon its subse-
quent use. Most semen is cryopreserved, although
some is used affer simple extension and chilling to
4°C. The practice of using an ambieni temperature
diluent is virtuallyunique to New Zealand,where
the practice is made possible by the low incidence
Fig.31.3Flew cytometric sorting of X-andY-bearing sperm
of infectious disease, and is required for the highly
After staining, the sperm are passed by photomultiplier tubes
seasonalpattern ofreproduction in its dairy cows.
(PMT).The electronic signals from the PMT are sent to a
For cryopreservation, or for use at4 °℃, the semen s
computer foranalysis.Thereafter the fluic stream is broken into
firstextended witha diluentbased uponeitheregg yoll
droplets and apositivecharge is placed cndropletsidentified to
or skimmed mill(Table 31.2 lists examples of widely
contain a Y-bearing sperm and negative charge on droplets with
used diluenis;Salisburyel al 1978,Vishwanath &
X-bearing spem. The drops then travel between high-voltage
fields, which direct them to their respective collection tubes.
Shannon 2oo0).which contains antibiotics for the
(Derived fromJohnson&Welch 1999,Seidel&Ganer 2002.)
control of contaminating bacteria.The semen is then
cooled to 4°C. If it is destined for use in this form,
the motility of the sperm will be reassessed, then the
semen is released for use. If the semen is destined
Diseases transmissible in semen
for cryopreservation, glycerol is also added, then the
semen is packed into 0.25 or 0.5 ml paillettes,or 0.5
Many infectious agents can be transmitted through
or 1.0ml glass ampoules. The semen is then equili-
semen. Foot and mouth virus can be transmitied in
brated for 1-4 hours. It was originally considered
775
Part
61
Themaleanimal
Table31.1 Diseases listed by theWorld Organisaticn forAnimal Health (OlE) as requiring control of spread via semen
Cattle
Sheep and goats
Horses'
Pigs
OIEListA
Footand mouth,Vesicular
Footandmouth,Vesicular
Vesicular stomatitis,
Footandmouth,Vesicular
stomatitisinderpest,lu
stomatitis,Rinderpest,
African horse sickness
stomatitis,Rinderpest,
tongue,Lumpy skin disease
Blue tongue,Peste des
Swinevesicular disease,
petits ruminants (sheep
Classical swinefever,
African swine fever
OIEList B
Leptospirosis,
Leptospirosis,
Dourine,Equine
Leptospirosis,Porcine
Paratuberculosis (Johne's
Paratuberculcsis (Johne's
viral arteritis,
brucellosis,Transmissible
disease),Bovine brucellosis,
disease),Ovine/caprine
Venezuelan equine
gastroenteritis,Aujeszky's
Tuberculosis,Bovine
brucellosis, Brucella ovis
encephalomyelitis
disease,Enterovirus
venereal campylobacteriosis,
Enzooticabortion of
encephalomyelitis
Trichomonosis,Enzootic
ewes,Scrapie(sheep and
(Teschen/Talfan disease)
bovine leukosis,Bovine
goats),Sheep pox/goat
herpesvirus-1,Contagious
pox,Contagious caprine
bovine pleuropneumonia
pleuropneumonia
Other diseases
Bovineviral diarrhoeavirus
Table31.2Diluentsforuseincryopreservation of bovinesemen(derived from].Wilmington,personal communication;
Parkinson&Whitfield1987)
Constituent
Skimmed
Egg-yolk-citrate
Reading
Egg-yolk-Tris
Nether-lands
(gorml/litre)
milk
diluent
extender
Egg yollk
100ml
200ml
200ml
200ml
200ml
UHT skimmed milk
870ml
Fructose
12.5
Lactose
82.8
2.9% sodium citrate
770ml
buffer*
Tris buffer
800ml
800ml*
Citric acid monohydrate
Cirrate-HCO,buffer (c)
753ml
Glycerol
47ml
47ml
Stage1:
30ml
30ml
!N
Stage2:
110ml
110ml
140ml
Antibiotics
Typically,1000lUpenicillin+1000μg streptomycin/ml
*Trisodium citrate dihydride
30.28gTris17.30g/litre citricacid monohydrate.
31.5gTris.12.3g/litre citric acicmonohydrate.
at 30-37°C,afterwhich the semenis.ccoled to4C.From:Salisbury etal1978,Parkinson&Whitfield1987,Vishwanath&Shannon2000.
that thiswastheperiodoverwhichglycerolpene
isthenfrozeninthevapourof liquidnitrogenorina
trated thesperm,althoughmorerecent observations
microprocessor-controlled freezer.The semen there-
indicatethatthepenetrationofglycerolisveryrapid
afterremainsinliquid nitrogen until thawed foruse.
andthatmost ofthe equilibration period is con-
Freezinginalcoholandsolidcarbondioxideorin
cernedwith membrane stabilization during expo
pelleis on blocks ofsolid carbon dioxide,although
suretolow temperatures(Watson1979).Thesemen
formerlyusedwidely,hasnowvirtuallyceased
776
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
Theability to perform an intrauterine insemi-
Table31.3Diluentsforambient temperatureextensionof
nation in cattlemeans thatarelativelylowdose of
bovine semen(derived fromShannon1965,Shannon&
spermisrequired toachieve acceptablepregnancy
Curson1982,Vishwanath&Shannon2000)
rates.Typically,ofie 10-25x10°speun hiatare
Basicdiluent
Cornell
Caprogen
required in each insemination dose,6-7x10 sur-
(g/litre)
University
diluent
vive freezing. a figure that is generally regarded as
extender
the minimum dose compatible with acceptable fer-
tility (Milk Marketing Board 1967, Sullivan&Elliott
Sodium citrate
14.5
20
1968).Lower numbers of sperm canbeused where
Citricacid
0.87
unfrozen semen is used(Salisbury &VanDemark
Sodium
2.1
1961).
bicarbonate
The use ofambient temperature diluents is pre-
Glycine
20
10
cluded inmost countriesby theriskof contamina-
Glycerol
12.5
tionofthesemen withfoot-and-mouth-diseasevirus.
However, it has many advantages over other meth-
Glucose
3
3
ods of extension,for,whereas cryopreserved semen
Potassium chloride
0.4
requiresabout10-25x10spermatozoaperinsem-
Caproicacid
0.3125
ination,semen extendedin ambient tenperature
Preparation of diluent:
diluents can achieve acceptable fertility withfewer
than 2.5x10 sperm per insemination (Shannon
Basicdiluent
80%
80%
et al 1984）.Initial work on ambient temperature
Egg yolk
20%
20%
diluentsforbovine semen was based upon the use
Nitrogen gas
Bubbled for
oftheIVTdiluent(Salisbury&VanDemark196l,
20minat 5°℃
Melrose1962),but the development ofambient
Catalase
4.5mg/l
temperature dilution has subsequently been based
upon the use of the CuE and Caprogen diluents
(Shannon 1965:Table 31.3).With the subsequent
modifications that have taken place, these diluenis
Timing
are now capable of maintaining sperm viability and
Cows ovulate at about 12 hours after the end of
acceptable conception rates for up to 5 days,with
an insemination dose of between 0.5 and 2.5x10
oestrus.The ideal timefor insemination is there-
fore 6-24 hours prior 10 ovulation (Roberts 1986).
sperm per insemination.
Observationsofconceptionratesofanimalsthat
Insemination
were inseminated atdifferent times afteroestrus
(Fig.31.2A) led to the developmentofthea.m.-p.m.
Prior to insemination,straws of semen arewith
rule,bywhichcowsfirst seen inheatin the morning
drawn from liquid nitrogen storageensuring that
were inseminated that afternoon(or that morning),
the canister containing the frozen semen remains
whilethosefirstseeninheatintheafternoonwere
contained within the neck of the storage flask (Fig.
inseminated thefollowingmorning(Olds&Sheath
31.4A).After identification of he sire,excess nitro-
1954,Foote1979).
gen is flicked out of the end of the straw before it is
In fact, the optimal timing of insemination is a
deposited into thawing water(Fig.31.4B).The straw
compromise between many factors. Insemination
ofthawedsemen isthendriedand theidentity of
earlyin oestrus is likely toachieve alow fertiliza-
the sire is re-checked,after which it is loaded into
tion rate,becauseoflimitations on spermviability
theinsemination catheter (Fig.31.4C).After thaw-
whereas eggs that are successfullyfertilized arelilkely
ing, it is important that temperature is controlled:
toyield high-quality embryos.Conversely,insemi
semenmustnotbeallowed tocoolbelowthetem-
nationlateinoestrusislesslikelytoresult inlimita
perature at which it wasremovedfrom the thawing
tions onspermviabilitybutismorelikelytoresult
water.Hence,itisgenerallypreferableto thaw small
in the fertilization ofan aged oocyte,resulting in
numbers of straws at a time, depending upon the
impaired embryo development (Saacke et al 2000).
proficiency of theinseminatorand thetemperature
Accordingto this proposal,the‘optimum’timing
oftheenvironment.
ofinseminationrepresentsacompromisebetween
777
Part
161
The male animal
as the degree to which the sperm have been affected
by the preservation process. The latter can further
involve botlr precapacitation changes and impair-
menl of spermviabilityin thefemaletract.
Site.
Standardmethodofinsemination
Cows are inseminated just into the short iterine
body. The standard technique of insemination is
to grasp the cervix through the rectum with the left
hand.A catheter, into the tip of which a paillette
of semen has been inserted (Figs. 31.4C, 31.5A), is
then passed into tlie vagina and manipulated into
and through the cervix by the right hand.This tech-
nique, the rectovaginal method of insemination,
requires considerable practice for success. The vul
val lips are opened by downwards pressure fron the
arm in the rectum, while the circular folds of vag-
inal mucosa are obliterated by pushing the cervix
fotward. The catheter is initially inserted pointing
upwards at an angle of about 30° to avoid entering
the urethral meatus or fossa, and is then moved hor-
izuntally until it engages in the external os of the
cervix. The left hand squeezes the anterior vagina on
to the caudally projecting external os of the cervix,
thereby obliterating the fornix of the vagina (Fig.
31.5B) and facilitating entry of the catheter into the
cervix. Entry into the external os is accompanied
by a characteristic ‘gritry' sensation. The catheter
is then introduced through the convoluted cervi-
cal canal by manipulation of the cervix through the
rectal wall. One finger is placed over the internal os
of the cervix, so that the tip of the catheter can be
C
palpated as it emerges fron the cervical canal (Fig.
31.5C). As soon as the catheter has emerged, depo-
Fig. 31.4 5emen-handing for bovine artificial insemination.
sition of semen into the uterus begins; the catheter
(A) Withdrawing a straw of frozen semen from the liquid
is advanced no deeper into the uterus. In this way,
nitrogen flask. The canister containing the semen should not
semen should be equally distributed between the
be lifted above the level cf the top of the neck of tne flask.
(B)Thawing.After checking the identity of the sire,the straw
two uterine horns (Figs.31.5D, 31.6). Insemination
is thawed.Water temperature is not really critical but piacing
deeper into the uterus runs the risks of either insem-
essea
inating into the uterine horn contralateral to tie
regime.(C) The straw is placed in an nsemination catheter,
ovulation site or scoring the endometrium with the
whch is then covered with a plastic sheath.The catheter is
tip of the insemination caiheter. Reduced feruility is
then ready for use, but caremust be exercised not to allow
the consequence of these errors,
the semen to hecome ch lled again before it is inseminated.
No forward pressure should be exerted on the
catheter with the right hand, because the uterine
the processes of aging of sperm and cocyte (Fig.
wall is friable and easily penetrated if the catheter
31.2B). However, these processes are also affected by
moves suddenly （Fig.31.7D).The mos1 common
the duration of oestrus and theinterval between the
fault of insemination (Fig. 31.7A) is twisting the cer-
onset of oestrus and ovulation (see Ch. 22), as well
vix in theleft hand,so that one uterine horn is partly
778
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
A
Fig.31.5 Rectovaginal method of insemination.(A)General method.(Redrawn with permission frorn Salisbury et al 1978.)
(B)Partiallydissectedbovineuterusshowinggriponthecervixfor theobliterationofthevaginalfornix,tofacilitateentryofthe
catheterinto theexternal osof thecervix.(C)Second grip on thecervixto allowpassage of the catheter through the tortuous
cervical canal-theindexfingerisgentlypressedover theinternal osinorderfofeel thetipof thecatheterasitemergesfrom
thecervical canal.(D) Siteof depositionof semenin theuterinebody-the,recommended siteisnomore than 0.5cm deep to
the internal cervical os.
Fig.31.6A,BDistributionofsemeninthecowafterartificial insemination.Adark-coloureddyehasbeenplaced into the uterine
body andrunsequallyintobothuterinehorns.Asinseminators aretrainednottopalpatetheuterusorovaries,they should be
unawareof thesideonwhichovulationwill occur,sosemenmusthaveaccesstobothuterinehorns
779
Part
6
Themale animal
occluded.Alternatively,thecatheter maybepartly
stages of the oestrous cycle; such animals are there
withdrawn during the depositionof semen,resulting
fore often beypnd the capabilities of inexperienced
inapartiallyintracervicalinsemination(Fig.3l.7B).
inseminatorsand it is common to find that they
Peneurationofthecervicalcanalofmaidencattleis
deposit the semenintothecaudalpartofthecervix
difficult atoestrus andvirtuallyimpossible atother（Fig.31.7C).However,thecervixofparouscattlecan
Fig.31.7Distribution of dyein the reproductive tractof the cow after faulty insemination.(A)Uterus twisted during insemina-
tion,occluding oneuterine horn.The dyeispresentinonly onehorn;typically theright.(B)Catheterwithdrawn into thecervix
during semen deposition.Some dyeispreseniintheuterine body,butmostiswithin thecervical canal.(C)Failure topenetrate
the cervix: semen deposited in the caudal cervical canal.(D)Penetration of theuterinehorn following excessively deep insemina-
tion.Suchpenetrationsareusually associatedwith theuseofundueforceon thecatheterduringpassageof thecervicalcanal.
780
Chapter
311
Artificial insemination
with greater or lesser difficulty, be traversed at most
to the calving rate,which depends ipon the interval
stages of the oestrous cycle and early pregnancy.It is
after initial insemination atwhich it is calculated.
therefore imperative that it is known whether an ani-
NRR is useful for observing trend in performance
mal is likely to be pregnant before insemination is
and for identifying below average performance.Al
attempted,for abortion can be induced if aninsemi-
nation catheter penetrates the fetalmembranes or
the fertility oftheir bulls and iheresults obtained
ifinfection is intoduced into apregnant uterus by
by their technicians.Bulls that produce consistently
poor insemination hygiene.
low figures are generally slaughtered. Technicians
whose performance is below average are normally
required to undergo a period of retraining and/or
Alternativesitesforinsemination
limited licensure until their figures improve.
Whiletraditionalmethiods ofinsemination avoid
Farm staff can be trained to inseiminate cattle,
deep uterine deposition of semen, this has been
withmany countries allowing‘farmer-inseminators
advocated as a means ofimproving conception rates
to breed their own cattle. There are two potential
(Senger et al 1988,Dalton etal 1999). However, this
advantages that persuade farmers to undertake their
has not been achieved in all studies (e.g. Mckenna
own inseminations:first,the avoidance of the costs
et al 1990) and has not been widely adopted in
associated with having an Al centre technician per-
practice.
form the insemination and,second,the hope that
Single hiorn insemination has also been advocated
improved timingofinseninationtoovulationwil
as a means of improving conception rates. This tech-
raise conception rates. Morton (2000) undertook a
nique requires palpation of the ovaries to determine
widespread survey of theresults achievedby farmer-
the site of ovulation and a careful straightening of
inseminators in comparison to Al centre techni-
the ipsilateral horn to allow the insemination cath-
cians.Overall,farmer-inseminators achieved a 3%
eter to be inserted to within =2 cm of the uterotubal
lower conception rate than centre technicians (45
junction.Again, some authors have found that this
vs 48%). However, while 13% of farmer insemi-
results in improved conception rates (Pallares et al
nators achieved conception rates that were more
1986,Lopez-Gatius & Camon-Llrgel 1988),while
than 5%higher than centre technicians,45%had
oihers have not (Hawk& Tanabe 1986,Momont
results that were more than 5% worse and 12% had
et al 1989).
results that were more than 15%worse than cenire
Despite the equivocal results in field trials, some
technicians.
continue to advocate the use of deep inirauter
In practice, farmer-inseminators who are well
ine insemination,especially in situations in which
trained, motivated, have enough time to perform
semen may be commpronised, as, for example, in
inseminations and havereasoniably large herds tend
bulls whose semen does not respond well to preser-
to achieve good results, whereas those for whom it
vation or when sexed semen is used (f-lunter 2000,
is'another job'or who do not have the opporunity
Lopez-Gatius 2000).
to developagood insemination technique donot
Poor insemination techinique can be associated with
Management of insemination
disastrously poor pregnancy rates.
Inseminations are generally perforned by tecli-
Control of infectious diseases
nicians employed by Al organizations, or by farim
staff.
Many diseases can be spread in bovine semen (Table
Fertility to AI is generally monitored by record-
31.1), while Al centre technicians, by travelling
ing the proportion of cows that are re-presented for
between farms, also pose a considerable risk as dis-
insemination after theinitial service.Theproportion
ease vectors. Consequently, there is legislative con-
of cows thatarenotre-presented is sufficiently closely
trolover ihe healthstatusof semen used in domestic
related totheproportionthatactuallyhavebecorne
trade,while international trade in bovine semen is
and remained pregnant to be a useful monitor of fer-
subject to the requireiments and recommendations
tility (reviewed by Salisbury et al 1978). The figure
of the OIE. There are also controls over the hygienic
thus obtained,the non-return rate(NRR),is an over-
practices of inseminators.Diseases thiat are specifi-
estimate of calving ratebut is generallyin fixedratio
cally regulated by the OiE are listed in Table 31.4.
781
Part
6]
Themale animal
Table 31.4World Organisation for Animal Health requirements for discase testing of sires use cf semen in artificial insemination
programmes (OIE 2008)
Cattle
Sheep and goats
Pigs
Bovine brucellosis
Caorine and ovine brucellosis
Bovine tuberculosis
Bovine tuberculcsis
Ovine epididymitis
Brucella abortus
Bovine viral diarrhoea
Contagiouis agalactia
Brucella suis
Bovine herpesvirus-1
Peste des petitsruminants
Swine vesicular disease
Blue tongue
Paratuberculosis
African swine fever
Campyiobacter fetus suhsp.venerealis
Scrapie
Entercvirus encephalomyelitis
Tritrichomonasfetus
Maedi-visna
Caprine arthritis/encephalitis
Blue tongue
Tuberculosis
Border disease
Contagious caprine pleuropneumonia
Most of the serious viral diseases of cattle(foot
and mouth, rinderpest, cic.) can patentially be trans-
1982). Most importantly, the classic venereal patho-
mitted throughAl.Legislativeregulation of bovine
gens of cattle, T. fetus and C. fetus subsp. fetus are
  n s  s   s 
transmissible by Al, so control of these two organ-
isms remains the second major precept upon which
Occurring. Many of the somewhat less serious viral
legislation governing cattle AI is based.
diseases, such as infectious bovine rhinotracheitis-
Three other conditions warrant specific mention.
infectious pustular vulvovaginitis (IBR-IPV) can also
Firstly, although enzootic bovine leukosis (EBL)
be transmitted thus (Chapman et al 1979, Kahrs et
virus is considered not to be transmissible in semen
al 1980). Recently, it has become apparent that the
(Radostits et al 2007),infected bulls are excluded
bovine viral diarrhoea (BVD) virus can be present in
from AI studs. Secondly, blue tongue virus gener-
the semen of bulls (Barlow et al 1986), potentially
ally causes few or no clinical signs in infected cat-
causing early embryonic death and abortions in
tle（Radostits et al 2007).However,the disease that
inseminated cows (Grahn et al 1984),as well as its
the virus causes in sheep is so severe that semen
better known ability to cause the birth of persistently
from potentially infected bulls(Bowen&Howard
1984)is carefully excluded from most countries in
list B that could be of potential concern to bovine
which sheep production is of economic importance.
AI include Akabane, ephemeral fever and bovine
Finally, Johne's disease is also commonly regu-
immunodeficiency virus. Thibier & Guerin (2000)
lated,as semen from clinical cases and subclinically
reviewed literature suggesting that Akabane virus
infected animals is potentially contaminated with
has not been detected in semen and, while ephen-
the organism.
eral fever and bovine immunodeficiency virus may
In cattle, control of these diseases rests upon three
be present in bull semen, transmission by AI has
major strategies. Diseases that can be detected by
not been demonstrated. There is no evidence that
serology, such as brucellosis,IBR,EBL,Q fever, et
the prion agent responsible for bovine spongiform
are controlled by exclusion of seropositive bulls
encephalopathy (BSE) can be transmitted through
from AI studs.Likewise,tuberculosis is controlled
semen(Wrathall 1997).
by exclusion of bulls that react to tuberculin testing.
A number ofbacterial diseases are transmissible in
Leptospira spp. may be killed by freezing and thawing.
semen,including tuberculosis,brucellosis and lep-
The antibiotics that are added to semen diluents are
tospirosis (Roberts 1986).Histoplilus somni,patho-
intended tokill both pathogenic bacteria (including
genic species of Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma diversum
C.fetis) and the contaminant bacteria hat originate
782
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
fromthepenisandprepuceduringsemen.Antibiotics
ofinseminationhavebeendevised thattrytobypass
are alsoused tocontrolMycoplasmaand Lreaplasma
the cervix.All these methods have had varying suc-
species.The final and most potent means of control
cess in achieving an economically viable com-
of disease is the quarantine of sernen afterits collec-
promise between fertility,technical difficulty and
tion.After semen has been frozen,it is placed in a
numbers of sperm needed for insemination.The
containerwhereit remainsuntouchedfor28 days.
methods in widespread use are iniravaginal,intra
1f, during that period, the donor bull develops any
cervical,transcervical intrauterineand laparoscopic
disease,the semen is destroyed.If notitisreleased
intrauterine(see below).
foruse.
Collectionand storageofsemen
Artificial insemination of sheep
Semeniscollected by an artificialvagina or electro-
ejaculation（see Ch.30)and subjected toroutine
Artificial insemination of sheep has been compre-
examinationformotilityanddensity.Mostinsemi-
hensivelyreviewedbyEvans&Maxwell(19s7)and
nationsofewes areperformedusingsemen thathas
Chemineau et al (1991).The sheep is less amen-
beenextendedbytheadditionofsimplediluents
abletoartificial inseminationthanisthecow,since
since the small volume of the ovine ejaculatemeans
oestruscannotreadilybedetectedwithoutthepres-
that it is difficult to control sperm numbers if used
enceoframs,insemination isless straightforward
for directinsemination.Diluent and thefinal num-
andovine semenislesseasytofreezethanbovine
ber and concentrations of sperm depend upon the
semen.In eastern Europe,South America and
route ofinsemination,whether theinsemination
Australasialiswidelyusedinsheep-breedingo
isundertaken duringthenatural breedingseason
grammes butits use is much less widespread in west-
or after induction ofout-of-seasonbreedingand
ern Europe and North America,mainlybecause of
how thesemen istobestoredbetweencollection
and insemination direct insemination,cooled stor-
compared with the costs of natural service.
age, cryopreservation. Recommendations for sperm
Ewesnormally display oestrous behaviour only
numbers and insemination volume are shown in
in thepresence ofa ram.In orderto determine the
Table31.5
timeatwhichAl shouldbeperformed,itis therefore
necessary either to control the timing of oestrus or
Liquid semen
todetect it with maleanimals.In theformer situa-
tion,pharmacologicalmethodsare used toinduce
Diluents thatareinroutineuseforunfrozen semen
andsynchronizeoestrus,sothatthetimeofthefer-
include buffersthat includecitrate orTris,together
tile period is defined.In the latter situation,rad-
with eithereggyollkorcowsmilk(Table31.6).Where
dled,vasectomized rams are used to detect oestrus.
milk is used itneeds tobeheated to destroy the
Thecost:benefitratiofortheuseofAIin sheephas
spermicidallacienin'protein,soeitherskimmedor
thereforetobeconsideredcarefully.Wherethereare
UHT-treatedmilkisused.After dilution,the semen
substantial costs associatedwithAl,either ofmain-
iscooledandstoredateither+15°Cor+4°Cuntil
taining rams, of drugs (plus their adminisiration)
used.The semen should be used within 8 hours of
for oestrus synchronization or of the procedures
collection,asfertility declines progressively after this
associated with insemination itself, these have to
time(Chemineau et al 1991), with a 30% reduction
be set against the financial benefits gained from the
in lambing rates after storage for 24 hours (Maxwell
superior carcase or wool characteristics of the prog-
&Salamon1993)
enyborn to Al.
However, the most important limitation of the
Cryopreservation
use ofAl in sheepisinthemethodofinsemination,
sinceitis difficultto achieveintrauterineinsemina-
However although such simple diluents arecapable
tionbecausethecervicalcanaloftheeweissotor-
tuous.Sinceintracervical Alresults inbothalower
periodsdemandedfordirectinseminaion,cryopreser-
conceptionrateandalowernumberoflambsborn
vation isrequiredforlong-termstorageofsemen.
per ewe than natural service,a numberof methods
Unforunately,cryopreservation of ovine semen isnot
783
61
Themale animal
Table31.5Minimumnumbersofmotile spermatozoa forinseminationof ewesatdifferentsites（derived fromEvans&Maxwell
1987,Usboko 1995, Shipley et al 2007)
Route
Number of motile sperm (x105)
Tnsemination
Concentrationof
volume
inseminate(x10%/ml)
Fresh
Liquid
Frozen
Vaginal
300
400
0.3-0.5ml
2000
Intracervical
100
150
180
0.05-0.2ml
1000
Transcervical
60
0.1-0.5ml
200-400
intrauterine
Laparoscopic intra-
20
20
20
0.05-0.10mlper
400-800
uterine
horn
Table31.6Diluentsforramsemenforuseat5-15°C(derivedfromEvans&Maxwell 1987,Salamon&Maxwell2000)
Constituent(g/litre)
Tris diluent
Egg-yolk-citrate
Skimmed milk
Tris
36.3
Fructose
5.0
Glucose
5.0
10.0*
Citric acid
19.9
Sodium citrate
23.7
Skimmedmilkpowder
90.0
Egg yolk (mlitre)
140
150
50.0
Antibotics
1000lUpenicillin and1000μg streptomycin/ml
*Recommended byFeredeanet al(1967)foraddition to thebasicskimmedmilk dluent
particularly straightforward,sincetheprocess ofcry
For intrauterine insemination,in which lower
opreservationcausesasignificantlevelofdamageto
numbersofspermatozoa arerequired,farmoresat-
ovine spermatozoa.In consequence,frozen semen is
isfactory dilution rates of semen can be achieved, so
not recommended for intravaginal insemination and,
cryopreservation is more successful. Furthermore,
whileitcanbeusedforintracervicalinsemination,fer-
since the insemination site does not require sperm
tilityresults arerelativelypoor.
totraversethecervix,thesperm donot haveto sur-
There arealsoanumberofdifficultiesencountered
viveinsucharobuststateas isneededforintracer-
whensemenisfrozenforintracervicalinsemination.
vicalinsemination.Hence,theconceptionratesthat
These arise as a relatively large number of sperm
areachievedwith theuseof cryopreserved semenfor
(150-200x10°total sperm:Salamon &Robinson
intrauterineinseminationarecommensuratewith
1962,Langford & Marcus 1982)have to be con-
those ofnatural service after oestrus synchroniza-
tainedwithinthelimitedvolumeofinseminatethat
tion(see,for example,Davis etal 1984)
canbeplacedwithinthe ovinecervix.Sincetheanat-
omyofthecervicalcanal limitstheinsemination
Diluents
volumetobelowabout0.25ml(Evans&Maxwell
1987)the dilutionrates arelimited tobetween1:1
Early diluentsforram semenwerebasedon citrate,
and 1:4.In consequence,insufficient protection can
egg yolk,a monosaccharide such as glucose or fruc-
beaffordedtothespermbythediluentagainstcold
tose,and/or milk.Other cryopreservation diluents
shock and freezing damage (Miller 1986), generally
have been based on disaccharides (e.g lactose), tri-
resultinginmediocrepost-freezingsurvival offunc-
saccharides (e.g. rafinose), complex polysaccha-
tional sperm.
rides (e.g.gum arabic) or other complex molecules
784
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
(eg.polyvinylpyrrolidone).Optimal glycerol
post-thawmembraneintegrity andmotility.Low
concentrationsseemtobeintherangeof4-6%
molecular-weightproteins（15-25kDa)appear to
(Salamon & Maxwell 2000),although this con-
bemost associated with these benefits andit has
centration is affected by other components of the
been postulated that a spermadhesin protein may be
diluent, such as egg yolk and sugars. while early
the critical component.As yet,however, the inclu-
studies suggested that theremight be advantages to
sionofseminalplasma hasnotbeen incorporated
adding glycerol at 5°℃,or to its stepwise addition,
into field practice.
current practice is to add the glycerol at =30°C.Two
diluentswhicharecurrentlywidelyrecommended
Freezing protocols
for ram semen,are Tris-glucose-eggyolk(Salamon
&Visser 1972) and Tris-citrate-fruciose-eggyolk
After dilution,ram semen needs to be cooled
(Shipleyetal2007)（Table31.7),although thereare
slowlyfrom30°Cto5°C,asrapidcoolingbelow
many other diluents that are used successfully in
5°Cis associatedwithpoor sperm survival(Fiser&
commercial orresearchpractice.
Fairfull 1986).Hence,cooling to 5°C should take
The problem of low dilutionrates for semen that
place over 1.5-2 hours: Shipley et al (2007) rec-
istobeused for intracervicalinsemination was
ommend that this is best managed in awaterbath.
addressedbySalamon(Evans &Maxwell 1987) by
During this period of cooling‘equilibration’with
preparing arange of different diluentsfor freezing
glycerol takes place.Thereafter, semen can be suc-
semen at dilution ratios of 1:1 to1:4,in which the
cessfully frozen in pellet form on the surface of
constituents were present in higher concentrations.
blocks of solid carbon dioxide (Salamon 1971) or
In this way,compensation is achieved for the effects
in paillettes in the vapour of liquid nitrogen (Fiser&
oftheratiobetweendiluentandseminalplasma.
Fairfull1984).Thereis,however,muchvariation in
Chemineau et al(1991)dealtwith thesameprob-
the ability of the semen of individual rams to sur-
lem by using two cifferent diluents (an eggyollk-
vive cryopreservation and the semenofaproportion
lactosediluent andaglycerolized skimmedmilk
of rams does not survive freezing successfully.
diluent) in varying proportions depending upon the
final dilutionrate tobe achieved.
turesof35-40°C.Pelletscan bethawed ina dry tube
Recently,altention has been focused on whether
inawaterbathorcanbeplacedinprewarmedthaw-
theinclusionof seminal plasma in cryopreservation
ing solution.lt is suggested that pellets are thawed
diluents will improve the response to cryopreser-
at 40°℃thenmaintainedina30°Cwaterbathuntil
vation.Evidence reviewed byMaxwell et al (2007)
requiredforinsemination(Shipleyetal2007).
suggests that it is generally beneficial in terms of
Insemination
Table31.7Diluentsfor thecryopreservationofram semen
Vaginalroute
(derived frcmEvars &Maxwell 1987,Shipleyetal 2007)
Vaginal insemination deposits semen into the cra-
Constituent
Tris-glucose
Tris-citrate-
nialpartofthevaginawithout attemptingtolocate
fructose
thecervix.Therequirementsofthismethod,in terms
Basicdiluent
ofboth technicalproficiencyandhandlingfacili-
ties for the sheep,are minimal.However,as previ-
Tris(g/litre)
36.3
24.4
ously described,this method requires large numbers
Fructose(g/litre)
10.0
of spermatozoa per insemination and is not really
Glucose(g/litre)
5.0
amenablefor use with stored semen.Moreover,con
Citric acid (g/litre)
19.9
13.6
ception rates are also poor afterpharmacological
oestrus synchronization,so intravaginal insemina
Glycerol (ml/litre)
50.0
64.0
tion isbest suited touse after oestrus detection dur-
Preparation of diluent
ing the natural breeding season.The ideal timing of
Basic diluent
85%
80%
insemination is before ovulation,i.e.12-18 hours
Eggyolk
15%
20%
after theonsetofoestrus(Evans&Maxwell 1987)
Highest conception rates are therefore achieved
785
Part
161
Themaleanimal
whenthetimingofinseminationisoptimized by
drafting ewesforinsemination twiceper day.
Duck-billed
Intracervicalroute
speculum
Uterus
Intracervicalinseminationisbestachievedwith
thehindquarters ofthe eweelevated.After clean-
ing oftheperineum,thevagina is openedwith a
duck-billed speculum and the cervix is located (Fig.
Cervix
31.8A).The insemination catheter is then inserted
as far as possible into the cervix.Penetration of the
A
Pubis
cervixis typically0-2cm.
Insemination
Theconceptionrateishighlycorrelatedwith the
catheter
depthofpenetrationTable31.8;Evans&Maxwell
1987)and,hence,the technical proficiency of the
Gas inflation of
inseminator.Conception rates achieved with the
Illumination
abdomen
useof unfrozen semenbythis method are adequate
after pharmnacological methods ofoestrus synchro-
Insemination
nization(Chemineau et al 1991).Theideal time for
trochar
inseminationis55+1hourafterremovalofintra-
Insemination
vaginalprogesteroneinserts,or 15-17 hours after
catheter
theonsetof detected oestrus.However,evenwhen
substantial numbers ofcryopreserved sperm areused
Cervix
for intracervical insemination,conception rates are
belowthoseofnaturalserviceorfreshsemeninsem-
ination (Colas 1979).Conception rates of 65-80%
aretypical when thismethod is used in the ewes
breedingseasonwithalowerfigureforout-ofseason
Uterus
breeding regimes.
Laparoscopicintrauterineroute
Fig.31.8 Insemination of the ewe:(A)intracervical route.
(B)laparoscopicintrauterine insemination.
The method of direct intrauterine,laparoscopic
inseimination (Fig.31.8B)was developed to over-
come many of the difficulties of intravaginal and
is injected into theuterinelumen via a stab(Killeen
intracervical insemination.In this method,ewes are
&Caffery1982).Thesemencanbeintroducedto the
sedated and restrained in a cradle.Laparoscopy is
uterusviaa simplepipette(Evans&Maxwell 1987)
performed close to theudder.After inflation of the
orbytheuseofspecializedinseminationequipment
abdomenwith CO,theuterus islocated and semen
(Chemineau et al1991).With oestrus-synchronized
Table 31.8Lambirig rates(%)inrelation to the depthof intracervical insemination (frcm Evans&Maxwel 1987)
No.spermatozoaper
Siteofinsemination
inseminate（x10°)
On theentrance fold
Up to 1cm into the
Deeper than 1cm into
of the cervix
cervix
the cervix
400 (undiluted)
50
68.8
71.4
100(dluted)
43.8
66.7
71.4
50 (diluted)
25.7
60.7
66.7
786
Chapter
31
Artificial insemination
ewes,the ideal timing of insemination is between
been developed. In this method, transcervical intra-
48 and 65 hours after withdrawal of progesterone
uterine insemination, the cervix is fixed by being
sponges, with conception rates declining afier 72
grasped with forceps, and an insemination needle
hours post-withdrawal (Salamon & Maxwell 2000).
is introduced as far as possible through its lurnen.
Conception rates to frozen semen inseminated by
Although better conception rates can be achieved
thismethod are higher than for intracervical insemi-
by this method than by conventional intracervical
nation,becauseofbettercryopreservationofsperm
insemination (Souza et al 1994),both the retrac
and a site of insemination that avoids sperm having
tion of thecervix and thepenetration of the cervical
to traverse the cervix. Conversely, the laparoscopy
lumen are associated with significant levels of dam-
is technically demanding and there are far greater
age (Usboko 1995, Campbell et al 1996). Itis prob-
implications for the welfare of the ewes than with
able that, with the development of expertise in the
intracervical insemination.
method, its use will become more widespread but,
The development of laparoscopic iniraurerine
atpresent,it seems to have little tocommend it over
inseinination ofewes is undoubtedly thiemost sig
laparoscopic insemination.
nificant development in sheep Al in recent years, for
it circumventsmany of theproblems of traditional
Conceptionrates toAl
methods (Haresign et al 1986). The mumber of
sperm required for each insemination is lower and
Conception rates depend upon the route and tim-
the volume of inseminate is proportionally greater,
ing of insemination, whether ewes are being bred at
synchronized or spontaneous oestrus and whether
fore betier preservation of sperm. Hence, concep-
fresh or frozen semen is used (Table 31.9).Equally
tion rates arecloser than those of natural service and
importantly, it depends upon the management and
embryonic mortality is reduced to an acceptable
condition of the ewes and thecare with which theAl
level. The method also allows for the possibility of
programme is managed.
genuine progeny testing of rams, as semen from an
individual sire can be used in many flocks over pro-
Control of infectious diseases
longed periods of time. Consequently, laparoscopic
Al hias been adopted in most of the major sheep-
Diseases of sheep and goais that are transmissible
producing countries (Haresign 1992).
in semen and that are regulated by OiE are listed
in Table 32.4.Brcella melitensis and B.abortus can
both be transmitted in semen and, of the organ-
Transcervicalroute
isms responsible for ovine epididymitis, B. ovis
A new method that attempts to achieve an intra-
can be transmitted in semen while the pleomor-
uterine insemination via thecervical routehas also
phic Gram-negative organisms are also excreted in
Table 31.9 Typical lambing rates achieved via different routes of insemination, using fresh or frozen semen (derived
from Shipley et al 2007)
Site of insemination
Semen
Numberof motile sperm
Lambing rate (%)
Intravaginal
Fresh.
400×106
20-60
Frozen
5-20
Intracervical
Fresh
200×106
40-80
Synchronized cestrus
Frozen
25-40
Spontaneous oestrus
Frozen
30-60
Laparoscopic intrauterine
Fresh
20×106
70-95
Frozen
40-80
Transcervical
200×106
40-80
Frozen
30-70
787
Part
161
The male animal
semen.Other significant diseases of sheep andgoats
bulbourethral gland.This enzyme coagulates egg
that arecontrolled inAl donor sires include maedi-
yolk and hydrglyses lecithin to fatty acids and sper-
visna,caprine arthritis encephalitis virussheep pox
micidallysoTecithins(Iritani&Nishikawa1964).It
and goat pox,although there is no clear evidence
isconsideredthattheprimaryactivityof EYCEisvia
fortheir transmission throughsemen (Thibier&
aphospholipase A,but itmay also containlipase
Guerin2000)nor doesitappearlikelythat theprion
(Leboeufetal20o0).Bulbourethralglandsecretions
responsiblefor scrapiecan be transmitted through
also have a toxicinteraction with millk.A 55-60
lisroute(Wrathall1997).
kDa glycoprotein lipase (originally named SBullI
(Nunes et al 1982),now called BuSgp60(Pellicer-
Artificial insemination of goats
Rubio et al1997)),which is structurallyrelated10
pancreatic lipase PLRP2,releases oleic acid from
milk triglyceride(Pellicer-Rubio & Combarnous
Artificial insemination of goats is generally very
1998).Skimmed milk can thereforebeused asa
similar to that of sheep.However, it is much eas-
diluent,although its effectiveness depends upon
iertoachieveanintrauterineinseminationviathe
theextent towhich itcontains anyresidual fat.It
cervix ofthegoatthan thatoftheewe.Secondly,
has been suggested that EYCE and BUSgp6O are
whileoestrus detection ismore efficient in thepres-
the same protein; this possibility remains under
ence ofabuck(or after a synchronizationproto-
investigation.
col),it is possible to detect oestrus in does in the
As a consequence, diluents for goat semen have
absence ofabuck(Nuti2007).Consequently,there
either been based upon skimmed milk,in which the
has been a significant uptake of Al as a means of
sperm surviveadequately,ortheseminalplasma has
breeding goats, in both the commercial and life-
been removed before using egg-yolk-based diluents
style sectors. In France,for example, the numbers (Cortel 1974).Where yolk-based diluents are to be
ofgoatinseminationsincreasedfourfoldduringthe
used,washingthespermatozoaisachieved(Corteel
1980s(Chemineauetal1991).Ontheotherhand,
there are dificulties in preserving buck semen,
solution and centrifugation.
whether cooled or cryopreserved,because of toxic
interactions berween seminal plasma and milk
Liquid semen
egg-yolk-based extenders.
Two main strategies have developed for the use of
liquid semen in goat AI.
Collection and storage of semen
Semen is generally collected using an artificial
Chilled semen in simple diluents
vagina (AV). It can be collected by electroejaculation
·Removalof seminal plasmabywashingina sim
but this islesswell tolerated than in theram and,as
plebuffer,followedby dilutionineggyolk-citrate
it affects thecomposition ofseminalplasma,it can
or egg yolk-tris-fructose diluent and use at 5°℃
reducetheabilityofspermto survivepreservation
(Haibel1986,Evans&Maxwell 1987,Chemineau
(Leboeufetal 20o0).Bucks are seasonal breeders,
etal 1991).
with a decrease in the quality and quantity of semen
produced in the spring and summer.This decline
·Becauseremovalofseminalplasmaistime-con-
can be mitigated if bucks continue to copulate regu-
suming and leads to loss of total sperm numbers,
skimmed-milk diluents can be used as an alterna-
larly throughout theyear(Corteel 1981).
tive for storage at 5°C.The effective life span of
semen in skimmedmilk diluenisisrelatively short
Effectsofseminal plasma upon storage
（around 12h)but,despite this,skimmed milk
Themajorproblemwiththepreservationofgoat
semen is thatthere arecomponents inseminal
·Low levels of inclusion ofegg yolk (=2.5%) do not
plasmathatimpairtheviability ofsperm stored
resultinthetoxiceffectsof highinclusionrates,so
in media containing milk andeggyolk.The toxic
glucose-citrateor tris-fructoseplus alowconcen-
trations of eggyollkhas also been used effectively
coagulatingenzyme(EYCE)'thatis secreted by the
(Shamsuddinetal2000).
788
Chapter
31
Artificialinsemination
Ambient temperature diluents
that it is usually thepreferredmethodof cryopreser-
vation.Although much variation exists between
·If sperm are not cooled below15°℃,eggyolk is
individual animals,overall results with doses of50
notneeded topreventcold shock(Leboeufet al
x10motilefrozen-thawed sperminseminated into
2000).Slimmed milk and the commercial,soya-
theuterusarecomparablewith those ofnatural ser-
lipid-based diluent Biociphos Plus (IMV,LAigle,
vice(Ritar & Salamon 1983）.Yet the relationship
France)can maintain sperm viability at 15-22°℃
betweennumbersofspermatozoa andfertilityisnot
for=24 hours（Paulenz et al2005).
well known,sincefewdatafrom large-scalesurveys
·Defined diluents,based on the antioxidant
on the subject exist.Nevertheless,Haibel (1986)
TEMPOL(4-hydroxy-2,2.6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-
suggests that 100-125x10° spermatozoa are used
1-oxyl)(Mara et al 2007) phosphocaseinate
per insemination,while Evans &Maxwell (1987)
(Leboeufet al2003),have alsoproved effective.
recommendsimilarnumberstothoseusedinsheep.
Semenis thawed usingsimilarprotocolstothosefor
theram.
Cryopreservation
For cryopreservation, egg-yollk-based diluents are
Insemination
morewidelyusedthan slimmed-milk-basedones,
althoughacceptableresults can be achievedwith
Similarroutesofinseminationcanbeusedin the
skimmed milk （Corteel 1974).The most widely
doe to those employed in the ewe.Intravaginal
used diluents(Leboeufetal 2000)are skimmed-
insemination is effective if fresh semen is directly
milk-glucose (Corteel 1974) and Tris-glucose-
inseminated(Nuti2007) butgivespoorresultswith
citric-acid-egg-yolk (Salamon &Ritar 1982).When
extended orfrozen semen.Hence,themain means
thefinalconcentration ofeggyolkiskept below
ofinsemination are intracervical insemination or
2.0%of the diluent（Ritar&Salamon 1982),egg-
laparoscopic intrauterine.Intracervical insemina-
yolk-baseddiluentscanbeusedwithoutremovalof
tion is the most widely practised method,espe-
seminal plasma.Glycerol is the most effective cryo-
cially in‘lifestyleherds.In a significant number of
does,anintrauterineinsemination canbe achieved
Chemineauetal(1991)recommend that,forwashed
via theintracervicalroute,since the caprine cervix
sperm,primary dilution should bein glycerol-free
isrelativelyeasiertotraversethan theovinecervix.
egg-yolk-citrate diluent, followed by addition of
Interestingly, although intrauterine insemination
diluent containing 14% glycerol once the semen has
can beachieved simply by direct pressure of the
reached 4C.However,whereunwashed sperm are
insemination catheter upon thecervix,many tech-
used, semen can be glycerolized in a single step at
nicians prefer to deposit at least some of the semen
30°C（Ritar&Salamon1982,1983)
into the cervical canal,in case the intrauterine
For intracervical insemination,here are similar
inseminationhadbeen entirely into a single uterine
problems of sperm numbers in relation to the vol-
horn (Haibel 1986).Nuti (2007),however, suggests
ume ofinseminatetothosethat applyinthe sheep.
that therates ofinsemination failure afterintracervi-
Hence, Salamon (Evans &Maxwell 1987) also sug-
cal insemination arerelatively high,either because
gestedvariable composition extenders(which also
of failure toenter the cervix properlyor because of
contain a final concentration ofegg yolk of less than
damage to the cervix or uterus during the insemi-
2.0%)for one-step dilution ofgoat semen foruse
nationprocess.Depth ofinsemination isrelated to
in intracervical inseminationatdilutionratesof
pregnancy rate: intrauterine insemination result-
between 1:1 and 1:4.
ing in the highest rate, with the chances of concep-
Semen can be frozen either by the pellet method
tion declining significant as the site of deposition
（i.e. on the surface of solid carbon dioxide), or in
becomes further caudalin thecervix(Salvador et
paillettesthataresuspendedoverthevapourofliq-
uid nitrogen orusedinprogrammablefreezers.Post-
determinant of pregnancy success.
thaw recoveryrates arebetter with pellet freezing
Laparoscopic intrauterine insemination is per-
thanwithother methiods（Purdy2006)but,since
formedinthesamewayasin theewe.Ithasthe
acceptablerecoveryratesareachievedwiththelatter
advantagesofrequiringalower doseof sperim(=20
method,theconvenienceofhandlingsemenmeans
x10)andachievingahigher pregnancyratethan
789
Part
61
The male animal
intracervical insemination,butismoredemanding
Collection and storage ofsemen
to perform.Sohnrey &Holtz(2005) suggested that
Semen is maflually collected from boars in the pres-
deep cornealtranscervicalinsemination produces
ence ofa dummy sow(see Ch.3O).The frequency
resultsthat areatleast asgoodas that achievedby
of collection depends upon the semen characteris-
laparoscopy.
tics of individual boars but it is somewhere among
onceevery 2-3 days(Evans&McKenna1986),every
Artificial insemination of pigs
3-4days(Almondetal1998)or every 4-5 days
(Reed 1982).The pre-ejaculatory fluid is discarded,
while the post-sperm-rich fraction is filtered to sepa-
One of the main stimuli to the use of Al in pig
breeding is the possibility it confers of maintaining
rate the gel fraction.Between 100ml and 150ml of
a closed herd,by obviating the necessity of intro-
sperm-rich semenis produced,which,after evalua-
tionfor densitymotility and sperm morphologyis
ducing purchased boars.Furthermore,because the
diluted for insemination.
traitsofeconomicimportancein thepig-carcase
conformation, growth rate and feed conversion
Liquid semen
efficiency-havehighheritability and can beevalu
ated in the sires themselves, genetic selection can
Around99% ofpig inseminationsare undertaken
beintense,so that the potentialvalue ofAl boars
usingliquid semen(Johnsonetal2000)and,since
inenhancingthegeneticbaseofabreedingherdis
pig sperm are highly sensitive to cold shock,nearly
considerable.
allof these use ambient-temperature diluents.
Traditionally, the use of Al in pig breeding has
Where semen is to be stored at ambient tempera-
been greatest in eastern Europe and in countries,
tures,theactivity ofsperm has tobeinhibited to
suchas Holland and Denmark,withveryhighden-
ensureadequateperiodofviability.
sities of pigs. However,there has been a marked
Diluents,which are designed tobeused at ambi-
increase in the use ofpigAl in many other coun-
enttemperature,wereinitially,throughoutthe1960s
tries, in parallel with the improvements in Al tech-
and 1970s,based upon the Illinoisvariable temper-
nology and the demand for high-genetic-merits
ature（IVT)diluent(Paquignon 1984).Thesehave
sires (Johnson et al 2000). In the UK, only about
more recently been superseded by diluents such as
9%ofthenational herdwasbredbyAlinthesurvey
the Guelph(=Kiev)diluent,BTS（BeltsvilleThawing
oflritani(1980),whereasin 2004 the figure was
Solution)
diluent and Zorlesco diluent (Haeger
60-70%(Goss 2004].The USA has seen a similar
&Mackle 1971,Pursel&Johnson 1975,Goltardi
growth of Al in pigs over the same period (lohnson
etal1980).The Guelph diluentissimpler than the
elal20o0).Most inseminationsin theUKareper-
IVT diluent topreparebut maintains theferility of
formed byfarmstaff,as thecosts ofa technician
semenforasimilarlengthoftime.Themorecompli-
service are too great to be economically viable,
cated Zorlesco diluentmaymaintain semen fertility
althoughtechnician servicesareavailablein some
forupto12days,althoughfieldtrialsindicatedthat
other countries.
theeffectiveperiod isprobably shorter than that.
Two main difficulties exist in pig Al.First, the
Newer diluents, such as the Zorpva(Cheng 1988)
periodofmaximumfertility isnotparticularly easy
Reading（Revell & Glossop 1989)and Androhep
to detect in sows(Evans &McKenna 1986),so that
(Weitze 1990)diluents have reliably maintained
animals havetraditionallyhad tobeinseminated
sperm fertility over longer periods of up to5 days
two (or even three) times during oestrus to maxi-
and are, consequently, in increasingly widespread
mize conception rate and litter sizeSecondly,the
use（Almondetal1998),although themostwidely
semen of boars has a short storage lifebecause of
useddiluentintheUSA istheBTS(Johnsonetal
itsinabilitytosurvivecryopreservationadequately.
2000).Examples of short-and long-term diluents
Hence,insemination of sows has been based upon
are given in Table31.10.
multiple insemination ofsemen that has been
Insemination doses are variously recommended to
extended but not chilled (Reed 1982), using large
contain a minimum of1x10sperm,with increased
numbers of sperm (=2.5x10).This has meant that
numbers wheresemen isnot usedon thedayofcol-
eachcjaculateproducesonlyasmallnumberof
lection. Althouse (2007) suggests that, as a rule of
insemination doses.
thumb,sperm numbers areincreased byIx1ofor
790
Chapter
31
Artificial insemination
Table31.10Diluentsforambient temperaturepreservationof boarsemen(derivedfromHaeger&Mackle1971,Evans&McKenna
1986,Cheng1988,Weitze1990,Almondetal1998,Johnsonet al2000)
Constituent(g/litre)
Short-term (up to 3 days)
Long-term(3-5days)
Guelph (Kiev)
BTS
Zorlesco
Zorpva
Androhep
Dglucose
60.0
37.0
11.5
11.5
26.0
Di-sodium EDTA
3.7
1.25
2.3
2.35
2.4
Sodium hydrogen carbonate
1.2
1.25
1.25
1.75
1.2
Trisodium citrale
3.7
6.0
11.7
11.65
8.0
Citric acid
4.1
4.1
TRIS
5.50
5.5
HEPES
9.0
Polyvinyl alcohol（typeIl)
1.0
Bovine serum albumin
2.5
Cysteine
0.1
0.07
Antibiotics
Lincomycin,spectinomycin,gentamicin,neomycinand/orbenzylpenicillinplusstreptomycin
every dayofdelayininsemination:hence acommon
and highly variablebetween individual sires,and
doserateforcommercialboarAlservicesis2.5x10
fertilityofsemenisinvariablysubstantiallybelow
sperm (Roca et al 2006a). If semen is collected in
that of extended semen.Typical results for frozen
situationsinwhich sperm density cannotbe deter
semen are,at best,70%of sows conceiving to a dou-
mined accurately,oris forlocal usewithinabreed
ble insemination,compared with s0-90%for liquid
ing establishment,conservative dilution at 1:4-1:7
semeninsemination.Littersizeisalsolowerafter
is recommended (Althouse 2007), to result in
frozen than after liquid semen insemination(Roca
etal2006b).Consequently,only=1%ofpiginsemi-
volumeofmaterial thatisinseminatedisimportant,
nationsusefrozensemen,whichislargelylimitedto
becauselow-volumeinseminationfailstoachieve
sementhathasbeentraded internationally.
acceptableconceptionrates.Hence,atotalinsemina-
There are twomajorlimitations to success infreez-
tion volume of 70-100ml (typically 80 ml) is used.
ingboar semen.Firstly,itishighly sensitive tocold
The necessity for using such a large volume is prob-
shock andneither egg yolk nor skimmed milk pro-
ably to stimulate uterine motilityin the sow, thereby
vides anything like the degree of protection against
ensuringthatadequatenumbersofspermreachthe
coldshockthatitprovidestothesperm ofmost
siteof fertilization.Semen is typically packaged into
other species (Watson 1979). Secondly,while glyc-
plastic tubesflatpacks or botles and ismaintained
erol isprobably thebest cryoprotectant for the sperm
above15oCpriortoinsemination.
of boarsits toxic effects upon sperm are more pro-
ForAlincommercialpiggeries,itiscommonprac-
nouncedinthis speciesthan inmostothers(Wilmut
ticetomixthesemenof differentboarsininsemina
&Polge 1974).In consequence,the numbers of
tion doses.Thisreduces therisk associatedwith the
sperm that arerequired toobtain even themediocre
responses ofindividualboars'semen to extension
conceptionrates that follow the use of cryopreserved
and dilution,malingthe outcomes ofinsemination
semen areveryhighindeed:typically5-6x10sperm
morepredictable(Codetetal 1996).
per insemination dose（Paquignon 1984).Hence
whenfrozensemenisused,onlyaboutfive animals
can be inseminated per ejaculate.This low exten-
Cryopreservation
sionrateeffectivelylimitstheuseoffrozensemento
The semen of boars does not generally respond well
intermational trafficinpiggenetics andtothepreser-
to cryopreservation.Recovery after thawing is poor
vationofgenestocksforfutureuse.
791
Part
161
The male animal
A great deal of work has been undertaken to
Rather, they have undergone significant capacitation-
improve the results of cryopreservation of porcine
like changes that reduce the duration of their survival
semen,which,despite theunpromising appearance
inthefemaletract.Re-examinationof theinsemina-
ofearly studies,hasresulted in better and orecon-
tion process with regard to the site of deposition of
sistent survival of freezing.Progress has been made
semen and the timingofinsemination(seebelow)
inanumber of areas(reviewed by Johnson et al
is allowing significant improvements in pregnancy
2000,Rocaet al2006b).
ratesand littersizestocryopreservedsemen.
Improvementindiluents
Currentpractice
The protectiveeffectofggyolk is greatlyimproved
Saravia el al(2005) summarize the processing of
when detergent(Orvus Es Paste(OEP))isadded
semen forfreezing,basedon methods described
tothe extender,probably as it breaks down thefat
byEriksson&Rodriguez-Martinez（2000a,b).After
globules and allows better interaction of the egg
holding at room temperature for =1 hour, the semen
phospholipids with themembranes.
is extended 1:1 in BTS.The extended semen is held
Addition ofantioxidants such as vitamin E,glu-
at I6°Cfor3hours,after which itis centrifuged
lathione or superoxide dismutase prevents lipid
at S00g for 10 minutes.After centrifugation,the
peroxidation during freezing and thawing.
supernatant is discarded and the pellets are resus-
pended in a lactose-egg-yolk diluent. The semen is
then cooled to5°Cover 2 hours in the centrifuge.
Improvementincontrol offreezing
Thereafter,semenismixedwith afurherlactose-egg
Temperature control is a critical aspect of the suc-
yolk extender, which also contains OEP and glycerol
cesswith which thesperm of any species canbefro-
(to give a final concentration of 3% glycerol).
zen.The large-volume straws (5-6ml) in which pig
After packaging into appropriate containershe
semen has traditionallybeenfrozen do not provide
semen is frozen in staticliquidnitrogen vapour or
good control of temperature, either during freez-
in a programmable freezer. The optimal cooling rate
ing or during thawing, especially in the centre of
over the range 0 to-50°℃ is generally accepted as
the straw.Much better responses are achieved when
being-30°C/min (lohnson et al 2000).This cooling
semen ispackaged into 0.5ml strawsin aliquotsof
rate has to bematched by a very rapid thawing rate
=2x 10” spern, then diluted post-thaw 1o an appro-
of1200°C/min.
priate volume for insemination.Alternative‘flat
pack'systems of freezing have alsobeen developed,
Insemination
but ensure even cooling throughout the pack.
The optimum time for Al is during a 24-hour period
in themiddleofthe50-60hoursofoestrus,sothat
Selection of sires
capacitatedsperm arepresentatthetimeofovula
tion.Thehighestfertility results are achieved when
Boars can be selected for response to freezing: selec-
insemination is undertaken 10-12 hours prior to
tion for'good freezers results in more consistent
ovulation (Evans & Mckenna 1986).However, the
quality of frozen-thawed semen and fewer ejaculates
interval betweentheonsetofoestrusandovulation
that fail to survive the freezing process.Roca etal
isvariable,whileeventwice-dailyoestrusdetection
(2006a)evensuggestthat boarsemen should betest-
maynot accuratelypinpoint the onsetofoestrous
frozen for identification of'good’and‘bad'freezers.
behaviour.Hence,it is recommended that optimal
In this context it is interesting to note that,in the
conception rates and liter sizes are achieved by
early days of bovine Al,a similar selection process
delayinginseminationuntil12-18hoursafterthe
was practised,with an effective elimination ofbad
first detection of oestruswith a second insemina
freezers (at least of dairy breeds) from studs.
tion12hours（Evans&Mckenna 1986)or18-24
hours(Almondetal 1998)later.Themostwidely
used means of inseminating sows is the method
Insemination
developed by Rowson （1962) and Melrose&
Recent years have seen therecognitionthatsperm that
O'-lagen(1959) by passing a spiral rubber catheter
survive freezing are not unchanged by the process.
into thecervixofthesow（Fig.31.9).The catheter
792
Chapter
31
Artificial insemination
using signs other than those of behavioural oestrus,
Large-volume insemination
acceptable ferility might be achieved with a sin-
gle insemination.Ulltrasonography has been used,
but scanning has to be undertaken frequently to
give a useful prediction of the timing of ovulation
（Bortolozzo et al 2005, Sumransap et al 2007).
Tip of catheter
Hence, ultrasound-based prediction of ovulation
locked intofold
has yet to be refined to a point at which it is use-
ofcervix
Melrose
ful incommercialpractice(Soedeetal1998,Serret
catheter
et al2005).Controllingthetime ofovulation with
gonadotrophins (GnRH,hCG,eCG) (de Rensis etal
2003,deBaer&Billei2004,Kauffoldetal2007）,
whether applied after the onsetofobservedoestrus
orgivenatafixedpointafter weaning,hasbeen suc-
cessfullyusedtoallowadequatefertilitytosingle
inseminations.However,where single insemina-
tionsareused,thetiminginrelationtoovulation is
critical(Garciaet al 2007).
Intrauterine insemination has been performed in
Fig.31.9 Insemination of the sow,using a Melrose-type
the caudal part of the uterus (postcervical insemina-
cathe:er.
tion(PCi) or deep within the uterine horns (deep
uterine insemination（DuI)).Bothareachieved by
passing an insemination device through a conven-
is rotated into the cervix until its spiral groove
tional Al catheter;the deviceforPClisrigid,thatfor
becomeslocked into the cervical canal.Thecervi-
DUl is longer, finer and more flexible.PCI insem
callockpreventsthe catheterfrombecoming dis-
ination requires more than 1x10 sperm for lit-
lodged ifthesowmovesduringinsemination and
ter size to be acceptable,although pregnancy rates
prevents lossof thelargevolume of fluid thathas to
aregoodevenwithlowernumbersofsperm.Dul
be inseminated.
with600x10spermis expected togive similar
However,there arevery substantial losses ofsperm
results interms of pregnancy rate and litter size to
afterinsemination（reviewed byRoca etal 2006a)
conventional intracervical insemination with2-3x
Some30-40%ofthesemenflowsbackwardsout
10sperm(Roca et al2006b).Laparoscopic meth-
ofthecervix and,ofthespermthatemain,many
odshavebeendeveloped,inwhichsmallnumbers
become trapped in the cervix or are eliminated by
of sperm are deposited into the ampullary part of
theimmune system of theuterus.Hence,9o%ofthe
the uterine tubevery close to the time of ovulation
sperm are eliminatedwithin 2-3 hours ofinsemina-
(Vazquezetal2006).Thishasbeenusedexperimen
tion and,of the=3x10sperm thatare inseminated,
tally forsex-semen inseminations,withgoodresults
onlylxl0becomeestablishedattheuterotubal
(Rocaet al 2006b).However, themethods donot
junction.This loss of sperm is exacerbated when
yet appear to be feasiblefor commercial use since
they arefunctionally impaired (eg.when they have
they require general anaesthesia of the sow.
suffered damage through cryopreservation),with
numbers at theuterotubal junctionbeing tenfold
Inseminationby farmstaff
lower than with liquid semen.
In order to make theprocess of pigAl more eff-
AsemendeliveryservicewasintroducedintotheUK
cient, two new approaches are being developed:
in the mid-1960s(Melroseetal1968),sincewhen
moreprecise synchronizationofthetimingof
it has undergone steady expansion.Processed semen
inseminationwiththat ofovulationsand intrauter-
is despatched from the processing centre to farms,
ine insemination.
wherethe farm staff,usingconventional intracer-
Fertility is maximal when insemination is per-
vical insemination catheters,inseminates the sows.
formed up to 12-18 hours before, or just after,
This systemallows double inseminations1o be
ovulation (Nissen et al 1997).Hence,if he tim-
performed and the risk of disease transmission is
ingofovulation canbeidentifiedmore accurately
minimal.It requires some technical proficiency on
793
Part
6
Themale animal
thepart of thefarm staff in terms ofoestrus detec-
Bacterial pathogens include Brucella suis,
tion, as well as in the insemination procedure itself.
Staphylococcusy aureus,Stureptococcus spp.and
The use of Al with delivered semen has also
Mycoplasme spp., which are transmitted by the vene
receivedconsiderableimpetusfrom increased useof
Tealroute and have significant effects upon sow
batch management of pig herds.Thus, large groups
fertility.Leptospira serovars andErysipelothrix rlusio-
ofsows areweaned simultaneously,in thelnowl-
pathiae,whilenotdirectlyspread throughsemen,are
edge thatmost of them will be in oestrus at a pre-
spread as urinary contaminants,so contamination
dictable interval after weaning. Standing or advance
of thesemen throughcontactwith urineorthepres-
orders are placed for the semen to inseminate these
ence of the organisms within the prepuce is likely
sows,with small numbers of boarskept tomate the
(Cutler 1986)
smallproportionofsowsthatreturnto oestrus out-
More seriously,classical swine fever(hogcholera),
sidethepredictedtimeperiodandtodetectand
African swine fever and Aujeszky's disease can also
mate animals thatfail to conceive.
be spread through semen,as can foot-and-mouth
On-farm collectionand insemination programmes
virus(Cutler 1986,Mengeling1986,Almond et al
canbeusedwherelargenumbersofsowshavetobe
1998).Porcine reproductive and respiratory syn-
inseminated as cheaply as possible.In this situation,
drome (PPRS)virus can be shed in the semen and
inseminations areperformedwithraw ordiluted
can be transmitted by insemination, although it
semen immediately after collection.Ina number
is not specifically controlled by OlE(Yaeger et al
of countries,Al centres have provided producers
1993).Likewise,parvovirus and Japanese encepha-
with semen diluent for on-farm inseminationpro-
litiscan also potentially be transmitted by semen
grammes.This method minimizes the risk of disease
（Thibier&Guerin2000）
transmissionbut limits each farm tousing theboars
AIstudsundertakeserological testingofboars to
ithas available.Access to performance/progeny-
ensurethatheycarryneithervenereallytransmitted
tested sires isthereforelimited.
diseases nor other conditions that might jeopardize
the health status of theherd.Antibiotics areaddedto
Inseminatorservice
semen toremovenon-specific andpathogenicbac-
teria.However,themost valuable means of control-
Technicians employed by AI centres take the semen
ling disease transmission is to quarantine incoming
from the centre to the farm,where they inseni
boarsfora month,duringwhich time observations
natethe sows.Thiswas the main form ofinsemi-
for signs of clinical disease and/orfurther serologi-
nation serviceinwesternEuropewhenpigAl first
cal testing are undertaken.
started,butit hasfallen progressively into disfavour,
exceptinregions ofexceptionallyhighpigdensity.
Inseminator servicesgenerallyprovide onlyasingle
Artificial insemination ofhorses
insemination ofthesowinagivenoestrusperiod,
resultingin significantlylower conception rates and
lower numbersofpigletsper litter than are achieved
Artificial insemination of horses has been practised
by natural service(Reed 1982）.Also,the costof a
for many years.Until recently, most of the breed
technician serviceishighinrelationto thevalueof
ing by Al took place in eastern Europe,theformer
the progeny,especially as litter sizes are lower than
LSSR(Tischner 1992)and China.Conversely,devel-
withnaturalseivice.Furthermore,itinerant insemi-
opment of Al in horses in Western countries was
nators are potential vectors for disease transmission
hampered for a long time by the refusal of key regis-
between farms.Therefore the trends towardsclosed
tration authorities to allow the registration of foals
bred by AI. However,therecent acceptance of such
herdsand‘minimal disease'precautions onmost
pig farms have mitigated against the use of such
registrationsbythe American QuarterHorseand
technicians.
American Paint Horse associations(Loomis 2001)
hasprovidedasignificantimpetustothedevelop-
Controlof infectious diseases
mentofequineAI.Thus,althoughtheThoroughbred
Breeders'Associationrenmains unwilling to allowreg-
A large number of pathogens can be transmitted
istration of foals conceived by Al,most other breed
through boar semen. The diseases that are specifi-
societiesallowrestrictedorunrestrictedregistrations
cally controlled by OlE are listed in Table31.4.
ofAl-bredfoals.
794
Chapter
311
Artificialinsemination
There are a numberoftechnicaldifficultiesthat
etal 2003).Incommercial Al programmes,itmay be
havetobeovercomeinthedevelopmentofAlpro-
advantageoustotrainstallionstomountabreeding
grammes for horses:
phantomdummy-mounting device, in preference
Semen collection:Coitus in horses is relatively
to the use of mares.
protracted, which makes semen collection rather
more difficult thaninotherlarge herbivores,and,
Liquid semen
as thesemen is fractionated,the sperm-richcom
Aftercollectionequine semenrequires careful tem-
ponenthastobeseparatedfromtheremainderof
theejaculate（Brinsko&Varner1993)
perature control toprevent damage tothe sperm by
cold shock（Brinsko&Varner 1993）.Ifthemares
Storage of semen: Stallion semen is relatively sus-
that are to be inseminated are close by insemina
ceptible to damage due to cold shock and cryo-
tion can be performed directly usingraw semen,
preservation(Amann 1984)
but it is generally preferable toplace the semen in a
·Insemination:Synchronizing insemination with
diluent,evenifitisfordirectinsemination straight
ovulation has to be accurate.However,becauise
away. Simple diluents,(eg. skimmed milk plus anti
of thevariability and duration ofoestrusin the
biotics; Table 31.11), used at a ratio of 1:1 or 1;2,
mare,predicting thetimeofovulation isdifficult
with semenmaintainedat ambient temperatures are
withoutregular andfrequentexamination of the
adequateif thesemenistobeusedwithin6hours
mare.On the other hand,insemination of the
ofcollection(Samper2007).
mare ismucheasier thaninseminationofthecow,
Equine semen can also be stored for longer peri-
because the equinecervix issoft and doesnothave
odsoftimebeforeinseminationifitiscooled.Most
a convoluted luminalcanal.
that at 4-6°C is the ideal temperature(although
there are some reports of better results at 15° or
Collection and storage of semen
Semen is normally collected by AV(see Ch.30).
based upon milk, using either skimmed milk,
Because it is necessary to remove the gel fraction
cream-gel ('half-and-half cream partially set with
of the ejaculate beforeprocessing the semen for Al,
gelatine) or fat-free dried mill powder. Kenney's
some peoplepreferiouseanopen-endedAVtoallow
diluent （Kenney clal 1975)and iis very close
collection of the separate fractions of the ejaculate.
derivative（Francletal 1987）EZ Mixin (Animal
Alternatively, the gel fraction can be separated by use
Reproduction Systems,Chino,CA) are probably
ofanylonmeshfilterplaced in theAVorsemenbot
the most widely used diluents in the USA,because
tle at the time of collection,orbyfiltration through
oftheirsimplicityofuseandthieeasewithwhich
gauze after collection.The latter is associatedwitha
sperm can bevisualized after dilution (Blanchard
greater loss of sperm than othermethods(Blanchard
etal2003)(Table31.11).
Table31.11Diluents for short-term storage ofequine semenat4°C(derived fromKenney et al 1975,Tischner1992,
Brinsko&Varner 1993,Blanchard etal2003)
Component(g/litre)
Skimmed milkdiluent
Modified Kenney
Egg-yolk-glucose
(Kenney)
extender
Fat-free driedmilkpowder
24
24
Cow's milk(pasteurized)
Glucose
49
26.5
70
Sucrose
40
Sodium hydrogen carbonate
1.5
Eggyolk
70ml
Antibiotics
PenicilinG,streptomycin,gentamicin,polymyxinBand/oramikacin arecommonly
added
795
Part
61
Themaleanimal
Other diluents that are used for cooled storage
Cryopreservation
of equine senmen are based on millk plus egg yolk
orarechemically defined(e.g.INRA-96).Diluents
Stallion semten has been successfully cryopreserved
based on egg-yolk appear to provide best pro-
(Picketi&Amann1993),using low concentrations of
lectionwhen seminalplasinais removed(Jasko
glycerol, in diluents containing sugars, egg yolk and/
et al 1992),whereas milk-based diluents support
or skimmed milk.Prior to freezing. seminal plasma
cooled storage less well when seminal plasma is
isremovedbycentrifugation,usually aftertemporary
completelyremoved,butthis effecican be over-
extensionofthesemeninadiluentthatwill maintain
come if the diluent is supplemented with salts
its viability at ambient temperatures.Various diluents
have been used for this step,including UHT skimmed
milk-based diluents that are supplemented with
milk, Kenney's diluent, lactose-EDTA, INRA-2 (glu-
Tyrode's salts require the removal of seminal
cose, lactose,rafinose,citate,Hepes, plus egg yolk
plasma for maximal sperm survival (Katila etal
(Vidament 2005)) and EDTA-citrate. To minimize
2005).The defined diluent INRA-96,which is
damagetosperm duringthecentrifugation process,
based on Hank's salts supplemented with67
semen may be‘cushioned’bylayeringit onto a high-
mmol/1 glucose,126mmol/1 lactose and 27g/l
viscosity solution before centrifugation.High concen-
native phosphocaseinate （Batellier et al 1998,
trationsflcosernsenertstonicbstane
Paglet al 2006),gives pregnancy rates that arebet-
(eg.Cushion-Fluid,Minitub,Landshut, Germany)
ter than simple skimmed-milk diluents,especially
(Siemeet al2006)havebeen used as thebasis for
for stallionswhose semen does notrespondwell
cushioning media for centrifugation.After discard
to simple diluents（Batellier etal200l).Webb&
ingthe supernatant,thesemen isresuspendedin the
Humes(2o06) showed that furtherimprovements
freezing diluent.Itisthen slowly cooledfrom ambi-
lo theperformanceofsemeninINRA-96canbe
ent temperatures to4°℃,since slowcooling over this
obtainedbyremovaloftheseminalplasmaby
phase is preferable to rapid cooling.
centrifugation.Masuda et al (2004) suggested that
Freezing diluents are typically based on sugars,
a diluent based on 2% milk casein plus 5% egg
buffers and egg yolk; many are available commer-
yolk also gave good results.
cially and many others have been described in the lit-
With thesediluents,therateofcoolingfrombody
erature.Among these, Kenney plus 4% clarified egg
temperature to19°Cisnot critical butbetween
yoll,INRA-82 plus 20% egg yolk or lactose-EDTA
19°and 8°C,slowcooling（ideally 0.1-0.3°/min;
plus 20% egg yolk (Pickett& Amman 1993, Loomis
nomorethan0.5°C/minute)isnecessarytoavoid
2006);have been widely used as freezing media.
causingcold shock(Douglas-Hamilton etal 1984,
Recent studies suggest that defined media contain-
Katila 1997).Below8°C,rateofcoolingisnotcriti-
ingegg-or soy-derivedphosphatidylcholine(Ricker
cal.Controlling the rate ofcooling semen in the
et al2006)maintain sperm survival duringfreezing
field has been greatlyfacilitated by cooled-storage
at least as well as diluents,which contain whole egg
units such as the Equitainer (Hamilton Research,
yolk.Glycerol is the best-tolerated cryoprotectant,
Inc.South Hamilton,MA).In this system,diluted
and is typicallyusedatafinalconcentrationof2.5%,
semen is placed in an insulated container with
although some diluents use concentrations ofup to
pre-chilled cooling packs that reduce the tempera-
4%（Cochran et al 1984,Heitlandetal 1996)
tureinthesemenat anappropriaterateioprevent
The use of O.5ml paillettes has superseded older,
cold shock developing.Suchdevices can maintain
largervolume,containersfor freezing equine semen:
semen fertility at acceptable levels for =48 hours.
little semen is now frozen in other containers.The
Air should be excluded from storage vessels,since
inseminationdoseiscommonlyloadedintofour
sperm survival is significantly greater when no airis
toeightstraws andmixedfor inseminationafter
present(Katila1997,Batellier et al2001),because
thawing (Samper 2007).Freezing may be over the
of the effects of aerobic respiration and lipid per-
vapourofliquidnitrogenoraspelletsonthesurface
oxidation.Addition ofantioxidants,such as ascor-
of blocks of solid carbon dioxide.When program-
bic acid,pyruvate and,most recently, N-acetyl
mable freezers are used,coolingrates of 40°C/min
cysteine（Pagl etal2006),is thereforeadvocated
to-60°Cthen60°C/minuntil-140°Cisreached
as a means of increasing the longevity of sperm in
(thereafterplungedintoliquidnitrogen)havegiven
cooled storage.
goodresults(Vidament2005).
796
Chapter
31
Artificial insemination
Thawingrates are more critical for cryopreserved
equine sperm than for many other species.Loomis
& Squires (2005) suggest that semen frozen in 0.5
ml strawsshould bethawedat37Cforaminimum
of20 seconds.It isimportant that the temperature
of thethawingwaterisaccurately controlled:sperm
dierapidlyif thetemperatureisraisedto39Cor
40°℃.Higher thawing temperatures(eg.75°Cfor7
seconds)givebetter post-thawresults,provided the
straws are removed at the correct time: however,it is
difficult toensurethatthisoccursinfielduse.Wliere
semen is supplied in4-5ml tubes,thawing should
beat50°Cfor45seconds.
Evaluating the fertility of cryopreserved equine
Fig.31.10 Insemination of the mare
semen is not a straightforward process.Post-thaw
motility is a poor predictor of fertility in all spe-
cies;itidentifies theworst ejaculatesbutfails to dis-
Timing of insemination
criminatebetweenlevelsoffertility.Inthestallion,
itisparticularlyunreliable（Pickett&Amann1993)
Inseminationwithcooledsemenshouldtakeplace
given theminimalamount ofreliabledata oncon-
somewherebetween48hoursbeforeand=6hours
ception rates in mares.However,attemptshavebeen
after ovulation.Insemination later than 6 hours
madetofind objectivemeasurementsthathavehigh
after ovulationmayresultinconceptionbutismore
levelsofcorrelationwithfertility.Christensenetal
likely to alsoresult in embryonicdeath.The opti-
(1996)used in vitroinduction ofacrosomereac-
maltimingdepends,however,uponthesuccesswith
tions as a predictor of fertility,whileSamper(1992)
which the semen has survived the cooling process:
and Hellander(1992)have used combinations of
the semenof somestallionsneeds tobeinseminated
glass-wool/Sephadex filtration andmolilityesti-
with a few hours of ovulation if it is to achieve an
malestopredict fertility.Nevertheless,despitethe
acceptableresult.Samper(2007) suggests thata fer-
progress that these methods represent,it remains
tilemarecanbeinseminatedonceortwice(12-24h
difficult topredict thefertility of a stallion's semen
apart) with good-quality semen but, if the semen is
after cryopreservation.
of poorer quality or the ferility of the mare ques-
tionable,a single insemination as close aspossible
Insemination
tothe timeofovulationispreferable.
Inseminationwithfrozen-thawed semenneedsto
Thestandardmethodofinseminationwithcooled
beperformedbetween12hoursbeforeand6hours
orfrozensemenistodeposititintothecaudalpart
after ovulation.Regular examination of themareis
of the uterine body via a catheter passed through the
required to ensure that this timing is achieved.In
cervix（Fig.31.10) Insemination is best performed
practice,most mares are inseminated once,within
with the mare restrained in stocks. After apply-
6hours after ovulatioi,or twice,oncebefore and
ing a tail bandage and cleaning theperineal area,
once after ovulation（Loomis & Squires 2005).
a hand is inserted into the vagina and the cervix is
Mares are often given human chorionic gonado-
located.The index finger is inserted into the cervix
trophin (hCG) or a gonadotrophin-releasing hor-
and aninseminationcatheter ispassedthrough the
mone (GnRH) analoguein order to more precisely
vagina,then alongside the index finger and so into
control thetimeofovulationwhen they aretobe
the uterus.A vaginal speculum can also be used to
inseminatedwithfrozen semen.Thishastheadded
locate the cervix.Semen isdeposited slowly,invol-
advantageofreducingthenumber ofoccasions on
umesrangingfrom 0.5-80ml.Most inseminations
which themare has tobe examined.Samper(2001)
usea low volume of fluid,as there is little benefit
suggested giving 2500 IUhCG once a follicle more
from highervolumes uponuterinecontractility and
than 35mm is present,then examining themare's
thereisagreaterriskofretrogradeflowfrom thecer-
ovaries6-8-hourlytopinpointthetimeofovula-
vixwithlargervolumes.
tion,whichwill occur36±17hours after treatment.
797
Part
61
Themale animal
The GnRH analogue deslorelin (Ovuplant) can be
bers and insemination timings have been reported:
given as a short-term implant,resulting is a much
Vidament(2p05)suggested that best results are
closerregulationofthetimeofovulation(Hemberg
achievedwitfiupto two dailyinseminations with
et al 2006),with ovulation occurring at38±2 h post
300or 400x 10 sperm from the time of hCG admin-
treatment,so thatmaresonlyneedtobeexamined
istration,ora singlepost-ovulation inseination;fig
at36and41hourspost-implantation todetermine
ureswith whichNewcombeetal(2005)concurred.
the point of ovulation.
Newinseminationmethodsforcompromised
Sperm numbers and conceptionrates
sperm
Chilled semen. Chilled semen inseminations are typ-
Losses of sperm in traversing the uterus from the
ically madewith250-500x10progressivelymotile
siteofinseminationtotheuterotubaljunctionare
sperm(Brinslo2006),commonly doubled to 1x10°
high,especially where the functional integrity of the
motilespermwheninseminationistobedelayedby
more than 24 hours.Conception rates of 73-75%
sorting.Deep intrauterine insemination has been
havebeen recorded for this method.However,this
investigated as a means ofreducing thenumbers
number of sperm almost certainly represents a
ofsperm andimproving the pregnancyrateswhere
wastage,atleastinfertile stallions:100x10motile
such sperm areused
sperm have been used for insemination without
Deep uterineinsemination,in which a semi-rigid
anylossoffertility(Pace& Sullivan 1975,Pickett
orflexible inseminationcatheteris guided to the
1980), although lower numbers (e.g. 50x10°) give
cranial part of the ulerine horn,has been used
morevariableresults(Householderetal1981).On
successfully,
withspermnumbersreducedto
the otherhand,theuseof highernumbersofsperm
20-200x10sperm.Thecathetercanbeguidedper
issaidtoeliminatemuchofthevariationbetween
rectum or using ultrasonography (Sieme et al 2003).
stallions and allows for some loss of sperm during
Early attempts at thismethodresulted in highembry-
transportwithout lossof fertility.
oniclossrates duetotraumaticinjury totheuterus
There is, however, a great deal of variability in the
by thecatheter(Morris 2006a),although this prob-
qualityofcooledsemen that issuppliedto horse
lemnow appearsto havebeen resolved(Sanchez
breeders.Metcalf(1998)showed thatsemenrated
etal2005).Whetheranimprovementinconception
as excellent or good on the basis of percentage or
ratesis achievedoverconventionalmethodsremains
motile and morphologically normal sperm had
higher(87%and62%,respectively)pregnancyrates
than semenrated asfair orpoor(33% and 11%).
sperm numbers toachieve conceptions were
Loomis(2001) reported a wide range of numbers
successfullyreduced.
ofprogressively motile sperm in cooled semen
Direct insemination on to theuterotubal june-
(mean598×10,SD 604x10′,range8-4257×10°).
tion hasbeeninvestigated as an alternativetodeep
Moreover,whilecontrolled trialshaveshown that it
intrauterine insemination,Hlysteroscopic insemi-
is possible to reduce sperm numbers without loss of
nation at the uterotubaljunction allows reduc
fertility,Brinsko(2006)showedevidencefromuse
tionofspermnumbers1010-25x10(Siemeetal
inthefieldthatdosesoflessthan500x10sperm
2004,Ball2006),orevenaslowas1-5x10°（Morris
are associated with much lower pregnancy rates
etal2003,Siemeetal2003,Morris2006b),which
(20%) than doses of more than 500x102 sperm.
allows acceptable pregnancy rates to be achieved
Frozen semen.Frozen semen inseminations typically
even with sex-sorted sperm(Lindsey et al 2001).
Finally,direct insemination into theuterine tube
Withmost stallions having post-thawrecovery rates
has also been successfully used for insemination
of40-70%(Vidament2005),thisnecessitatesatotal
ofcompromisedsperm（Lindseyetal2001,Morris
inseminationdoseofaround800-100x10”sperm.
2004).While these techniques have significant ben-
The fertility offrozen semen incommercialpro-
efitsinterms ofimprovedusageofsperm,especially
grammes hasbeenreported torange berween32 and
ofsexedsperm,whicharenormallyonly availablein
73%percycleand56-89%overthebreedingseason
smallnumbers,the costs are substantial,soare not
(Loomis2001).Variouscombinationsofsperm num-
inwidespreadusein thefield.
798
Chapter
311
Artificialinsemination
Control ofinfectious diseases
develop,with a significant degree ofresistance to it
bymanybreed societisndeed, theabiltyoreis
A considerable number of pathogens are transmis-
pedigree pups that have been bred by Al, may be
sible through equine semen (Table 31.1). Most
conditional on prior consent to the breeding by the
inportantly, this includes equine viral arteri-
registration body Thus,Al of dogs occurs principally
tis, which can be shed into the semen of virae-
in two main circumstances.Firstly,wherecopulation
mic and recovered stallions for long periods of
is not possible and, secondly, as a means of using
tine.Because of the difficulties ofcontrolling this
sires that are geographically remote from the bitch,
disease, the use of methodologies for process-
particularly where these residein a different country.
ing semen that remove the virus has been recom-
However, in common with most other species, the
mended (Morrell & Geraghty 2006）.Many other
use of Al in dogs has increased markedly in recent
viruses can be transmitted through semen,includ
years. In parallel, methods have been developed for
ing EHV-III, equine infectious anaemia and, ossi-
breeding non-domestic Canidae for coniseivation or
bly,EHV-II and vesicular stomatitis.The case with
commercial purposes.
EHV-I is less clear-cut for,although its transmis-
sion through semen appears likely, no recorded
cases have orcurred(Klug &Sieme 1992). Many
Collection and storage of semen
non-specific bacterial contaminants of semen may
Semen is usually collected from the dogby digital
causeinfertilityininseminated mares.The presence
manipulation (see also Ch.30). The use of elcc-
of β-haemolytic streptococci in semen is associated
troejaculation under general anaesthesia has also
withreduced fertilityofmares(Klug&Sieme1992),
as are haemolytic E.coli,Staplylococcus aureus and
tory fluid, sperm-rich fraction and a little of the
Pseudomonas aernginosa.Klebsiella spp.are of more
post-ejacularory (prostatic) fluid are collected. The
clear-cut significance as a cause of infertility, while
whole ejaculatemay beinmediatelyinseminated
Taylorella equigenitalis,the causal organism of con-
into the bitch's vagina,but it is more common to
tagious equine metritis,is an important venereal
dilute the semen so that multiple inseminations
pathogen, although not controlled by OIE. Within
can be performed.Where the whole ejaculate is
its geographical area of distribution, Typanosoma
used,only a few millilitres ofprostaticfluid should
equiperdum,theprotozoonresponsible for dourine
be collected.
is venereally transmitted.Legislative control exists
in many countries to control the spread of equine
viral arteritis equine infectious anaemia, conta-
Liquid'semen
gious equine metritis and dourine, at least in the
Dog semen can be stored in a chilled condition
bloodstock industries,but control of venereal dis-
for 24-72 hours at 4°C, after dilution in simple
eases in ponies and riding horses is often minimal.
diluenis(e.g.skimmed milk) (Harrop 1962).1his
The simple precautions of serological examination
of stallions for the presence ofviral infection and
tions to be performed on the bich, or for air freight
serial bacteriological examination oftheir external
transport to most international destinations. Hence,
genitalia before using the animals as AI (or, indeed,
this method is very widely used in dog Al [Pena etal
natural service) sires are all that is required to con-
2006). Better longevity of semen can be achieved
trol most venereal pathogens, yet, all too ofien,
with the use of diluents such as Kenney's diluent for
this does not occur until after the onset ofa disease
equine semen (Bouchard et al 1990;Table 31.11), or
outbreak.
Tris-glucose-egg yolk (Iguer-Ouada and Verstegen
2001, Table 31.12). Removal of the prostatic fluid by
centrifugation improves storage and viability, espe-
Artificial insemination of dogs
cially when samples are dilute (Romagnoli 2002),
although semencanbepreserved successfillywith
It was upon the dog that the earliest recorded stud
out its removal (England & Ponzio 1996). Cooling
ies of Al were undertaken,by the ltalian natural phi-
frombody temperatureto 4C shouldbe slow10
losopher Spallanzani. Despite such an impeccable
prevent cold shocl: Bouchard et al (1990) recom-
pedigree,demand for Al of dogs has been slow to
mended cooling at 0.3-1.0°C/min.This rate can be
799
Part
19
Themaleanimal
packaginginto O.5mlpaillettes for freezing.Pena
Table 31.12Diluents for cooled storageofcanine semen
(derived from lguer-Ouada&Verstegen 2001,Romagnoli
etal（2006)dilute semen 1:1in a Tris-glucose
2002)
extenderprior tocentrifuigationtoseparatethesem-
inalplasma.After that the semen is resuspended in
Component
Tris-glucose/
Skimmed
further Tris-glucose-egg-yolk diluent, with a two-
Tris-fructose
milk
step glycerolization (3% at room temperature, fol-
Tris(g/litre)
30.25
lowed by slow coolingo5°C,then diluted further
Sodiumcitrate
17
with a similar diluentwith ahighercontentofglyc
monohydrate(g/litre)
erol,to provide a final glycerol concentration of
7%). Freezing is also in 0.5 ml paillettes.
Glucose or fructose
12.5
(glitre)
Early methods for freezing relied upon the well
Skimmedmilk
80%
tried routes of freezing in pellets on blocks of
solid carbon dioxide or in paillettes suspended in
Buffer
80%
the vapour of liquid nitrogen.The results achieved
Eggyolk
20%
20%
by thesemethods are remarkably similar:in 2001
Antibiotics
Commonlypenicillin,streptomycin
Nianski et al found no difference between the post-
thawrecovery of semen frozen aspellets or in 0.25
or0.5ml paillettes.Theuseof progranmmablefreez-
achievedinpracticebyplacingthedilutedsemenin
ers has thepotential toresult insignificant improve-
a container filled with water at room temperature,
ments in post-thawrecovery rates,although,as the
which is then placedat4°Covernight（Pena etal
optimal coolingrateis determinedby theconcen-
2006).The use of theEquitainer as a means of cool-
trationofglycerol and theother components of
ing/transportingcaninesemenhas alsobeenrecom-
the diluent, it is difficult to generalize about opti-
mended.Dilutionrateshavetotakeinto accountthe
malcoolingrates.Thus Rota et al(i998)foundno
voluinethatcanbeinseminatedintothebitch and
differencein post-thawrecoverybetween cooling
the density ofthesemen,but should aimto achieve
at 10°C/minand 50°C/minbetween-10°Cand
at least 150x10progressivemotile sperm.
-40°C: however a cooling rate of 30°C/min is com-
monlyrecommended over thisperiod.Thawing at
70°℃ in water for 8 seconds provides good post-
Cryopreservation
thaw recoveries,although 37°C for 30 seconds is
Cryopreservation of dog semen is more dificult
also used (Thomassen et al (2006).
tlian formany species,but successhas been improy
ing over recent years.Many different diluents have
been tried,largely onanempirical basisorbecause
Insemination
they work for other species. Egg yolk appears to
Liquid semen
be an important component of most diluents.
Likewise,many different glycerolization regimens
Where the reason for Al is failure of copulation,
have been employed in an attempt to achieve a
semeniscollectedfromthedogbydigitalmanipu-
satisfactory compromisebetween its toxiceffecis
lation andthewholeejaculatemaybeinseminated
uponsperm andtheconcentrationsneededtogive
intothevaginaofthebitchimmediatelyaftercol-
effective cryoprotection (England 1993). While the
lection.It may,however,bepreferableto dilute the
optimal glycerol concentrationappearstobe about
semen,inseminating one portionimmediately and
6%,its addition in one or multiple steps doesnot
theremainder48hourslater.
have a major effect upon post-thaw survival(Silva
Similarly, where chilled semen has been trans-
etal2003）
portedfrom thesire to the bitch,insemination may
Consequently, there are manyregimens forfreez-
be performed upon receipt of the semen and 48
ing semen.Two methodsare described as examples
hours later.It is therefore imperative to ensure that
ofthose in current use.Thomassen et al(2006)
the recipient bitch is approaching the ferile period
dilute semen in aTris-fructose-citric-acid extender,
ofoestrusbeforesemen iscollected.
with8%glyceroland20%eggyolk,ina singlestep
When fresh or chilled semen isused,intravagi
at35C.Itisthencooledslowlyto5Cbefore
nal insemination is undertaken,with the semen
800
Chapter
31
Artificial insemination
depositedascloseaspossibletotheexternalosof
ismanipulatedthroughthecervixinto theuterus
thecervix(Burke1986).The semen maybe depos-
with theother.Afterdeposition ofthesemencareis
itedthrougha shortenedbovineinsemination
taken to avoidbackflowbyensuringthattheplastic
catheter,which may requiretheuseofa speculum
sheathremains in closecontactwith thecatheiei
to be guided into the correct site.Some authors
and by elevating the hindquarters of the bitch (as
recommendinsertingoneortwofingersinto the
described above).As an alternative to transabdomi-
vulvaafterinsemination,inordertopromotethe
nal fixation of thecervix,an endoscope can beused
motilityofthefemalegenitaltractthatnormally
tolocate thecervicalos.Insemination iseasier in
occurs during the copulatory tie.Alternatively,an
bitches ofmoderate size than ingiant andminia-
Osiris catheter,which consists of an outer sheath
turebreeds,and is more difficult in animals that
with a Foley bulb and an inner caiheter, can be
are excessively fat.
used(Nianski2006).Theinflatableballooniscon-
Inseminationviaasurgical laparotomy,orvialap-
sideredtoboth simulatethecopulatorylock and
aroscopy, can also be used for insemination of fro
prevent retrogradeflow of semen.However,thereis
zen semen,especially where practitioners are not
no unequivocalevidencethat thistype ofcatheter
confident with the transcervical method.
improves conception ratesbeyond those achieved
with simplecatheters.Whichevermethodisused,
Timing of insemination
thehindquartersofthebitchshouldberaisedfor
a few minutes after insemination,topreventretro-
The bitch has a prolonged period of receptivity to the
grade loss of semen.
male buta relatively short fertilization period (seeFig.
28.12).Thusthe fertility achieved in canineAl primar-
ilydependsuponachievingcorrect timingofinsemi
Frozensemen
nationinrelationtothatofovulation.Whennatural
Conception rates using frozen semen arepoorer
service isused,many breeders allow bitches only a
with intravaginal than intrauterine insemination.
singlemating,whichtypically occurs12days after the
Hence,direct intrauterine insemination,either via
onset of pre-oestrous bleeding.For successful Al, much
thecervix ordirecilyvia surgeryorlaparoscopy,is
closerattentiontothetimeofthefertilizationperiodis
currently recommended.Linde-Forsberg etal (1999)
needed,especiallywhencryopreservedsemenisused
reported whelping rates of nearly 85% with intra-
althoughmorelatitudeexists wherechilledsemen
uterineinseminationcomparedwith=60%with the
is used (Jeffcoate & Lindsay 1989, Linde-Forsberg
intravaginal route.However,higher pregnancy rates
&Forsberg 1989, 1993, Morton & Bruce 1989). The
wereachievedwhenmultipleintravaginalinsemina-
inherentfertility of thedogis alsoofimportance,wih
tionswere performed,although there was no ben-
thelongevityof hisspermin thefemaletractbeinga
efitfrom multipleinseminationsby theintrauterine
criticaldeterminantoffertility.Dogswithlong-lived
route.The Osiriscatheter hasbeen used to try to
sperm can achieve pregnancies even if the timing of
improve conception rates to intravaginal insemina-
inseminationisnotoptimal,whereaswithdogswhose
tion(Niansli2006);however,whelpingratesby this
sperm havepoorsurvival,sperm deah ismorelikely
methodwerealso=60%
lohaveoccurredprior toovulationundersuchcircum-
Passing a catheter through the cervix is difficult,
stances(see Fig.28.12).
because of the length of the vagina,the length of
The timing of ovulation can be predicted, the
thecervixandthe siteofitsexternal os(England&
preovulatory rise in circulating progesterone con-
Lofstedt 2000).However,the Norwegian catheter,
centrations or measurementofLHconcentrations.
which consists ofa2mm catheter insideaTeflon
Alternatively,the ovariescanbeexamined byultra-
sheath,can beused successfully,although consid-
sonography.Vaginal cylology,while useful as an
erablepracticeisrequiredtomasterthetechnique
indicatorof the approachofovulation,is tooimpre-
of its use (Romagnoli 2002). Thomassen et al
cise for frozen semen inseminations.Measuring
(2006) describe the method ofintrauterine insem-
serum progesterone concentrations daily after the
ination asfollows:Insemination isperformed on
onset ofoestrus(or afier the appearance of a high
standingbitches,which normally do notrequire
percentage of cornifiedvaginal epithelial cells)pro-
sedation.Thecervixis fixed through the abdom-
vides a reasonably good prediction of the timing of
inalwall with one hand,while the steelcatheter
ovulation. Progesterone concentrations rise from
801
Part
61
The male animal
base-linevalues to2.0-3.0ng/mlonthedayofthe
inprogrammable freezers(at a coolingrate of
LH surge, thereafter increasing to 4.0-8.0ng/ml on
-10°C/min betyeen 5°and-80°C)or, less success-
the day ofovulationand 10-25ng/ml during the 2
fully, in pellets on dry ice.
daysfollowingovulation(Romagnoli2002).Hlence,
Ovulation hastobeinducedbeforeinsemination,
the first rise in progesterone concentrations can be
withhCGbeingthemostcommonlyuseddrugfor
taken as an indicator of the LH surge; alternatively,
this purpose. One or two doses of hCG areused to
LH can be measured directly using an'animal-side
induce ovulation,with insemination 15-30hours
assay method (e.g. the semi-quantitative Status-LH,
later; opinions vary concerning whether it is better
Synbiotics Corporalion, San Diego, CA). The assay
toinseminatebeforeorafterovulation hasoccurred.
is intended forusewith serum,although it has also
Intravaginal insemination has been reported,but,in
been used to detect LHinurine(Durrantei al 2006).
domesticcats,intrauterineinseinination via a lapa-
Insemination should ideally be performed 2-3 days
rotomy is more convenient.
afterovulation.Thomassenetal(2006) showed that
insemination atthe optimal timeresultsinahigher
whelping rate and litter size (78% and 5.8±0.2
References
pups, respectively),than late insemination (56%
and4.5±0.5pups).
AdamecV,CassellBG,Smith EPPearsonRE2006DairySci
89:307
Artificial insemination of cats
Almond G,BriuJ,FlowersBetal199sThe swineAl book,
2nd edn.Morgan Morrow,Raleigh,NC
Almquist JO:ZauggNL1974|Dairy Sci 57:1211
Althouse GC 2007 n:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR(ed)
Insemination of domestic cats isundertaken rela-
Curent therapy in large animal theriogenology,2ndedn.
tively rarely, usually it is used as a means of con-
Sanderlseviuis38
servingrare breeds or for international trade.Al is,
Amann RP 1984 In: Proceedings of the 10th International
however,increasinglywidely used in the conserva-
Congress on Animal Reproduction and Artificial
tion ofwildFelidae,sincemanyofthese species are
Insemination,Urbana vol 4,Il. p28
AravA,Yavin S.Zeron Yetal 2002Mol Cell Endocrinol 187:7
considered tobeendangered.Reviews offeline Al
Asbury AC 1986 In: Morow DA (ed) Current therapy in
have recently been published by Luvoni (2003a,b)
theriogenology.2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
andTsutsui(2006),
p718-722
Semen iscollected byelectroejaculation(Zambelli
BallBA2006Ippologia 17:25
&Cunto 2006) under general anaesthesia.Semen
BarlowRM,NetletonPFGardinerAetal 1986VetRec118:321
can alsobe harvested from theepididymides,vasa
Batellier ElaDuchamp G,Vidament M et al 1998
deferentia or evenfrom minced testistissue.
Theriogenology50:229-236
Cooled storage of semen requires prevention
BatellieVidamentM,auquant al2001nimprod
of cold shock.Eggyolk is less effective at protect-
Sci 68:181
Bedford JM,Hoskins DD 1990 In:Lamming GE(ed)
ing cat semen against cold shock than it is in most
Marshall'sphysiology of reproduction.Churchill
other domesticspecies and,while simpleTest-yolk
Livingstone,Edinburgh,vol 2,p 379
willmaintain spermviability at5°C,thelow-density
BergeronA,ManjunathP2006Mol ReprodDev73.1338
lipoproteinfractionisfarmoreeffectivethanwhole
Biffani S,SamoreAB,Canavesi F 2002In:Proreedings of
the 7th World Congress on Genetics Applied to Livestock
yolk（Glover &Watson 1987）.Such diluents can
Production,Montpellier,France,ession9,04
maintain semen quality for =24hours,with occa-
BlackshawAW 1954Aust]Biol Sci7:573
sional reports of longer periods of storage.
BlackshawAW,Salisbury GW1057IDairy Sci40:1099
Similar diluents areused for freezingasthose for
BlanchardTL,VarnerDD,Schumacheretal2003Manual of
cooledstorage,rwithdiluentsbasedonTrisitrate
equinereproduction,2ndedn.Mosby,StLouis,MO
glucoseructoserlactoseuegyolk.Glyerls
BochenekM,erjanT,OkolskiA,SmoragZ2006In:
the best cryoprotectant for cat semen but,because
Havemeyer Foundation Monograph Series 18,p 13-14
of sensitivity toits toxiceffectsitisusually added
BortolozzoFP,UemotoDA,Bennemann PEetal 2005
al concentrations of up to 4%.Antioxidants, such
Theriogenology64:1956
BouchardGEMorrisJKSikesJDYoungquistRS1990
astaurine,appear important in the maintenance
Theriogenology34:147
ofpost-thawviability.Afterloadingintopaillettes,
Bowen RA,HowardTH 1984Am JVetRes 45:1386
semen canbe frozen in the vapour of liquid nitrogen,
Brinsko SP2006Theriogenology 66:543
802
Chapter
311
Artificial insemination
Brinsko SP,Varner DD 1993 In:McKinnon AO,Voss IL（eds)
Eriksson BM,Rodriguez-Martinez H2000a AnimReprod Sci
Equine reproduction.Lea&Febiger,Philadelphiap790
63:205
BurkeT]1986Small animalreproduction andinfertility.Lea
ErikssonBM,Rodriguez-MartinezH2000bZbIVet MedA47:
&Febiger,Philadelphia
89-97
CallisJ.Mckercher PD 1980BovinePract 15:170
EvansLE,McKenna D) 1986 In:MorrowDA(ed) Current
CampbellIW,HarveyTG,McDonald MFSparksman RI 1996
1herapy in theriogenology.2nd edn.WB Saunders.
Theriogenology45:1535
Philadelphia,p 946
Cassou R1964 In:Proceedings of the5th Intemational
Evans G,Maxwell WMC1987Salamon'sartificial insemina
Congress on Animal Reproduction and Artificial
tionof sheepand guats.Butterworth.Sydney,NSW
Insemination,Trento.p540
Farrant I19so In:Ashwood-SmithMl.Farrant I(ed) Low
ChapmanMS,Lucas MH,Herbert CN,Goodey RG1979Vet
temperature preservation inmedicine andbiology.Pitman
Sci Commun 3:137
Medical.Tunbridge Wells,Kent,p 1-17
Chemineau P, Cagine Y, Guerin Y et al 1991 Training manual
Faustini M,Torre ML,Stacchczzini Set al 2004
on artificial insemination in sheep and goats.FAOAnimal
Theriogenology 6l:173
Production and HealthPaper 83.Foodand Agriculture
FeredeanT,Barbulescu I,Popovici 1967 LucrStiint Inst Cerc
Organizationofthe LnitedNationsRome
Zooteh459-470.CitedbySalamon&Maxwell2000
ChengWTK19881ChinSocVetSci14:339
Fiser PS,Fairfull RW1984 Cryobiology 21:542
Christensen PWhitfield CH,Parkinson TI 1996
FiserPS,Fairfull RW 1986Cryubiology 23:18
Theriogenology 45:1201
FlipsseRJ,Patton S,AlmquistO1954JDairy Sci37:1205
Clay CM,Squires EL,Amman RP,Picketu BW 19S4 In:
FooteRH1969In:ColeHH,Crupps PT (ed)Reproduction
Proceedings ofthelothIntermational CongressonAnimal
in domestic animals.2nd edn.AcademicPress,New York
Reproduction and Artificial Insemination,Urbana,vol2
p313-353
p187
FooteRH1970JDairySri53:1478
CochranJD,Amann RPFromanDP,PickettBW1984
FooteRH 1979IDairy Sci62:355
Theriogenology 22:25
TooteRHGrayLC,YoungDC,Dunn HO1960 Dairy Sj
Colas G1979 LivestockProd Sci 6:153
43:1330
ColleauH.Moureaux S2006INRA ProdAnim 19:13-14
Foulkes IA1977|ReprodFertil49:277
CorteelJM1974Ann BiolAnim Biochim Biophys 14:741
Foulkes IA,Sweasey D,GoodeyRC1980ReprodFertil60:
Corteel JM 1981 In:Gal C(ed) Goat production.Academic
165
Press.London,p 171-191
FranclAT,Amann RP,Squires l,PickeBW1987
Corteel JM.Baril G,Leboeuf B,Nunes IF 1984 In:Courot M
Theriogenology 27: 517
(ed) The male in farm animal reproduction.Martinus
Gacitua H,Arav A 2005Theriogenology 63:931
NijhoffBoston,MA,p237-256
GaoDY,Ashworih E,Watson PFet al 1993Biol Reprod 49:
Croquet C,Mayeres P, Gillon A etal 2006| Dairy Sci 89:
112
2257
GaoDY,LiuJ,Liu Cetal 1995 Hum Reprod 10:1109
Curry MR2000 Rev Reprod 5:46
GarciaC,AbadM,Kirkwood RN2007AnimReprod Sci100:
CuterR 1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Currenuherapyin the
397
riogenology2ndedn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia,p957
CarnerDL2006Theriogenology 65:943
Dalton IC,Nadir S.BameJH,Saacke RG1999
GloverTE,Watson PF1987 Anim Reprod Sci 13:229
Theriogenology51:883
Godet G,MercatMI,Runavot JP199GReprodDomestAnim
Davis IF,Kerion D),McPhee SRet al 1984 In:Lindsay
31:313
DR,Pearce DT (ed）Reproduction in sheep.Cambridge
Goss|2004Achievingreslis usingAl:couldyou dobelier?
LIniversity Press,Cambridgep 304-305
Available on line at: htp://www.thepigsite.com/articles/2/
DavisIS,BratonRW,FooteRH1963Dairy Sci46:333
ai-genetics-reproduction/1465/achieving-results-using-ai-
De Baer C,Bilkei G2004ReprodDomestAnim39:293
could-you-do-better.Accessed 1Novermber2007
De Leeuw FE,Colenbrander B,Verkleij AJ1990 Reprod
Gotardi L,Brunel L,Zanelli L1980In:Proceedings of the
Donest Anim Suppl 1:95
yih International Congress onAnimal Reproduction and
De Rensis F Benedetti S. Silva P Kirkwood RN 2003 Anim
Artificial nsemination,Madrid,vol5,49
Reprod Sci76:245
GrahnTC,FahningML,Zemjanis R1984IAmVet MedAssoc
Douglas-Hamilton DH, Osol R, Osol G et al 1984
185:429
Theriogenology 22:291
Haeger O,MackleN1971 DtschTerarzWochenschr78:
Durrant BS,Ravida N,SpadyT,Cheng A 2006
395
Theriogenology 66:1729
Haibel GK1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Curent therapy in the-
EnglandGCW1993|ReprodFertilSuppl47:243
rigenlogynddnBSaunehilaia4
England GCw,LofstediR2000 Caninereproduction semi-
Haile-MariamM,BowmanPl,Goddard ME 2007 Genet Sel
nar,AtlanticVeterinary College.Availableonline at:htp:/
Evol39:369
icsb-mobile.com/documents/canada.pdf.Accessed9
HaresignW1992IReprodFertil Suppl45:127
November2007
HaresignW,CumockRM,Reed HCB 1986AnimProd
England GCW,PonzioP1996Theriogenology46:1233
43:553
803
Part
6
The male animal
HarropAE1962In:MauleIP（ed)The semenofanimals
Lindsey AC,Bruemmer JE, Squires EL2001 Anim Reprod Sci
andartificialinsemination.CommonwealthAgricultural
68:279
Bureau,Farnham Royal,Buckinghamshirep304-315
Loomis PR 2001-Anim Reprod Sci 68: 191
HawkHW.TanabeTY1986]AnimSci 63:551
LoomisPR 2006Vet Clin North Am EquinePract22:663
Heitland AV,JaskoD),Squires ELetal1996EquineVet」28:47
Loomis PR,Squires EL2005 Theriogenology 64:480
HellanderJC1992a ActaVet ScandSuppl88:67
Lopez-Gatius F2000Theriogenology53:1407
Hemberg E,LundeheimN,EinarssonS2006ReprodDomest
Lopez-Gatius F, Camon-Lrge l] 1988Theriogenology 29:
Anim 41:535
1099
HoltWV2000AnimReprod Sci62:3
Luvoni GC,Kalchschmidt E,Leoni S,Ruggiero C2003a
HouseholderDD,Pickett BW,Voss ILOlarT11981} Equine
JFeline Med Surg5:203
Vet Sci 1:9
Luvoni GC,Kalchschmidt E,Marinoni G2003b Feline Med
Humphrey ID,LintlePB, Stephens LR 1982Am IVet Res 43:
Surg5:257
McKenna T,LenzRW,Fenton SE,AxRL 1990  Dairy Sci 73:
HunterRHF2000 RevMed Vet151:187
1779
Iguer-Ouada M,VerstegenIP2001Theriogenology55:671
McParland S,Kearney IERathM,BerryDP2007aDairy Sci
Iritani A 1980In:Proceedings of the9thInternational
90:4411
Congresson Animal Reproduction and Artificial
McParland S,KearneyJF,RathM,BerryDP2007b|AnimSci
Insemination,Madrid,vol 1,p115
85:322
Iritani A,NishikawaY1964Ipn|Anin Reprod10:44
MannT1964Thebiochenistry of semen andthemale
IsachenkoE,IsachenkoVKatkov IIetal2004Hum Reprod
reproductive tract,2nd edn.Methuen,London
19:932
Mara LDaltena M,PilichiS 2007AnimReprod Sci 102:152
IaskoD),Hathaway 1A,SchaltenbrandVL etal1992
MarloweT11964IAnimSci23:454
Theriogenology 37:1241
Masuda H,Nanasaki S,ChibaY2004J EquineSci 15:1
JeffcoateIA,LindsayFEF1989」ReprodFertilSuppl39:277
Maxwell WMC,SalamonS1993ReprodFeril Dev5:613
Johnson LA,Welch GR1999Theriogenology52:1323
MaxwellWMC,Nebel RL,Lewis GS1996ReprodDomest
Johnson LA,Flook JP,Look MV 1987 GameteRes 17:203
Anim31:665
JohnsonLA,WeitzeKFFiser P,Maxwell WMC2000Anim
Maxwell WMC,de Graaf SP,Ghaoui RE-H,Evans G2007 In
Reprod Sci 62:143
Reproductionin domesticruininantsVl,p13-38
Jondet R 1964 In:Proceedings ofthe5thInternational
Melrose DR 1956 In:Proceedings of the 3rd International
Congress on Animal Reproduction and Artificial
Congress on Animal Reproducuion and Artificial
Insemination,Trento,p 463
Insemination,Cambridge.vol 3. p G8
Kahrs RE Gibbs EPJ,Larsen RI 1980 Theriogenology 14:151
Melrose DR 1962 In:Maule IP(ed)The semenofanimals
Katila T 1997 Thenogenology 48: 1217
andartificialinsemination.CommonwealthAgricultural
KatilaT,KareskoskiM,AkcayEelal2005In:Havemeyer
Bureau Farnham Royal,Buckinghamshirep1181
Foundation Monograph Series 18,p3-5
MelroseDR,OHagen C1959 In:Proceedings of the 6th
Kauffold J.BeckjunkerI,Kanora A,ZarembaW2007Anim
International Congress on Animal Reproduction,
Reprod Sci 97:84
The Hague,vol 4,p 855
KearneyEWall E,Villanueva B,CoffeyMP2004DairySi
MelroseDR,Reed HCB,Prat JH1968In:Proceedingsof the
87:3503
Gth International Congress on Animal Reproductionand
Keith IR1981 VetMed Small Anim Clin76:1043
Artificial Inseminauion,Parisp 181 (abstr)
KenneyRM，BergmanRV,CooperWL,MorseGW1975
MengelingWL 1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy
In:Proceedings of the 21stAnnual Convention of the
in theriogenology.2ndedn.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
AmericanAssociation of EquinePractitioners,p327-336
p949
Killeen ID,Caffery GJ 1982AustVetI59:95
Metcalf ES 1998In:Proceedings ofthe44thAnnual
Klug E,Sieme H1992 Acta Vet Scand Suppl 88:73
Conventionof AmericanAssociation on EquinePractice
KoenigS,Simianer H 2006LivestockSci 103:40
BaltimoreMD.p16-18
KutzlerMA 2005 Theriogenology 64:747
MilkMarketingBoard 1967Report ofbreeding andproduc-
Landa CA,AlmquistJO1979J Anim Sci 49:1190
tion organisation 1966-1967,no 17.p123
Langford GA,Marcus GI 1982| Reprod Fertil 65:325
Miller SI 1986In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy in the-
Leboeuf B,Restall B,SalamonS2000 Anim Reprod Sci
riogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders,Philadelphia.p884
G2:113
Momont HW,SeguinBE,Singh G,StasiukynasE1989
LeboeufB,GuillouetPBatellierF2003Theriogenology
Theriogenology 32:19
60:867
MorganWJB,MelroseDR,StewartDL1959ICompPathol
Linde-ForsbergC,Forsberg M1989JReprodFertil Suppl
69:257
39:299
Morrell jM,GeraghtyRM2006EquineVet]38:224
Linde-ForsbergC,orsbergM1993Reprod Feril Sup
MorrisLHA2004Anim ReprodSci 82/83:625
47:313
MorrisLHA2006bVet ClinNorthAm EquinePract22:G93
Linde-Forsberg C,Strom HolstB,CoveleG1999
MorrisLIIA 2006aVet ClinNorthAmEquinePract22:G93
Theriogenology52:11
MorrisLHA.Tiplady C,AllenWR2003EquineVetI35:197
804
Chapter
311
Artificialinsemination
Morton|2000ProcSocDairy CattleVetNZVA 17:5,43
Reed HCB1982 In:ColeDJA,Foxcroft GR[ed) Control of
MortonDB,BruceSG1989JReprodFertil Suppl39:311
pig reproduction.Butterworth,London,p 65-90
Nebel RL2007 In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR(ed)
Revell SC,Glossop CE 1989AnimProd48:579
Current therapy in large animal theriogenology,2nd edn.
Ricker JV,LinforII,DelfinoWJ 2006 Biol Reprod74:359
Saunders-Elsevier,StLouis,MO,p253-258
Rigby SL,BrinskoSlCochran Met al2001 Anim Reprod Sci
Nebel RL,Bame H,Saacke RG,Lim F 1985 Anim Sci60:
68:171
1631
RitarAI.SalamonS1982AustBiol Sci35:305
Nebel RL,VishwanathR,McMillan WH,SaackeRG1993
RitarAl,Salamon S1983Aust J Biol Sci 36:49-59
ReprodlertilDev5:701
RobertsSI1986Veterinary obstetrics andgenitaldiseases,3rd
NeildDM,BrouwersFHM,ColenbranderBetal2005Mol
edn.Self-published,Ithaca,NY
ReprodDev72:230
Robertson L,Watson PF 1986JReprod Fertil77:177
NewcombeIR,lichtwarlS,Wilson MC2005EquineVet Sci
Roca J,Vazquez IM,Gil MA etal 2006a ReprodDomestAnim
25:525
41(suppl 2):43
NianskiW2006Theriogenology 66:470
RocaJ,Rodriguez-MartinezH,VazquezIM 2006b In:
NianskiW,Dubiel A,BielasW,Dejneka GJ2001 」Reprod
ControlofpigreproductionVll.NottinghamLniversity
Fertil Suppl 37:365
Press,Nottingham,p 261-275
NissenAK,SoedeNM,Hyel Petal1997Theriogenology
Romagnoli S2002Proceedings oftheVeterinarySciences
47:1571
Congress,Oeiras,p 167-170
Nunes II;Corteel IM,Combarnous Y, Baril G 1982 Reprod
RotaA,Linde-Forsberg C,Vannozzi Iet al 1998 Reprod
Nutr Dev22:611
Domest Anim33:355
Nuti L2007 In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR(ed) Gurrent
Rowson LEA 1962In:MauleIP (ed) The semenofanimals
therapy in largeanimal theriogenology2nd edn.
andartificialinsemination.CommomwealthAgricultural
Saunders-Elsevier,St Louis,MO,p529534
Bureau Farnham RoyalBuckinghamshire,p263280
OIE 2008Terrestrial animal health code2008Vol1,Sec14.
SaackeRG,Dalton JC,Nadir Setal 2000 Anim Reprod Sti
Ch4.5,4.6
60-61:663
Olds D,Sheath DM 1954In:KentuckyAgricultural
SalanunS1971Aust  Biol Sci 24:183
Experimental Station Bulletin,p 605
SalamonS,MaxwellWMC1995AnimReprodSci37:185
PaceMM.Sullivan 11975IReprodFertil Suppl23:115
SalamonS,MaxwellWMC2000AnimReprodSci 62:77
Pagl R.Aurich JE.Muller-Schlosser Fet al 2006
SalamonS.RitarAI 1982AustJ Biol Sci35:295
Theriogenology 66:1115
Salamon S,Robinson T 1962 Aust I AgricRes13:271
PallaresA,ZavosPM,HemkenRW 1986Theriogenology
5alamonS,ViserD 1972Aust| Biol Sci25:605
26:709
Salisbury GW,VanDemark NL1961Physiologyofreproduc
Paquignon M 1984 In:Courot M (ed) The male in farm
tionand artificialinsemination.Freeman,SanFrancisco,CA
animal reproduction.MartinusNijhoff,Dordrecht,
Salisbury CW,VanDemarkNL,LodgeJR1978Physiologyof
p202-218
reproduction and artificial insemination of catle2nd edn.
Paquignon M 1985 In:LA Johnson,K Larson(ed)Deep freez-
Freeman,San Francisco, CA
ing of boar semen.Swedish Uiniversity of Agricultural
Salvador l,Viudes-de-Castro MP,BernacerJet al2005Reprod
Sciences,Uppsala,p129-145
Domest Anim 40:526
ParlinsonT1,Whitfield CH1987Theriogenology27:781
SamperI1992ActaVetScand Suppl S8:59
Paulenza H,Soltun K,AdnoyT etal 2005 Small Rumin Res
SamperIC2001AnimReprod Sci 68:219
59:89
Samper IC 2007In:Youngquist RS,Threlfall WR(ed)
Pellicer-RubioMT, Combarnous Y1998J Reprod Fertil
112:95
Saunders-lsevier,StLouis,MO,p3742
Pellicer-RubioMT,MagallonT,CombarnousY 1997Biol
Sanchez R, Gomes I,Ramos Het al 2005 In:Havemeyer
Reprod 57:1023
FoundationMonograph Series 14,p103-104
Pena F,Nunez-MartinezI,MoranJM2006ReprodDom
Saravia FWallgrenM,NagySet al20051leriogenology63:
Anim 41（suppl2）:21
1320
Pickeu BW1980In:MorrowDA(ed) Current therapy in the
Schenk JL,Seidel GE 2007 In:Reproduction in domestic
riogenology,2nd edn.WB Saunders.Philadelphia,p 692
ruminants VI.Nattingham University Press,Nottingham,
Pickeu BW,Amann RP1993In:McKinnonAO,Voss JL(ed)
p165-178
Equinereproduction.lea&Febiger.Philadelphia,p769
Seidel GE2007 Theriogenology 68:443
PickelBW,FowlerAK.CowenWA 1961IDairy Sci43:281
Seidel GE,Garner Dl.2002Reproduction 124:733
Polge C 1953 Vet Rec 65:557
SengerPL,BeckerWCDavidgeSTetal1988JAnimSci66:3010
Polge C,Smith AU,Parkes AS 1949Nature 164:666
Serret CG,Alvarenga MVECoria ALPet al 2005Anim Reprod
Purdy PHI 2006 Small RumRes 63:215
(Belo Horizonte）2:250
Pursel VG,Johnson LA 1975JAnim Sci 40:99
SewalemA,Kistemaker GI,MigliorEvanDoormaal BI2006
Quinn PI,ChowPYW,White1G1980JReprodFertil60:403
JDairy Sci89:2210
Radostits OM,Gay CC,Hinchcliff KW,Constable PD2007
ShamsuddinM,Amiri Y,BhuiyanMMu2000Reprod
Veterinary medicine10th edn.BSaunders,Oxford
Domest Anim35:53
805
Part
161
The male animal
Shannon P1965]Dairy Sci48:1357
Thomassen R,Sanson G,Krogenaes Aet al 2006
ShannonP 1972 In:VlthInternational Congresson Animal
Theriogenology 6G: 1645
Reproduction and Artificial Insemination,Munich1972
TischnerM1992ActaVet ScandSuppl 88:111
Summaries,p279-280
TorreML,Faustini M,AtilioKEA,VigoD2007RecPatents
Shannon P,Curson B 1982J Reprod Fertil 64:463
Drug DeliveryForm 1:81-85
Shannon P,Curson B,Rhodes AP 1984NZIAgric Res 27:35
Tsutsui T 2006 Theriogenology 66:122
ShipleyCFB,Buckrell BC,MylneMIAetal2007In:Youngquist
Unal MB,BerndtsonWE,Picketts BW1978JDairySci61:3
RS,Threlfall WR(ed) Current therapy in large animal the-
UsbokoY1995MAgricSci thesisMassey University
riogenology,2nd edn.Saunders-Elsevier,StLouisMO
Auckland,NewZealand
P629-641
VajtoG2000AnimReprod Sci60-61:357
SiemeH,BonkA,Ratjen J et al2003 Pferdeheilkunde19:677
VazquezIM.Martinez EA,Parrilla Iet al 2006Reprod
Sieme H,BonkA,Hamann Hetal 2004Theriogenology 62:915
Domest Anim 41:298
Sieme H,Knop K,Rath D 2006Anim Reprod Sci 94:99
Vidament M2005AnimReprodSti 89:115
SilvaAR,CardosoRCS,choaDC,SilvaL.DM2003
Vishwanath R,Shannon P2000 AnimReprod Sci 62:23
Theriogenology59:821
Vishwanath R,Shannon P,Curson B1992Anim Reprod Sci
Slaweta R,LaskowskaT1987Anim ReprodSti 13:249
29:185
SoedeNM,HazelegerW,KenpB1998ReprodDomest Anim
Visliwanath R,Nebel RL,McMillan WH et al 1997
33:239
Theriogenology 48:369
Sohnrey B.HoltzW2005JAnim Sci 83:1543
WatsonPF1975JReprodFertil42:105
SorensenAC,SorensenMK,BergP2005DairySci88:1865
Watson PF1976IThermBiol1:137
Souza MIL,LuzSLN,Goncalves PBD,Neves JP1994 iencia
WatsonPF1979OxfordRevReprodBiol1:283
Rural24:597
WatsonPF1981ReprodFertil62:483
Squires EL,Barbacini S,Necchi D etal2003 In:Proceedings
Watson PF1990 In:Lamming GE（ed)Marshall'sphysiology
of the 49th Annual Convention of theAmerican
ofreproduction.Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh,vol 2
Association ofEquinePractitioners,p 353-356
StewartDl.19G41n:Proceedings of the5th International
WebbG,Humes R2006AnimReprod Sci94:135
Congress onAnimal Reproduction andArtificial
WeitzeKF1990PigNews Information 11:23
Insemination,Trento,p 617
WheelerMB,Rutledge JI,Fischer-BrownAet al 2006
Sullivanl,ElliotF1 19681n:Proceedings ofthe6th
Theriogenology 65:219
International Congress on Animal Reproduction and
Willeu EL,Salisbury GW1942In:MemoirsofComell
ArtificialInsemination,Paris2,1307
UniversityAgricultural Experimental Stationp249
SumransapP,Tummaruk P,KunavongkritA2007Reprod
Wilmut 1,PolgeC1974Reprod Fertil38:105
Domest Anim42:113
WoeldersH1997VetQ19:135
SuterD,ChowPYW,MartinICA1979BiolReprod20:505
WrathallAE1997RevSciTech OIE16:240-264
ThibierM,Guerin B2000Anim Reprod Sci 62:233
Yaeger MI,PrieveT,Collins I1993 Swine Health Prod 1:7-9
Thomas AD,Meyers SA,Ball BA 2006Theriogenology
Zambelli D,Cunto M 2006 Theriogenology G6:159
65:1531
806
Part
171
Exotic species
32
Reproduction in Camelidae
809
MarzookAl-Eknah
33
Reproduction in the buffalo
824
Nazir Ahmad andDavid Noakes
34
Normal reproduction,reproductive
disease and infertility in pet small
mammals.
.836
Sharon Redrobe
—$
32
Chapter
Marzook Al-Eknah
Reproduction in Camelidae
There are six species in the family Camelidae.
·Llama:Adult weighs 130-160kg and reaches
There are two species of Old World camels
1.9 m in height. Raised for meat production, but
(Genus Canelus), namely Camelus dromedarius
millk production is low and lamas are kept as
(one-humped Arabian camel) and Cainelus bac-
pets. There are about 5 million llamas in South
trianus (two-humped Bactrian camel); and four
America, ofwhich 3 million are in Bolivia.
species in the two genera of NewWorld camels
Alpaca: Smaller than the llama and grows a shag
(Lama and Vicigna), namely Lama glama (llama),
gier coat. The adult weighs 40-65 kg and is 1.5 m
Lama pacos (alpaca) and Lama guanacoe (Guanaco),
in height. Raised for meat and fibre production;
and Vicugna vicugna (vicuna).All members of the
there are about 5 million in South America,of
Camelidaefamilyhave 74 chromosomeswitha
which 3 million are inPeru
very similar morphology. It has been suggested
·Vicufia:Smallest of the lamoids; adult weight is
that Camelus dromedarius and Camelus bactri
30-50 kg and height 1.3m. Its fibre is the finest of
anus aretwo subspecies that descended fromthe
all llamoids.There are about 170 000 in total world-
wild Bactrian camel Camelus ferus(Larson & Ho
wide, mainly in Peru: they are a protected species.
2004).
·Guanaco: Has a similar conformation to the
llama. The adult weighs 130-160kg and is 1.8 m
General characteristics
in height.Their natural habitat is in Chile and
Argentina.
·Arabian camel: Adult weighs 300-1100kg and
reaches 3m in height. It is used for milk and meat
Camel hybridization
produrtion, and racing. The total population is
about 17 million, mainly distributed in sub-Saha-
ran and north Africa, the Middle East and the
New World camels can interbreed and produce
Indian suhcontinent.
fertile hybrids,as do Old World camels.The cross
·Bactrian camel: Adult weighs 300-800kg,
breeding ofArabian and Bacurian camels has been
reaches 2.5 m in height. It is used for millk and
practised extensively for many years. Hybrids are
meat production and racing. The total popula-
larger and heavier than purebred parents.
tion is about 2 million, mainly distributed in
Successful hybridization between a maleArabian
China, Russia, Mongolia, Iran, Afghanistan and
camel(Old World)and a female guanaco(New
Kazakhstan.
World) has been achieved (Skidmore et al 2001).
608
Part
171
Exoticspecies
Restraint of camelids for the
Decreasing day-length appears to be lhe stimulus
examination of the reproductive
toseasonality.In thoselivingnear theequator,there
isnoinfluenee'of photoperiod-inducedseasonality,
system
factors such as rainfall,nutition and management
probablyexert a majorinfluence.
Generally,camelidsarefriendlyandeasyto control,
hostilitybeingshownbykicking,biting.or spitting
regurgitated rumen contents.Therefore, adequate
Male reproductive system
restraint of camelids for examination of the repro-
ductive system is always necessary.
TheOld Worldcamels arerestrainedinsternal
Themale genital system is similar to that of domes-
recumbency using the‘riple tie,which involves
lic farm animals （Fig.32.1), except that there are
the use of two short ropes to maintainflexion of
well-developed bulbourethral(Cowper's) glands and
both carpal joints (to prevent standing) and a long
ampullae ofthevasdeferens.Thevesiculargland is
rope attached tobothhindfetlocksthatpasses over
absentin all male camelids.In addition,Arabian and
thevertebral column toprevent kicking.Llamoids
Bactrian male camels are distinctive in having poll
are readily restrained in a simple chute or stock.
glands,whicharelocatedonthebackoftheneck,
Epidural analgesia may be necessary,particularly
for the llamoids,to facilitate transrectal exami
nation,as well as sedation usingxylazine and/or
ketamine.
Puberty, sexual maturity and
breeding season
O:
R
UM
FemaleArabian andBactriancamelsreachpuberty
BU
UB
ICM
at around 3years of age(Chen & Yuen 1979) with
CP
sexual maturity occurring at about 5years of age.
DD
although some growing males and females do show
sexualinterest by the secondyear.Dependingon
body weight,male and female alpaca and llama
Camel
HE
willmatefromabout12months,althoughsexual
maturity isnotreached until 2.5years ofage.Ihave
SF
PS
observed a male Arabian camel calf exhibiting sex-
RPM
ual behaviour as early as 8months.
With the exception of the male llama, male
camelids are seasonal breeders. They live peace-
GP
fully together out of the rutting (breeding) season.
Howeve,during helatter,malecamelids arehostile
to othermales(Ismail 1988).
Opinions on the time of the breeding season in the
Arabian camel areconflicting. lt has been reported to
Fig.32.1Diagram of thereproductiveorgansof themale
be from March-August in Sudan, December-March
dromedary.BU,bulbourethral gland;CP,crus penis;DD,
ductus deferens;GP,glans penis;HE,head of epididymis,ICM,
in Pakistan,November-March in India,April-May
ischiocaverncsus muscle;P,prepuce;PG,prostate gland;PS.
in Somalia,December-May in Egypt, December-
penis;R,rectum;RPM,retractor penismuscle;S,scrotum;SF,
March inTunisia and October-Aprilin Saudi Arabia
sigmoid flexure;T, testis;TE, tail cfepididymis;UB,urinary
(Al-Eknah2000).Thebreeding seasonin theBactrian
bladder;UM,urethralis muscle.(Redrawn with permission
camel is shorter,occurringfrom mid-January tomid
from H.JoeBearden and John W.Fuquay(1997)Applied
Anima/ReproductionSimon&Schuster Inc.)
April in China,forexample（Tibary&Memon1999)
810
Chapter
|321
Reproduction in Camelidae
neartiepoll.They are active aftersexual maturity and
testes have descended into the scrotum at birth;they
duringthe rutting season.Theirroleis thought to be
are soft and difficult topalpate.
for attraction of the female camel formating.Their
The testes ofcamelidsmembers are relatively
secretion,whichruns downthebackof theneck,is
small,compared with the testes ofother farm ani-
darkbrownincolourandcontainsapheromonethat
mals,weighing 60-100g for the Old World and
is attractive to thefemale（Fig.32.2).
20-30g for the New World,camels.ln the Old
Thetestes ofcamelids,containedwithinthenon-
Worldcamels andvicuna,the testesincrease insize
pendulousscrotum,arelocatedintheperinealregion,
during the rutting season,which is associated with
justventral tothe anus,withtheirlongitudinal axes
increased sperm ouput.The average daily sperm
positioned berween the vertical and horizontal (Fig.
productionper gram ofparenchymais 0.751x10°,
32.3).Testicular descent in theOld World camels
lower than that of otherfarm animals.
commencessoon afterbirthandiscompleted dur-
The epididymis islocated along the dorsal bor-
ing the second year.However,theNewWorld camel
der of the testis,with the head curving around the
cranialpole.Thetail isroundedandprominent.
Theductusdeferenswidens towardsthepelvicure-
thra to form the ampulla.The penis is fibroelas-
ticwith aprescrotal sigmoidflexure.Separation of
the penis from theprepuce atpuberty is complete
by the second or third year in all camelids.The
non-erected penis is directed caudally,so that uri
nation is towards therear.Theglanspenisishook-
shaped.The urethral orifice opens on theleft side
of the glans penis in Arabian and Bactrian camels.
Inllamoids,there isa cartilaginous urethral pro
cess onwhichtheurethra opens ventrally at the
base,not the tip.Itis said that it helps to guide the
penis through the cervical canal at coitus (Sumar
2000).
Fig.32.2The site of the poll gland(PG)in themale Arabian
Female reproductive system
camel.Notehowitssecretion becomesdispersed over the
neck (S).
Themost strikingfeatureofcamelid ovaries is that
each is enclosed within thie ovarian bursa.The ova-
riesoftheArabian andBactrian camelsareoval in
shape and located on thecranial borderof the broad
ligament just lateral to the uterine horns. Their
length, width and thickness range from 2.5-6.0 cm,
1.5-4.0cm and 0.5-1.5cm respectively.The diam-
eter of the mature follicle ranges from 1.2-2.2cm
and the mature corpus luteum (CL) ranges from
1.2-3.7cm in diameter.
Theovariesofthellamoidsaresimilarinshape
and position,although smaller,weighing about
2.5g,andmoreellipsoid.Their length,width and
thickness range from 0.5-2.5cm,1.0-2.0cm and
0.5-1.5 cm,respectively, depending on the stage of
the oestrous cycle.The uterine tubes are similar to
Fig.32.3Subanal perineal location cf thescrotum in the
other farm animals,with alength rangingbetween
camel.A,anus;S,scrctum.
20 and30cm.
811
Part
Exotic species
The most characteristic feature of the camelid
with the occurrence of dominant follicles being
uterus is thattheleft uterine horn is longer than the
evenly distributedbetween the two ovaries.Plasma
right.The uterus of the non-pregnant nulliparous
oestradiol andoestrogen conjugate concentrations
temaleis locatedwithin thepelviccavity,whereas,
were positively associated (p<0.05) with follicular
with parity,the uterus extendsbeyond thepelvic
activity(Bravo etal 1990).
brim into theabdomen.Theuterinebody is coin-
The interval between two successivemature folli-
paratively small, about 2.5 cm in length, which is
cular phasesranges between 14 and 28 days for the
lessthan10%ofthetotaluterinelength
OldWorldcamels and10-15daysforthellamoids.
The length of the cervix of the Old World camel
The duration of oestrus is dependent on whether or
ranges from 4.0-6.5cm,and that ofllamoids from
not mating occurs, lasting 3 days ifit does but up to
2.0-5.0cm.Since ejaculation in camelids occurs
7 days if it does not.
intrauterinely,theexternalcervicaloscanreadily be
On transrectal palpation, the uterus feels tonic
dilated with a finger or catheter.Thevagina is about
and firm during oestruswith the presence ofone or
30cm in length.The mammary gland comprises
more mature follicles.In theArabian camel,maxi-
four quarters.
mum oestradiol concentrations inthe peripheral
blood are about 40 pg/ml when the follicle reaches
Oestrous cycle
about 1.7cm in diameter and,even though it will
continuetogrow,concentrationsfall tobasalvalues
Follicular growth of female Camelidae occurs in
of20pg/ml.In the absenceofovulation,progester-
regular waves during the rutting season. The use of
oneconcentrationsremainlow at lessthanlng/ml;
the term‘oestrous cycleis debatable, since,in the
however, following mating and ovulation the con-
absence of mating and hence ovulation (camelids
centrations graduallyincrease,reachingmaximum
are induced ovulators),there is no luteal phase.
valuesofabout3ng/mlafter8or9days.Inthe
For this reason it has been suggested that the term
absence of pregnancy they decline tobasal levels by
‘follicular wave pattern’should be used (Musa&
day 11-12(Skidmore2003).
Abusineina 1978, Skidmore et al 1996). Cyclical
Camelid females do not usually exhibit overt signs
follicular activitycanbedivided into threedistinct
of oestrus other than acceptance of themale when
phases,described as the growthphase,the mature
hand teased,or when they observe other camels
phase and the regression phase.There is variation,
mating. Some females may show signs of amucus
but thedurationofthesethreephasesare10.5±
dischargefrom thevulva.On transrectalpalpation,
0.5,7.6±0.8 and 11.9±0.8 days,respectively, in
（inllamoids this depends on thesize and parity of
theArabiancamel(Skidmoreelal 1996).The same
thefemaleand thesizeofthieexaminer'shand)at
authorsobservedthatinabout50%offollicular
leastoneovulatoryfolliclecanusuallybepalpatedon
wave cycles studied,the mature follicle reached
oneovary,and theuterusis tonic.
a diameter of 2.0 ±0.1cm before it regressed.
Normally,ahealthyfemalellamoidcanproducea
However in other cycles studied,themature folli-
cria every year,with 20 crias throughout the breed-
cle continued growing over 18.4 ± 0.8 days, before
ing life. Old World camels can produce a hewar
reaching a maximum diameter of 4.1 ± 0.2cm and,
every2years,with eight hewars throughout their
afterpersistingor4.6±0.5days,ifinallyregressed
breedinglife.
after 15.3 ± 1.1 days.
The follicle growth phase in llama (from 3mm
in diameter) averages 4.8 days, the duration of the
Synchronization of follicular activity
maturephase（follicles 8-12mm in diameter) aver-
ages 5.0 days and the regression phase about 4 days.
Group matings and artificial insemination require
Thedevelopmentofasubsequentdominantfolli-
reliablemethodsforthesynchronizationoffollicu-
cle usually begins within 2-3 days after the onset of
lar activity, and hence oestrus.
regression of the previous dominant follicle.while
The following techniques have been used:
several folliclesarepresent at thetime of the demise
·the progesterone releasing intravaginal device
ofthedominant follicle,onlyonefolliclecontin-
（PRID)and controlled intravaginal drug release
ues todevelop.Theinterval betweenovarianfollicle
(CIDR) inserted intravaginally for7-14 days have
wavesaveraged11.1days.Dominantfollicular actiy-
beenusedto synchronizeoestrusinagroupofcam-
ity alternatedbetweenovaries in81%of thecycles,
elids,with variable results(see Figs.1.37and 1.38)
812
Chapter
1321
Reproductionin Camelidae
·dailyintramuscular or subcutaneous injection of
100mg of progesterone powder prepared in ses-
ameoilfor7-14days
·injection of prostaglandin (PG)F in a group of
earlypregnant female camelidsresults in oestrus
occurringin4-8days.
Matingbehaviour and the
copulation process
Vigorousnalesinrutmaybreakoutofenclosuresor
disrupt theirtethers to seek out femalesin oestrus.They
exhibitcertainbehaviourswhentheyconfrontafemale
in oestrus,or a competing male.TheArabian camel
extrudes the soft palatewhilemakinga gurglingsound
Fig.32.5Copulation in theArabian camel.Note tha the
gland secretion and grinds is teeth.The Bactrian male
female(cow) is recumbent.
camel doesnotextrudethesoftpalatebutfrothsfrom
the mouth.Malellamoidsinrut becomerestless,circle
sideofher(Fig.32.5).The duration ofcopulation
aroundconfiningfences andstand on theirhindlimbs.
can vary,tending to decrease as the weatherbecomes
Males seek outfemales thatarein oestrusby smelling
warmer.Onaverage,theArabiancamelmatesfor5.5
the vulva, perineum and urine (Old World camels)
minutes,with a range of 3-25minutes, and llam-
or smelling the female's dung on the ground (llam-
oidsfor3-60 minutes(averagefor llamas18and
oids).Pheromones in theurine or dungof theoestrous
alpaca 20 minutes).
females stimulate the male to show flehmen (Fig.
Females in oestrus quicklyrespond to the male
32.4),a behavioural olfactory response in which he
by becoming recumbent.However, some females,
fully extends the head andneckwhileraising theupper
especially inexperienced females or those exhibit-
lipandmakingshallowrespirationmovements(Old
ing sire preference,will not accept a particular male.
Worldcamels)orwithan openmouth(llamoids).
He will attempt to induce recumbency by press-
Matingoccurs with thefemaleinsternalrecum-
bency,and themale squattingbehind herwith his
ter（llamoids).Following successful courtship,the
hindlegsflexedand hisforelegsextendedoneither
malesquats on thefemale,pushes himself towards
theperineum of thefemaleand directs hispenisfor-
wardto seekoutthevulva.Partialerection occurs
after the femaleis mounted,and the penis is not
fullyextendeduntil afterintromission is complete.
Ejaculation occurs several times during copulation,
when themalesiretcheshisentirebodyandextends
his neck.
Llamoidmaleslosetheir libidowhenleft for a
few days with females in one pen. Therefore hand-
breeding isrecommendedin these species,although
the disadvantageis that thefemalemightbe forced
tomatewhenthefolliclesarenotattheiroptimum
size,6-8mmin diameter.
Ovulationin Camelidae
Ovulation incamelids is inducedby the actofcopu
Fig.32.4Amale Bactrian camel displaying flehmen.Note the
lation.This maybeduetomechanical stimulation
elevated upper lip(arrow).
of the female genital tract;however,in theBactrian
813
Part
171
Exotic species
camel andalpaca anovulation-inducingfactor has
OldWorldcamels,despiteanincidenceof14%for
been identified in seminal fluid. This substance,
twinovulations,mostofwhich arefertilized.Thus
whichhas been shown to beeither a proteinorpoly-
death of the second embryo is very common.
peptide with gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
Theamniondevelopsfrom day14and
(GnRH)-like activity(Zhao et al 1992,Pan etal
the allantochorion is formedbydays 24-28
2001),will induce ovulationwhen seminalfluid is
post-ovulation.
placeddeepintravaginallyoradministeredbyintra-
Thetypeofplacentationin theCamelidaeissim-
muscular injection.Interestingly,in the Arabian
ple diffuse(see Ch.2).The microvilliare distributed
camel it will not induce ovulation.Skidmore el al
evenly over the fetal chorion,and the fetal chori-
（1996) have shown that inthe Arabian camel the
onicepithelium isincontact withthe epithelium of
abilityofthe follicdetoovulate isdependenton
theendometrium withno loss ofmaternal tissue.
its size: the optimum for responding is when it is
A unique featurein all camelids is theformation of
1.0-1.9cm diameter.In llamasand alpacas,follicles
an extrafetalmembrane(theepidermalmembrane,
need tobemorethan6.9mm in diameter,sinceif
epithelium or fourthmembrane),which surrounds
theyarelessthan thissizetheywill notrespondand
the whole fetus.
ifregressing they will become luteinized without
Pregnancy failure is not uncommon in camelids.
ovulating(Bravoetal 1990).
Early embryonic deathand abortion can be as high
as 40% and 20% respectively.
The length of gestation in Old World camels
Conceptionrate following mating
ranges beiween375 and415 days,being somewhat
Thefirstfactor determiningwhetherornotthereis
shorter（335-365days)inllamoids.This variation
fertilizationisthefertilityofthemale.Ifheisfertile,
ingestationlengthcanbeduetothemethodofhus-
then the second determining factor is the mating
bandry,number ofmatings duringoestrus,parity of
process and thecapability of thefemale toconceive.
thedam,sex of thefetus,levelof feedingor season
The duration of copulation is important, since high
ofconception.
ovulation andconception rates occur if the copula-
The peripheral plasma progesterone concentra-
tion timeisatleast 5minutes.Thesizeofthefollicu-
tions inthenon-pregnant camel arelow.Following
largrowth at matingisalsoimportant.Themature
matingatleast oneCLisformed,secretingasignifi
follicleshouldbe12-20mmindiameterincam-
cant amount ofprogesterone;values abovelng/ml
eloids and5-Smm in llamoids.The preparedness
arerecorded during pregnancy in all camelid species.
ofthegenital tract of thefemale is thefinal step
Since the only source of progesterone throughout
towards successfulconception.
pregnancyis heCL,ovariectomyatanystageofr
nancy is followed by abortion orpremature birth.
Atmid-gestation a rise in oestrogen concentrations
Pregnancy
isdueeithertocontinuedfolliculardevelopment
Althoughcamelidovaries arealmostequally active,
during pregnancy or secretion from the placenta, or
theembryo andfetuswillonlydevelopintheleft
both. High concentrations of oestrogen are present
uterine horn,although theright horn is involved
in allantoicfluidon the dayofparturition.
in the formationof the placenta.Embryosmigrate
The cervical plug provides an important physical
from therighthornviatheuterinebodyintotheleft
seal of the external cervical os during pregnancy;its
horn,whereimplantation occuurs.
presence is a useful indication ofpregnancy.The
Theembryoenterstheuterusfromtheuterinetube
physicochemical propertiesofthe cervicalmucus
at day6-7aftetovulationin OldWorldcamelsand at
are related to increases in the plasma progesterone
day3-4 in llamoids,the blastocyst being in the pro-
concentrationsresultingin aparallel increasein the
cess ofhatching.Maternalrecognition ofpregnancy
protein,alkaline and acid phosphatase concentra-
(seeCh.3)hasto occurearlier thianinotherdomes-
tioninthemucus(Al-Eknahetal1997).Adecrease
ticspecies,namelybeforeday8(Skidmore2003),the
in thedegreeofhydration,whichisunder theinflu
signal being similar to that produced in the pig and
ence ofprogesterone,leadsto either mucus con-
horse,i.e.the synthesis of oestrogensby the embryo.
centration or alteration in glycoprotein and other
Multiplebirths areuncommon in camelids.Musa&
cellular proteins, forming linkages affecting the
Abusineina(1978)quotedanincidenceof0.4%in
elasticity of themucus.
814
Chapter
|321
Reproduction in Camelidae
Diagnosis of pregnancy
·Progesterone assays: A peripheral plasma proges-
teroneconcentrationaboveIng/mlisusuallyindic
Response to the male: If, when the male confronts
ative of pregnancy.However, subsequent death of
the female, she repeatedly fails to become recim-
the conceptus cani occur afler a positive result.
bent following pressure to the neck or hindquar-
ters, she is probably pregnant. The pregnant Old
·Transrectal palpation:This procedure is relatively
easy in Old World camels but in llamoids it is
World camelshows thecharacteristicfeature ofa
dependent on the sizeof the animal and theveter-
persistet raised tail called tashweel (Fig. 32.6).The
pregnant female llamoid puts her ears back and
inarian's hand.Duringthe lst month ofgestation,
the uterus becomes flaccid and one (or both) ovary
spits or attacks the male when he approaches,and
moves away when he sniffs the perineum.Lsually,
will contain one or more CL.Swelling at the base
mature and experienced males show little interest
of the left uterine horn can be palpated during the
2nd month of gestation,however,with advancing
in pregnant females.
pregnancy, the uterus becomes more distended.
The left and right ovaries can bereached until the
4th and 7th months,respectively, after which they
are out-of-reach.
·Vaginal examination: Using a vaginal speculum,
the rnucosa of both the vagina and cervix can
be seen to become dry during early pregnancy.
However, by the middle of pregnancy, the mucosa
of the anteriorvagina and cervix are covered by a
layer of sticky mucus.A manual examination of
the vagina, especially in the early pregnant female
is contraindicated since itis easy to dilate thecer
vix and induce abortion.
·B-mode real-time ultrasonography: This is the
most reliable method of diagnosing pregnancy.
particularly in the early stages. In Old World cam-
els it is done transrectally,whereas in llamoids the
transabdominal left flank approach is probably
the most reliable, with the transducer head placed
over the relatively hairless area as far caudally
and dorsally as possible; this can be done from
40 days.However, it is possible using the transrec
tal approach to identify the conceptus as early as
12-14 days.
Differential diagnosis of pregnancy
A cyst-like structure formed at the infundibulum of
the uterine tube of the Arabian camel can be con-
fused with pregnancy (Ali et al 1992), because its
weight pulls the uterus over the pelvic brim and
into the abdomen, thus resembling pregnancy.
Ultrasound scanning of the cyst will identify a
large anechogenic struciure but with no embryo or
fetus.
Fig.32.6Female Bactrian(a)and Arabian (b) camels tash-
camel because of the frequent and unhygienic vag-
weel. Note the raised tail(arrows).
inal examinations carried out by owners and the
815
Exotic species
copulatory behaviour of he male camel, On trans-
·Abortion:Non-infectious abortion has been
rectal palpation, it usually resembles a 2-3-month
pregnancy (Enany et al 1990). Ulltrasonography
plasmosis-and chlamydiosis have been found
shows the presence of a largely hypoechoicmass
to cause aborion in llamoids.Experimentally
with anechoic and hyperechoic areas but with no
Gidlewski et al (2000) were able to induce abor-
embryo or fetus.Hydrometra and muicometra occur
tion in one llama in a group of 12 by inorulating
occasionally,associatedwith a persistent hymen in
1x10 viable Brucella abortus organisms into the
nulliparous or vaginal adhesions in parous females
conjunctival sac; it has not been isolated after spon-
due to the accumulation of fluid because ofimpaired
taneous abortions so far. Neospora spp.have been
drainage.
associated with abortion in alpacas and llamas.
Abortions have been reported in camels infected
Care of the pregnant animal
with riftvalley fever;other clinical signswere min-
imal. Antibodies against blue tongue virus were
Pregnant females do not usually need special care;
reported in camels in Sudan and in Saudi Arabia;
however, frequent handling and particularly rough
however, there were no clinical signs of abortion.
vaginalexaminationsperformedbycamelowners
Cervical-vaginal prolapse occurs in camelids, usu-
can lead to early embryonic death or abortion.
ally during late gestation (Fig.32.7). I1 can occur in
It is preferable to breed female camelids early in
non-pregnant fermales with anecdotalevidencethiat
the season, so that calving occurs before the end of
it is due to hyperoestrogenism. Manual replace-
the subsequent breeding season.
ment, followed by the use of a retainer made of
Males should not beallowed access to females
during the third trimester of pregnancy, since pla-
can help to retain the prolapse until the onset of
centa-derived oestrogens produced at that tine rnay
parturition, after which it disappears.
suiggest that the pregnant female is in oestrus.
·Uterine torsion:Rotation of the uterus about its
longitudinal axis (torsion)usually occurs dur-
Pathology ofpregnancy
ing late pregnancy but is only discovered during
labour because it causes dystocia in all species of
·Pseudopregnancy: A sterile mating will indluce
ovulation without ferilization, resulting in the
camelids. It is probably due to the disparity of the
formation of a CL(s) and thus a short pseudopreg-
uterine hiorns because of pregnancy always occur-
nancy. However, the absence of an embryo, with
ring in the left horn, rendering the suspension
of the uterus unstable, Although rolling the dam
no maternal recognition of pregnancy, is normally
followed by luteolysis of the CL(s)and a return
may help to correct the torsion in llamoids, man-
to oestrus. Sometimes, early embryonic death may
ual correction through a flank laparotomy is nec-
be followed not by luteolysis but by persistence of
essary in Old World camels.
the CL(s) and a pseudopregnancy.
·Conception failure:Fertilization failure and
early embryonicloss are not uncommon in cam
elids, particularly in Arabian camels.Those that
show repeated returns to oestrus after mating are
referred to as'repeat breeders', which is usually
associated with lesions of the uterus or uterine
tubes.
·Pseudohermaphroditism and freemartinism:
Both have been reported in llamas.
·Fetal mummification has been reported in both
Old and New World camelids.The sterile death of
a well-developed fetusmay be followed by persis-
tence of theCLwithresorption ofthefetal fluids
and soft tissue, leaving a fetal mummy within the
Fig.32.7Vaginal prolapse in anArabiancamel,asindicated
by thearrow
iterlis.
816
Chapter
1321
Reproductionin Camelidae
Parturition
cases immediate assistance is generally required.
ConversationswithBedouincamelownersindicate
The premonitory signs of approachingparturition
theirfamiliaritywiththerecognition andtreatment
include separationfrom theherd,restlessness,relax-
of dystocias due tu faulty disposition, such as car-
ationofthesacrosciaticligamientsandswellingof
pal flexion,lateral deviation of thehead and hock
the vulva accompanied by a vulvar discharge result-
and hip flexion,although posterior presentation is
ingfrom liquefactionof thecervical plug.Appetite
uncommon.Fetopelvic disproportion,monstrosi-
maybenormal until anhour orsobeforethestart of
ties and transverse presentations arerare,and thefre-
labour.Some of thesepremonitory signs maycom-
quency of twin births is of the order of 0.1-0.4%. In
mence as early as15 daysbeforelabour.
a recentreportedstudy conducted over 10years in
The firststageoflabourischaracterized byincreased
SaudiArabia,maternalandfetal causeswererespon-
myometrial contractility and complete relaxation
sible for 43% and57% of the cases,respectively.Of
andpassive dilatation of thecervix.Theanimal may
the maternal causes, uterine torsion was responsible
look at her flank, grind her teeth, increase the fre
for50%,primaryuterineinertiafor20%,incomplete
quency of urination and defecation, stand up and
cervicaldilatation for20%andvaginalandvulvar
liedown,movearound andraisefhetail.The first
stenosis for10%(Aboul-Fadleetal 1993).In the
phaselasts4-40hoursintheOldWorldcamels and
same study,faulty fetal posture wasresponsiblefor
2-3 hours in llamoids; this phase is usually longer
90%of fetal dystocias.I have seenmany casesof fetal
in primiparous than multiparousfemales.
maceration following dystocia in Arabian camels.
Llamoidsnormallygivebirthduringdaylight,when
Underfieldconditions,the correctionof limb and
the damcanavoidpredatorsandwhenitiswarmfor
neckflexions,wheresubstantial fetalretropulsion is
the newborn.However,the Old World camel dams
required,canbefacilitatedbycasting thedam,font
give birth at any time of the day and night.
endfirst,inadeeppitoronaslopeexcavatedinthe
The appearance of the fetus enclosed within its
sand,so that therear endis elevated.Headandlimb
membranes at the vulva and the presence ofregu-
extensionseemsmuchmoredifficult to achievethan
larstrainingindicatethe onsetofsecond stage of
inthe cow.Limited experience indicates that the
labour.The dam is very restless,standing up and
camelfetus survives dystociabetter than the equine
lying down ineither sternalorlateralrecumbency;
fetusand that thecamel isagoodsubjectfor thecae-
however, the fetus is normally expelled with the
sarean operation.When the fetus is dead,fetotomy
dam standing.The second stage of labour normally
using Thygesen's embryotome can be successful. For
lasts0.25-1.0hours,although frequently it is much
a caesarean operation,thecamel is cast on her right
shorterin llamoids.
side underxylazinesedation and the operationisper-
The expulsion of thefetal membranes(third stage
formed underregionalinfiltration anaesthesia alonga
of labour)usually takes less than 1 hour;none of
vertical incision in theposterior aspect of theleft sub-
thefamilyCamelidaelickthenewborn oreat the
lumbar area.Iandmycolleagues have delivered a live
afterbirth.
fetus withirreduciblehock lexionby caesarean oper-
ation17 hours after rupture of the amniochorion.
Careofthedamandnewborn
Induction ofparturition
High mortality rates (>25%) among newborn
hewars and crias has been reported, especially dur-
Parturition can be induced prematurely using
ing the first 3 weeks of life and especially due to
corticosteroids or prostaglandins.However, the
diarrhoea,cold shockand heatstress(Wilson1986,
owner must be informed beforehand about the
Bustinza et al 1988).Traditionally,the Bedouin do
adverse consequences,such as retention of the fetal
notbreed in thelateseason to avoidthe damscaly-
membranes.
ing during the hot season.
Postparturientproblems
Dystocia
Uterine prolapse is a fairly common complica-
There is a scarcity of published information on the
tion post-partum. Replacement under caudal epi-
incidence of dystocia in camelids.In alpacas,it is
dural isvery similar to that described in thecow
low（2%-5%)（Tibary&Anouassi1997),butinsuch
(see Ch.18).
817
Part
171
Exotic species
·Retention ofthefetal membranes:Fetal membranes
management strategies. Both male and female fac
are considered toberetainedif they havenotbeen
tors are responsible for canelid subfertility.
expelledby1 hour afterthebirthof thecalf.Thedis-
order is rarein camelids, perhaps ecause of the ye
Female infertility
ofplacentation,ie.diffuseepithelialchorial.
Congenitalanatomical defects
Uterine and cervical involution
Ovarian hypoplasia, persistent hymen ovarian
agenesis and freemartinism have been reported in
On the third day post-partum,the uterus in Old
Arabian camels and llamoids.
World camels can be palpated transrectally,with
some difficulty becauseofits size.Theuterinewall is
still thickened with longitudinal rugae.10-15 days
Acquired anatomical defects
latertheuteruscanbereadilypalpated;involution
Parturient traumaof thetubulargenital tract,vaginal
is complete by 16-20 days post-partum.By16-20
adhesions and perineal rupture are themost common,
days post-partum,thecervix appears closed but with
whereas neoplasia of the genital organs is considered
some congestion of the cervical folds. By day 26-30
low in Camelidae.Cyst-lilkestructureshavebeeniden
post-partum,thecervixis involuted
tified associatedwith theinfundibulumoftheuterine
In llamoid dams,uterine and cervical involution
is saidtooccurmorerapidly thanin cameloids.
Al-Eknah and Ali 2001,Aliet al 1992).
Breeding during the postparturient
Hormonal imbalance
period
Follicular cysts are common in camelids (El-Wishy
Female llamoids can be rebred 12-15 days post-
&Hemeida1984),resulting innymphomania;they
calving,ifno postparturient complications have
aretreatedwith GnRH- orhuman chorionicgonado
occurred.Cameloidsnormallyhave a longanoestrus
following parturition,if they suckle their calves,
trophin (hCG).
Early embryonic death with persistence of the CL
althoughif well fed they maycomeintooestrus.This
will certainly occur if the calf dies or isweaned.
can cause pseudopregnancy,which can be success-
fully treated with PGF
Infertility in camelidae
Environmental factors
Llamoids are particularly susceptible to heat stress,
The reproductive rate in camelids has always been
withprolonged exposure tohigh temperaturescaus-
described aslow (Gordon 1997).This was shown
ingretardation of the growth rate of the developing
by studies of 30 herds in Tunisia where there was
fetus,andpossibly seriousillness and even death in
a calvingrateof40%andamortalityratebetween
the dam.In contrast,adultcameloidsadapt well to
birthand 1yearof17%（Djellouli&Saint-Martin
extremesofbothheat andcold,although thenew
1992).However,anecdotal evidence from some
bom are susceptible to hyperthermia and hypo-
Bedouins is that, for every 100 Arabian camels
thermia.The forimer can be avoided by providing
mated,80-90producecalves.About 1% aresterile.
shelters with water sprinklers and the latter by pro-
Their fertility ismaintained throughout life,so that,
viding deep strawbedding and a dry shelter with
bybreedingin alternate years,which is the usual
protectionfrom the wind.
practice,a female canyield a total of 12offspring
although an averageof something less than eight
Poormanagement
seems more likely. One mating per oestrus is usu-
ally allowed,and itispossiblefora maleto serve
The absent of breeding records can be considered
fiveorsixfemalesinaday.Itissaidthatonemaleis
tobethemostimportantmanagementdeficiency
sufficientfor200females,withcontrolled breeding,
that results in subfertility.In addition,many Old
buta much smaller number is customary.Fertility
World camel owners do not have a strategy for
in llamoids has been described as good;where sub-
selectionforgoodfertilityorforcullingthosethat
fertility occurs it can usuallyberesolvedby different
are subfertile.
818
Chapter
1321
Reproduction in Camelidae
Nutrition
Nutrition plays avital role in the various physiologi-
cal events leading to the attainment of sexual matu-
rity and subsequently normal reproduction.The
faster the growthrate,theearlier sexualmaturity
occurs. It has been found in Kenya that dam nutri-
tionandhealth statushaveaninfluenceonbirth
weightofthehewars(Wilson1986).Undernutrition
delays puberty in both young males and females
and,if severe,might cause retrogressive changes in
the reproductive organs after their full development
(Tibary&Anouassi1997).
Infectious agents
Fig.32.8Vulvar discharge in anArabian camel (see arrow)
Non-specific uterineinfection is an important cause
following the surgical breakdown ofvaginal adhesions.
of subfertility in camelids.This can be ascribed to
the followingpredisposingfactors:
·The copulationprocess:With thefemale squat
Table32.1Organismscausinguterineinfection incamelids
ting on the ground during coitus for up to 25
Organism
Arabian
Llama
minutes in cameloids and 60minutes in llam-
camel
oids,thereis plenty of opportunity forthepenis
totransfer debris,and hence bacteria,from the
Campylobacterfetus
immediate environment into theuterus.This is
Corynebacteriumpyogenes
+
+
exacerbated by repeated matings
Escherichia coli
+
·Unhygienic and rough intravaginal and intra-
Proteusmirabilis
+
uterine examinations performed by camel
Staphylococcus aureus
+
owners:ItisbelievedbyBedouins that thereason
Pseudomonasaeruginosa
for a female camel failingto conceive is incom-
Neisseria spp.
pleteintromission,inthebeliefthatejaculationis
+
intrauterine.As a consequence,many camel cows
Tritrichomonas fetus
+
aresubjected togentle andgradualdigital dilata-
Pasteurellamultocida
+
tion of the cervix,using butter as a lubricant.After
Staphyiococcus epidermidis
+
十
this treatment,completeintromissionissaid tobe
Actinomyces spp.
十
possible andpregnancy ensues
Streptococcusspp.
+
·Dystocia and postpartum complications:These
Prevotella spp.
may result in theformation of cervical andvaginal
Leptospira spp.
adhesions,which can interferewithuterine drain-
+
age,resultingintheaccumulationofupto15 litres
Toxoplasma spp.
offluid or pus in the uuterus （Fig.32.8）.UIterine
Chlamydia spp.
infectionmay result in endometritis or pyometra;
commonbacterialisolatesresponsibleforuterine
infectionin camelids are shown in Table32.1
is characterizedby the absence of mass spermmotil-
ity and the presence of gel,to which the sperm are
Fertility and infertilityofthe
atracted(Agarwal1995).Liquefaction of the highly
viscoussemencantakeplacewithin60minutesat
maleCamelidae
37°C.However,if liquefactionis delayed formore
Male camelid fertility is generally good; for example,
than 1 hour, sperm longevity is affected. Tables
one maleArabian or Bactrian camel can serve up to
32.2-32.4 show the conparative characteristics of
50femalesin onebreedingseason.Camelid semen
the camelid sperm.
819
Part
Exotic species
Table32.2Characteristicsofcamelid semen
Parameter
Arabian
Bactrian
Lama
Alpaca
Volume(ml)
5-20
1-10
1-5
1-5
Colour
Creamy white to
Creamywhiteto
Milkywhite
Milkywhite
greyish white
greyishwhite
Consistency
Highly viscous
Slightly viscous
Highly viscous
Highly viscous
pH
7.0-8.0
7.2-8.0
7.8-8.3
7.2-8.0
Table32.3Characteristicsofcamelid sperm
Parameter
Arabian
Bactrian
Llama
Alpaca
Individual motility(%)
40-60
60-80
20-60
20-60
Sperm concentration
100-350
200-300
000-09
60-300
(million/ml)
Total sperm
0.5-6
0.2-3
0.06-1.5
0.06-1.5
(billion/ejaculate)
Abnormal sperm(%)
5-20
5-20
10-50
10-50
Table32.4Biochemical compositionof camelid seminal plasma
Component
Arabian
Bactrian
Llama
Alpaca
Protein(g/dl)
1.0-2.4
1.0-1.6
3-4
Fructose(mmoll)
7.0-10.0
7.0-10.0
一
Glucose(mmoll)
0.1-0.5
2.0-4.0
1.2-1.5
Sodium (mmol/l)
156-163
150-165
150-160
Potassium(mmoi/l)
9-17
2-18
Calcium(mmoll)
1.0-1.6
2-3
1.5-3
Albumin(g/)
3.6-7.0
1-3
Magnesium(mEq/l)
2-4
3-4
Phosphorus(mmol/l)
0.3-0.9
0.3-0.9
Infertilityin themalecanbe due topoor libido,
Artificial insemination
which isuncommon,although inllamas themale
will losehis sexual desire when left for a few days
with females in the same pen. Causes of inabil-
Semen collection in camelids is difficultbecause:
ity tocopulate are similar tothosedescribedin
copulation in thesespeciesoccurswith thefemale
other species(see Ch.30).One disorder peculiar
recumbent in a sitting position (see Fig.32.5), it can
to Arabian camelsis trauma to the prepuce and
lastupto60minutesinllamasand25minutes in
penis due to biting injuries following fights;this
Arabian camelsandduringcoitusthereisinterlock-
mayleadtopenileadhesions thatneedsurgical
ingofthehindlimbsofmaleandfemale.
separation.Cryptorchidism isnotuncommonin
Several semen collection techniques described for
camelids （Fig.32.9).
other species havebeenmodifiedand adapted,all
820
Chapter
1321
Reproduction in Camelidae
Lichtenwalner et al (1996) in llamas and
El-Hassanein (2003) in dromedaries describe the
collection of semen using an AV housed inside a
dummy female.Al-Eknahetal (2001) devised a safer
and more convenient method of collecting semen
from the male dromedary in which there was an
excavatedpitbenieath thie collection areawhere the
person collecting the ejaculate using an AV could be
positioned. This enabled appropriate positioning
of the AV beneath the teaser'sperineum and align-
ment with the base of the penis so that seimen col-
lection was relatively easy. In addition, ventral or
lateral bending of the penis was avoided, allowing
better semen discharge as well as providing the col-
lector with a better view of the mating process and
Fig.32.9 Bilateral cryptorclhism in an Arabian camel. (A) Anus
ejaculation. The main disadvantage of using such
and (SC) scrotun with no testes present.
a facility, or a dummy to which the Av is attached,
is the requirement for the male to be trained.
However, once this is achieved,collection is rapid
with varying degrees of success. The two main meth-
and efficient.
ods used are the artificial vagina (AV) and electro-
Seimen used in artificial insemination (AI)
ejaculation.Collection of semen from the camel
programmes should have a sperm concentra-
usingelectroejaculationrequires tranquillizationand
tion, percentage of motile sperm, dead sperm
special restraint. The ejaculate is of low volume and
and abnormal sperm of >325x10%/ml, >50.5%,
poor in quality; in addition, there is the possibility of
<18.0% and <27.7% respectively. Semen quality
contanination wit urine and cellular debris.
is related to the general health and nutritional sta-
TheAV is considered the most suitable means of
tus of the male.
collection (Fig.32.10),with several studies under-
taken to improve the method. Since the rulting
For preservation of camel semen, different extend-
ers have been used such as Laiciphos, Androlep,
male camel can be vicious and aggressive, the most
sodium-cifrate-egg-yolk, Dimitropolous extender,
important consideration in designing facilities for
Tris-egg-yolk and green buffer extenders (Bravo
semen collection is the safety of thehandler and
et al 2000).
collector.
Although AI 24-36 hours after induction of ovu-
alpacas and llamas, one of the obstacles for AI in
camelids is the relatively short life span of sperm in
extended semen of 1-6 hours ar 4°C.
Superovulation and embryo transfer
Thesmall numberofoffspringlikelytobeproduced
by a prestigious female camel in her relatively short
breedingliferestricts the distribution of her desirable
genetic material. Because of the restricted breeding
season and the camel's long gestation period, judi-
cious use of embryo transfer can increasereproduc-
tive efficiency.
Fig. 32.10 Cellecticn of semen from a Bactrisn camel
The optimum responses to superovulatory treat-
using an artificialvagina.Note that with both cow and bull
recumbent the operator has to squaton oneknee.
Of the ovaries. In farm animals, unlike camelids, the
821
Part
171
Exotic species
CL formed following spontaneous ovulation pro-
12 hours later. Ovulation failure can occur if ani-
vides the progesterone priming. Thus, to induce
mals are bred too early or if there is low luteinizing
superovulation for embryo transfer, gonadotrophin
hormone(bH)response.
is usually injected during the luteal phase, which is
then shortened, 24-48 hours later, by the adminis-
Flushing ofembryos
tration of a luteolytic dose of PGFSince members
of the Camelidae are inducedovulatorsandonly
Donors are flushed 6-9 days from the first mating.
have CLs following mating,it is possible that the
The embryos recovered on day 7range from compact
progesterone-dominated environment of dioestrus,
morulae to expanded blastocysts.Both surgical and
which is thought to be necessary to provide prim-
non-surgical embryo recovery have been performed
ingfor the wave of follicular growth in spontane-
in camelids. A transvaginal-ultrasonography-guided
ously ovulating species, may not be necessary in
techniquehasbeen used to collect embryos from
Camelidae.
llama and alpaca. The non-surgical method has been
For superovulation, equine chorionic gonadotro-
performed using either the close-circuit (continuous
phin(eCG) has been used successfully at dose rates
flow method) or syringe technique (Ebb interrupted
ofbetween500 and 1000IU forllamoids and 1000-
method)(see Ch.35).The medium used for flush-
3000iu for cameloids to stimulate the ovaries to
ing is Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DpBS)
produce multiple follicles.However, higher doses of
with 1% lheat-treated fetal calf serum.Antibiotics
eCGmay hyperstimulatethe ovaries,resulting in the
formation of follicularcysts with a diameterof more
The type of superovulatory treatments used can
than 2.5cm.Another method for superovulation
also affect the embryo recovery rale. eCG treatmenis
involves the use of 1-3mg ovine follicle stimulat-
usually result in low recovery rates, probably due
to an increase in spontaneous lutenization associ-
davs; it gives better results but is time-consuming.
ated with the high LH activity in eCG and its long
Combined treatmentwith eCG and FSH has given
half-life.Tie time of initiation of the superovulatory
more promising results. Recenily. studies using
treatment also affects ihe embryo recovery, thebest
priming with GnRH, followed by eCG and/or FSH
results being obtained when treatment is initiated in
(Ismail et al 2008) have been suiccessful. The gonad-
absence of any follicle growth. The time of flushing
otrophins are given just before, or after, the removal
may also affect embryo recovery, since the suggested
of thePRIDorCIDR,oron thelastdayofotherpro-
optimum timeforflushing dromedarycamelsis day
gesterone therapy.Exogenousgonadotrophinsmay
7-9 after mating and treaiment with GnRH.
also be administered during a luteal phase created
by mating the female with a sterile malc.
Management of recipients and
The superovulatory response to exogenous gonad-
transfer of embryos
otrophin therapy varies between individuals, with
embryo recovery per donor camel ranging from 0-30,
For immediate transfer ofembryos, the ovarian activ-
with a current mean ofsixper donor(Skidmore&
ity of the recipient females should be synchronized
Adams 2000).
with that of the donor female.I is recommended
thal embryosshould betransferred on day 6follow-
Breeding after superovulation
ing ovulation in recipients.
Collected embryos form donors at day 7-9 are
In order to achieve good superovulation rales,
generally at the hatched blastocyst stage. Embryos
donors should be monitored using ultrasonogra-
used for transfer should be morphologically nor-
phy andpalpation throughout thetreatmentregime
mal. Ovulation is induced in the recipient females
and bred when the follicles reach a suitable size
by the use afvasectomized males, or the injection of
of between 6-8 inm in diameter for llamoids and
hCGor GnRH.
13-16mm in Old World camels.
Freshly collected embryos can be stored for few
To ensuire optimum fertilization rates of super-
hours prior to transfer in DPBS media. However,
ovulated animals,a single injection of GnRH or
long-term storage requires freezing and the use of
hCG at the first mating or insemination should be
the associated technology described for other spe-
given.Mating or insemination should be repeated
cies (see Ch. 35).
822
Chapter
1321
Reproduction in Camelidae
Eachembryoisloadedintoa0.25mlAlstraw
El-Wishy AB,Hemeida NA 1984Vet MedJ32:295
and, using a modified Cassou insemination gun,is
EnanyM,HanaM,lGedFtal 90yed
transcervicallyintroduced intotheleftuterinehorn,
Assoc50:229
Gidlewski T,ChevilleN,Rhyan]etal2000Vet Pathol37:77
irrespectiveofwlietliertheCLisontheipsilateral or
Gordon[1997In:Gordon1(ed) Controlled reproduc-
contralateral ovary.
tion in horses,deer and Camelidae.CAB International,
Wallingford,Oxon,p1s9-208
Hafez ESE,Hlafez B (eds)Reproduction in farm animals.
References
Lippincol Williams&Willkins,Philadelphia
Ismail ST1988Theriogenology29:1407
Ismail ST,Al-EknahMMAIBusadahKA2008SciJ King
Ahoul-FadleWS,Al-Eknah MM,Bolbol AEetal 1993 In:
Faisal UIniv BasicAppl Sci9:103
2ndScientific Congressof theEgyptian Society for Cattle
Larson].Ho|2004InformationResourcesonOldWorld
Diseases,Assiut,Egypt,5-7December1993,p9097
Camels:ArabianandBactrian1941-2004.Animal Welfare
Agarwal SP 1995IntAnimSci10:365-370
Information Center.Belisville,USA
Al-Eknah MM2000AnimReprodSci60-61:583-592
LichtenwalrABWodsGLWebeA996Theriogenolgy
Al-Eknah MM,Ali AM 2001 Emirates JAgric Sci13:52-56
46:293
Al-Eknah MM,Homeida AM,Al-BishrBE1997Pakistanet
Musa BE,Abusineina ME 1978 Vet Rec 102:7
]17:91-93
Pan G,ChenZ.Lui D et al 2001 Theriogcnology 55:1863
Al-EknahM,Hemeida N,Al-HaiderA2001 Camel Pract Res
Skidmore IA 2003 Reprod Rumin VI(Reproduction Suppl)
2:127-130
61:37
AliAMA,El-Sanousi SM,Al-EknahMM etal1992RevElev
Skidmore L,Adams G 2000 Recent advances in camelid
MedPaysTrop 45:243-253
reproduction.International Veterinary Information Service,
BravoPW,Fowler ME,Stabenefeldt GH,LaselyBL1990 Biol
Itheca,NY
Reprod43:579-585
SlidmoreJA,BillahM,AllenWR1996Repiod Fertil 106:185
BravoPW,SkidmoreJA,ZhahoXX2000AnimReprodSci
SkidmoreA.BillahM,ShortRV,AllenWR2001Reprod
62:173-193
FertilDev 13:647
BustinzaAV,BurfeningP),Blackwell RL 1988|Anim Sci
Sumar I2000 In:Hafez ESE,Hafez B （ed)Reproduction
66:1139
infarm animals.LippincotWilliams&Wilkins
Chen BX,Yuen ZX 1979 In: Cockerill WR (ed) The camclid:
Philadelphia.p218-236
an all purpose animal. Scandinavian Institute of African
Tibary A,Anouassi A 1997Theriogenology in Camelidae.
Studies,Uppsala,vol.1,p364
Abu-Dhabi Printing and Publishing Co,Ahu-Dhabi
DjellouliMS,Saint-Martin G 1992 In:Proceedings of the
Tibary A,Anouassi A 2000 In:Skidmore L,Adams GP(ed)
IstInternational Camel Conference,DubaiLnited Arab
Recent advancesin camelid reproduction.Intemational
Emirates,p 209-212
VeterinayIoratinviceacaY
El-1lassanein E 2003 In: Skidmore L,Adams G （ed) Recent
Tibary A,Memon MA 1999] Camel PraciRes6:235
advancesin camelidreproduction.International Veterinary
WilsonRT198GAnimProd42:375-380
Information Service.Ithaca,NY,p1-9
ZhaoXX,HuangYM.ChenBX 1994IAridEnviron 26:61
823
33
Chapter
Nazir Ahmad
and
David Noakes
Reproduction in the buffalo
The buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) contributes signifi-
where often they are farmed intensivelyfor millk and
cantly to the eronomics of many tropical and sub-
meat production (Oswin Perera 1999).
tropical counries. These include Mediterranean and
In order to combine the higher milk yield of the
Middle Eastern countries, the whole of the Indian
river buffalo with the better working capacity and
subcontinent, south-east Asia,including southern
meat output of the swamp buffalo, cross-breeding
China and,more recenily,some South and Central
between the two types is practised. Despite their dif
American countries and Australia.Worldwide there
ferent karyotypes, the cross-breeds are fertile (Fischer
are about 158million (Madan & Prakash 2007). The
number are increasing annually at a rate of 1.3%
calves and the male hybrid, despite the presence of
(FAO 2000). They have been classified into three
a high percentage of degenerating spermatocytes
types: river, swamp and Mediterranean (Cockrill
and abnormal spermatids in the testes (Bongso ei al
1974). The two main types, which are collectively
1983), is capable of siring calf crops comparable to
referred to as water buffaloes and comprise 153 mil-
purebred male swamp bufaloes.
lion aninals worldwide, are the swamp and river
buffaloes, classified according to the environment
Female reproduction
(swamp buffalo) or in running water (river buf-
falo).The swamp buffalo is stocky in stature with a
Anatomy of the reproductive organs
rounded conformation;it has a chromosome con-
figuration of 48and is mainly used on small farms
The structure and location of the internal repro-
for draught purposes and meat. lt is the dominant
ductive organs of the buffalo are similar to those
type in east and south-east Asia. The river buffalo,
ofcattle.However, the vulvar labia are less tightly
which has a chromosome configuration of 50,pro-
opposed and the clitoris is more developed. The
videsmilkfor human consumption.Althiough they
cervix is less conspicuous and comprises four to five
are mainly reared extensively on small farms,in
rings of tissue. The uterine horns are smaller and
some situations especially near large towns and cit-
more coiled and the number of caruncles is lower
ies, they are farmed quite intensively,being confined
than in cattle.The ovaries,which are ovoid in shape
to stalls andzero-grazed; the specialist dairy breeds and simaller in size than in cattle, are located within
such as the Murrah,Nile and Nili-Ravi are popular
the pelvic cavity, caudal and lateral to the uierine
in these enterprises. River buffaloes are larger in stat-
horns. According to Samad & Nasseri (1979), the
ure than the swamp buffalo, angular in shape and of number of primordial follicles in the buffalo heifer
a shy disposition. The Mediterranean type predomi-ovaries is much lower than in heifers of Bos bovis
nates in Europe, north Africa and the Middle East,
of the same age(an average of 20000 vs50000 for
824
Chapter
1331
Reproduction inthebuffalo
both ovaries).Similarly,thenumberofgraafian fol
Sinceswampbuffaloesaremainlydistributedin
liclesmorethan1mmindiameterismuchless,and
parts of the worldwith a constant,very humid tropi
follicularatresiaisgreater inthebuffalo.Factors
calclimateand thepermanentavailabilityofgreen
controllingfollicular atresia may include age,stage
fodder,seasonal influences on reproduction are
ofreproductive cycle, pregnancy,lactation,extra
minimal.
ovarianorintraovarianhormones,nutrition,season
and genotype.The genital tract and ovaries,inclu
Cyclicperiodicity
ingthe cyclical corpusluteum(CL),and develop-
ing and mature follicles (>10 mn). can be palpated
The oestrous cycle averages 21 days in length, and
and imaged ultrasonographicallyby thetransrectal
'standing’oestrus is usually less than 24 hours,
route.
although variations as wide as 4-64 hours have been
reported (Ohashi 1994, Baruselli el al 1997）:we
have never observed suchi a long duration.Oestrus
Puberty
usually commences towards late evening.with peal
Thebuffalo attains puberly later than cattle.On
sexual activity during thenight and the early morn-
recommended levelsofnutrition,the averageage
ing.Thedurationof theluteinizinghormone（LH)
at puberty (first oestrus) in the female is about
surgeisaboutoursandovulationwhichisson
15-18months fortheriver buffalo and 21-24
taneous, usually occurs 24-29 hours after this LH-
months for the swamp buffalo;most first pregnan-
surge or 15-18hours after the end of oestrus.
ciesoccur when thebuffaloheifer weighs about
Factorslikeseasonfeyearnutritionmanage
250-275kg
mentanddelayedovulationcanprolongthelength
oftheoestrouscycle.Anincidenceof15.5%ofshort
oestrous cycles has been recordedin theriver buf
The oestrous cycle
falo, ranging from 6-14 days (Chohan et al 1992).
Breeding season
Plasma progesterone profiles reveal that short
oestrous cycles are associated with reduced secretory
Amajor factor causinglowreproductiveperfor-
activity of the CL or premature luteolysis. Delayed
mance in theriver buffalo is its seasonalpattern of
ovulationand'splitoestrus'aresaid to occur.
breeding.Decreasing daylength andcooler ambient
temperatures favour normal cyclical ovarian activity,
Signs of-oestrus
whereaslongdaylengthandhighsummer tempera-
tures depress cyclical activity. Some animals breed
Overt signs of oestrus in thebuffalo arenot as pro-
throughout theyearif fed and managed well. In the
nounced as in cartleTheeightmajor signs of oestrus
Indian subcontinent,maximum breeding activity
arevulvar engorgement,frequenturination,bellow
occurs duringSeptember-January,with apeakdur-
ing,bull mounting,restlessness,mucus discharge,
ing October-November;minimal breeding activity
licking of the heifer/cow by the bull,chin resting
occurs during the hot summer months.Thus,most
by thebull (Madan&Prakash 2007）.In a study
ofthebuffaloescalveduringJuly-November.
involvingMurrah buffaloes,thefirstfivesignswere
Season affects the reproductive process directly
responsible for 85% of the total observations,with
through environmental temperature and photope-
frequent urination themost frequently observed sign
in the summer months(Madan & Prakash 2007).
tity of feed, incidence of disease and management
Jainudeen&Hafez(1987)wereofthe opinion that,
practices. The onset of the breeding season is asso-
inriverand swampbuffalo,heterosexual behaviour,
ciatedwith a higher intake ofmetabolizable energy
particularly standing to be mounted by a bull,is
and a lower intake of crude protein.Hypoglycaemia
themostreliable sign ofoestrus,whereashomosex-
and high serumurea concentrationsobserved in
ual behaviour,such as standing to bemounted by
summer areassociatedwithalowerleveloffertil-
other females,is observed only occasionally.Signs
ity(Qureshietal1999).Fluctuations inmilkpro-
suchas swellingofthevulva,a clearmucoidvulvar
gesterone concentrations are inversely related to
discharge, spontaneous milk letdown,bellowing,
theenvironmental temperature.Lowblood thyrox-
resilessness,frequent urination and raised tail vary
inelevelsinthehotseasondepressfeedintaleand
inoccurrenceandintensityfromanimaltoanimal
bodymetabolism.
and inrelation to standingoestrus.
825
Part
171
Exotic species
Mating behaviour
Alternatively, as in domestic cattle (see Chs 1,
22, 24), various oestrus synchronization regimens
Mating behaviour in many respects resembles that
havebeenTisedwith theobjectofremovingthe
of caule. During the restraint period, the bulls
needfor oestrus detectionby usingfixed timeartifi-
exhibit circling snorting,vocalization, tucking
cialinsemination(Al)after modifying thelifespan
upof the sheath and intermittent urination.After
of theCL or the follicular wave pattern; these have
approachingafemalebulls exhibit sniffinglicking
beenreviewed byDeRensis&Lopez-Gatius(2007)
the perineum and vulva, and a flehmen reaction.An
Regimensthathavebeendescribedare:prostaglan-
oestrous female responds by standing immobile for
din(PG)Falone,progesterone and progestogens
the male to mount and perform intromission.The
alone, combined gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
copulatorybehaviourincludespenileerection,grasp-
(GnRH) and PGFu progesterone with estradiol and
ingthefemaleatthelevelofthepelvis,muscularcon-
human (hCG) and equine chorionic gonadotrophin
tractions atthebaseofthetail,penilemovementsto
(eCG). Generally the results have been disappoint-
locatethevulva,intromissionandejaculatorythrust.
ing,with most protocols only being effective dur-
During this process,the animal either rests its head
ing the normal breeding season.The best results
on the back of the female orwaves it in the air(Anzar
wereachievedwhensynchronizationmethodswere
et al 1988).However,the intensity ofthese events
used in combinationwith transrectal ultrasonogra-
varies from bull tobull.Matinglasts20-30 seconds.
phy tomonitorfolliculogenesis.DeRensis &Lopez
The maledismounts and graduallyretracts thepenis
Gatius(2oo7)commentthatmost synchronization
into the sheath,whilethefemale remainswith her
programmes allow Al without oestrus detection and
backarchedandtailelevatedforafewminutes.
result in similar pregnancy rates to those animals
that are inseminated following oestrus detection.
Methodsofoestrusdetection
Ashas been menioned abovedetection of oestrus
Cyclical changes of the internal genitalia and
using observational methods is often poor, mainly
reproductive hormones
because overtsigns are more prevalent during the night
-Prakash(2002)recorded59%ofoesirusesbelween
Ovaries. Therising level of oestrogens, particularly
10pm and 6am-andwith greater expression during
oestradiol-17β secreted by the graafian follicle,
winter(November-February)than summer(March-
combinedwiththedeclininglevelofprogesterone
August) in Murrah buffaloes. Improvement requires
secreted by the regressing CL, trigger a surge of LH.
the education and motivation of farmers, proper
The LH surge induces final mauration of a folli-
identification ofindividualanimals,good records
cle,followedbyovulationabout24-29hourslater
andregular and close observation ofbehavioural and
(Kaker et al1980, Shimizu1987).
physical signs(Oswin Perera 1999).A malebuffalo
Therearenormallytwoorthreefollicularwaves,
(preferably vasectomized) fitted with a chinball mat-
withheifersshowingaprevalencefortwo,resulting
ing deviceis probably thefrequently usedmethod for
inshorter(21-versus24-dayinteroestrousintervals
routine oestrus detection.Themaleis either kept in a
(DeRensis & Lopez-Gatius 2007).During oestrus,
corral with females from latecvening until thenext
amaturefollicle10-20mmin diametercanbe
morning,orisledbehind themtwicedaily,if they are
palpated or imaged by transrectal ultrasonograplly
in stanchions.Ifnomale is available,a buffalo cow
as a turgid areaprotruding slightlyfrom the sur-
canbe androgenized for oestrus detection.
faceoftheovary;folliclesupto15mm associated
Oestrus detection aids,such as pressure-sensitive
with the non-ovulatory waves can be identified for
indicators placed on the sacrum or painting the tail-
mostoftherestof theoestrouscycle.On theday
head,are unsatisfactory because wallowing inter-
ofovulation (days 1-2),the follicle softens and
feres with their efficiency.Where routine oestrus
the siteofovulationisfeltasapitordepression
detection isnot practised,buffaloes are submitted
on thesurfaceoftheovary.Normally,oneoocyte
orinsemination onthebasis ofavulvardischarge
isshedpercycle.
ofclear mucus,a drop in milkyield or a change
The growth, maintenance and regression of the
in temperament.In these situations,inseminators
CL are closely correlated with changes inproges
oftenpalpatetheuterusfor thepresenceoftone and
teroneconcentrations inperiphieralplasma ormilk
examinethemucusbeforeinseminatingan animal.
(Jainudeen etal 1983a,b).The developing CL(days
826
Chapter
1331
Reproduction in thebuffalo
2-7) issoftand difficult topalpateperrectumbut
catheter into the uterus.The clear,copious mucus
the mature CL(days 8-16) is palpableas a firm pro-
that is secreted during oestrus changes to an opaque,
jection on the surface of the ovary.The mature CL
thick, scanty discharge after ovulation.Hyperaemia
secretes progesterone,resulting in peripheral plasma
ofthevaginalmucousmeinbraneand someswell
concentrationsof1-4.0ng/mlatdays12-16ofthe
ingofthevulvaoccurduringoestrus.Blood inthe
cycle.With the regression of the CL(day 17),pro-
vulvar discharge or‘metoestrus bleeding', often seen
gesterone secretion rapidly declines, resulting in
incattle,rarely occurs in thebuffalo
concentrations of less than 0.4ng/ml at the next
oestrus.Old CLs appear as white scars on the sur-
Pregnancy
face of the ovary.Follicular fluid concentrations of
oestradiol-17βhavebeenshowntoincreasewiththe
Gestationlength
size of the follicles (Palta et al 1996). Plasma con-
Theembryoreachestheuterusbyday4-5after
centrationshavebeenshown tobeinfluencedbythe
oestrus andthe blastocyst hatches by day 6-8
seasonoftheyear,withlowervaluesduringthehot
(Oswin Perera 1999).Cestation is longerin thebuf
summer months,whichmighthaveaninfluence on
falothanin cattle,being305-320 daysfortheriver
theintensityofoestrusexpression atthesetimes of
the year (Rao& Pandey 1982, 1983). In Murrah buf
buffaloand320-340fortheswampbuffalo;male
calves are carried1-2 days longerthan femalecalves.
faloes,follicle-stimulating hormone(FSH)concen-
Riverxswamphybridsliaveanintermediategesta
trationsintheperipheralplasmapeakedatoestrus
before declining gradually over the next few days
tionlengthof315 days.Theincidence ofright-horn
pregnancy is higher than left-horn (67% vs 33%;
(Kaker et al 1980).There is also evidence ofa sea-
Usmani1992)and the transuterine migrationof the
sonaleffectwithFSHconcentrationsbeinghigher
embryoisveryrare.
duringNovember and December than March-June
(Janakiramanetal 1980).LH concentrationspeak
at oestrus(20-40ng/ml)andarelow（<2ng)duur-
Physiology of pregnancy
ingmostoftherest ofthe oestrouscycle(Madan
Placentation. The synepitheliochorial placenta of
&Prakash 2007).Aswith other reproductive hor-
the buffalo is of the cotyledonary type (see Ch. 2).
mones, there are also seasonal influences on LH
The fetal membranes and fetus mostly develop in
secretion with higher LHpeakvalues during the
oneuterinehorn.Mostofthe60-90placentomes
coolermonthsof theyear（Rao&Pandley1983).
are distributed throughout the gravid uterine horn.
There is good evidence for the role of inhibin in
As pregnancy advances,the placentomes enlarge
controllingfolliculogenesis,as hasbeenreportedin
tomushroom-like structuresmeasuring5-7cm in
other species(see Ch.1).Peripheral plasma inhibin
diameter.
concentrations increase toa maximum 2-4days
Endocrinology. Alihough cyclical ovarian activity
before oestrus at the time of the emergence of the
dominant preovulatory follicle, before declining
ceases during pregnancy, a few buffaloes may show
behavioural signs of oestrus, which is anovulatory.
rapidly during the early luteal phase tobasal levels
The CL is maintained throughout gestation but its
(Mondal et al 2003).As with many other reproduc-
rolein themaintenanceofpregnancy isnotknown.
tivehormones,there is also evidence ofa seasonal
As in cattle, plasma progesterone concentrations
effectonthesecretionofinhibin,which ishigherin
remain elevated throughout pregnancy.
because ofreduced follicular activity, since inhibin
concentration infollicularfluidisdirectlycorrelated
Methods ofpregnancy diagnosis
with follicular size(Singh 1990).
Clinical methods
Uterus, cervix and vagina.The uterine horns are tur-
gid andcoiledwith maximum tone duringoestrus,
Transrectal palpation.Pregnancy can be accurately
andbecomeoedematousatthetimeofovulation.
diagnosedperrectumfromabout45days,although
They graduallylose their turgidity and tonicity after
an experienced clinician can diagnose pregnancy as
ovulation,tobecomealmostflaccidduringtheluteal
early as 30 days after breeding.Manual slipping of
phase of the cycle.The cervix dilates sufficiently dur-
the allantochorion is possible from about 42-56
ingoestrustoenablethepassageofaninsemination
days ofgestation(see Ch.3).The uterus is suspended
827
Part
7
Exotic species
at thelevel of thepelvic floor up to the4th month
muscles lead to an elevation of the tail-head, while
of gestation, thereafter descending to the abdomi-
liquefaction ofthe cervical seal of pregnancy results
nal floor.In most buffaloes,placentomes and the
in a string urclear mucus hanging from the vulva,
fetus may be palpated beyond the 7oth day of preg-
particularly when the animal lies down.
nancy;however,in some deep-bellied river buffalo
Initiation of parturition.Plasma concentrations of
breeds the fetus maybe difficult topalpate,particu-
progesterone remain elevated throughout gesta-
larly between the6th and Sthmonths.In such cases,
tion but, about 15 days before parturition, plasma
palpation of the hypertrophied middle uterine arter-
levels of boih oestrone and PGF metabolite(PGFM)
ies,with fremitus,or recognition of the placentomes
increase,reaching peak values 3-5 days pre-partum
aids in the diagnosis.
(Perera etal1981,Arora &Pandey 1982,Batra &
Pandey 1982).At parturition,the sharp decline
Laboratory methods
in plasma concentrations of progesterone is asso-
ciated with a significant increase in plasma con-
Hormone assays. As in cattle, pregnancy can be diag
centrations of cortisol (Prakash & Madan 1984);
nosed on the basis of persistent elevated progester-
whetherthecortisol originatesfromthemother or
oneconcentrations inmilk orplasma 22-24days
fetus, or both,has ot been established.Parturition
after breeding.This test is accurate for the early
can be induced successfully with dexamethasone
detection of non-pregnant animals, but it is not
(Prakash &Madan 1985）. It is particularly useful
accurate for the detection of pregnant ones,for the
in treating buffalo cows with cervical/vaginal pro-
same reasons as stated for catlle (see Ch. 3). Milk
lapse, as well as those with prolonged gestation.As
and blood progesterone assays performed, as in the
in cattle, retained fetal membranes (RFM) is a com-
cow, at 20-23 days after service are nearly 100%
mon sequel.
accurate for identifying the non-pregnant but only
Stages of labour. About 12-24 hours before parturi-
65-80% accurate for pregnant individuals (Perera
tion,uterine contractions increase in both frequency
1980). Oestrone sulphate assays of blood or milk
and amplitude, causing the animal some abdomi-
can accurately differentiate pregnant from non-
nal discomfort.The cervix takes about 1-2 hours to
pregnant feales at 110 days, as reported in cattle
dilate fully (stage I of labour).
(see Ch.3).
As the fetus enters the birth canal, the dam lies
down in sternal or lateral recumbency and starts
Ultrasonography
straining (stage 2 of labour;Fig. 33.1). The allanto-
chorion mostly ruptures before it reaches the vulva
As in cattle, diagnostic uiltrasound can be effec-
and is quickly followed by the feturs, contained
tively used for early pregnancy diagnosis in the buf-
within the amnion, appearing at the vulva. Strong
falo. Using a 5.0 or 7.5 MHiz linear array transducer
abdominal contractions lead to the rupture of the
designed for transrectal use, pregnancy can be diag-
amniotic sac and the delivery of the fetus, usually
nosed accurately as early as 19-21 days after service,
in anterior longitudinal presentation and dorsal
the fetal heart can be detectedat30-35 days and
position,with extended limbs; posterior presenta
structures such as limbs, spinal cord and fetal mem-
tion is uncommon.This stage of labour lasts 30-60
branes by 35-40 days(OswinPerera 1999)
minutes bu may exiend up to 6 hours, particularly
in primiparae, As in the cow, the unbilical cord
Parturition and thepuerperium
ruptures before the calf reaches the ground.After
delivery,abdominal straining ceases and the fetal
Parturition and dystocia
membranes are expelled within 4-6 hours (stage
Signs of approaching parturition. Buffaloes' behav-
3 of labour). Twinning is rare:the incidence is less
iour as they approach calving is similar to that of
than l:1000 births.
cows.About 1-2 weeks before, the animal shows
Obstetrical disorders. The incidence of reproductive
marked abdominal enlargement,udder develop-
disorders is higher in the river buffalo than in the
ment, and hypertrophy and oedema of the vulvar
swamp buffalo.In the river buffalo, the incidence
lips.As the time of parrurition approaches, she nor-
of cervicovaginal and uterine prolapse has been
mally isolates herself from the rest of the herd. The
reported 1o be 42.0%, that of RFM 23.7%, dysto
relaxation and sinking ofthepelvic ligamenis and
cia 21.5% and abortion 12.8% (Samad et al 1984).
828
Chapter
1331
Reproductionin thebuffalo
一
Fig.33.1 Parturition in the buffalo(A-E) Progression of second-stage labour.(F) Endof second-stage labour
About64.8%ofcasesofprolapse（cervicovaginal)
dystocia andpoormanagementpractices havebeen
wererecorded pre-partum,while 35.2%(uterine)
implicated in thepathogenesisofRFM.
werepost-partum.Llterineprolapsemostly occurs
Dystocia.Dystocia is less common in thebuffalo
within thefirst6hoursafterexpulsionofthefetus
than in cattle. Stabled river buffaloes are more
andinvolvesacompleteeversionofthegravid
prone to dystocia than the free-ranging swamp type.
uterine horn (Fig.33.2). Infections,uterine inertia,
Thecommonestcauseofdystocia isfetomaternal
829
Part
7
Exoticspecies
Puerperium
Involution ofthe uterus.The uterus is palpable by
the second week post-partum as a well defined,com
pletely palpable structurecranial and slightlyventral
tothepelvicbrim.Involutioniscompleted byabout
30daysinthesuckledswampbuffaloandbyabout
45 days in thehand-milked river buffalo.llterine
involutionis delayed incases of dystocia and RFM.
There are conflicting reports regarding the effects
of age, season of the year and parity on the rate of
uterineinvolution.
Resumptionofovarianactivity.The CLof theprevi
ous pregnancy has completely regressed by day 30
post-partum.Peripheral plasma progesterone con-
centrations decline rapidly following parturition to
undetectablelevels by day3or4,andremain so till
the first postpartum ovulation,which occurs at about
96daysintheswampbuffalo(Jainudeenetal1983a)
and at60 days in theriverbuffalo（Pereraet al 1981).
However,inwellfedandwell managedanimals,fol-
licular activity can commence earlier.Theintervals
fromcalvingtoresumptionof folliculardevelopment
andovulation areshorterwhentheovarycontralat-
eral to thepreviouslygravidhornisinvolved(usmani
1992).Poor body condition, lactation, suckling and
age can delay the onset of the first oestrus post-
Fig.33.2Prolapse of theuterus in abuffalo.
partum.Hand-milkedriver buffaloes havealower
incidence of postpartum anoestrus than suickled
swamp buffaloes. Buffaloes calving during their nor-
disproportion,followedbyavariety offaulty diso
malcalvingseasonresumecyclical ovarian activityear-
sitions.Themostfrequentcauseofmaternaldystocia
lier than those calvingin otherseasons.
isuterinetorsion,followedbyincompletedilatation
Progesterone-releasing intravaginal devices (PRIDs)
ofthecervix anduterineinertia.Occasionalcasesof
（see Chs1,22)initiate ovulation and lutealactiv-
hydrallantoisandpersistenthymenhave alsobeen
ity in cyclical river buffaloes(Rajamahendran etal
reported.
1980)butnotinsucldedacyclicalswampbuffaloes
Most casesofuterine torsionoccur at thetime
（Jainudeenetal 1984).GnRHdoes notinitiatenor-
ofparturitionor duringthelastmonth ofpreg-
malcyclicalovarianactivity insuckledbuffalobut
nancy.The direction of torsion in the buffalo in
hCG triggers ovulation and the development of a
morethan90%ofcases is to theright(clockwise).
normal CL.Although earlyweaningreduces theinci-
Predisposing factors for both torsion of the uterus
dence of postpartum anoestrus, it has the disadvan-
andprolapse of thevagina or uterus are anatomi-
tageofincreasing thecostofbuffaloproduction for
cal in origin, relating specifically to buffaloes. Such
meat.As in cattle, temporary calf removal in suckled
factors as relatively long uterine ligaments and low
buffalo induces an anovulatory oesirus, which can
numbers of smooth muscle cells in the broad lig-
beovercomebypretreatmentwith aPRIDfor10-12
ament may contribute.In addition,management
days.Improvementinbody conditionisnecessary in
factors such as constant confinement ofbuffaloes
conjunction with any method of reducing the calv-
in a small and often sloping area with no facili
ing-to-first-postpartum-oestrus interval (Jainudeen
ties for exercise,are common under village condi-
etal1984).
tions. Schaffer's method (see Ch.10) has proved
As in cattle,the uterus normally becomes con-
veryusefulforihereplacementofuterinetorsion
taminatedwithbacteriafromthe environment
in thebuffalo.
immediatelyafterparturition.Whenuterine swabs
830
Chapter
|33
 Reproduction in the buffalo
were cuiltured from buffalo cows that calved nor-
The head of a normal buffalo spermatozoon has
mally (group 1), or suffered from dystocia (group
a specificrectangular shape with no resemblance to
2), a greater number of group 2 were found to
that of cattle. It measures about S.3 pm in lengih and
be contaminated and the bacterial flora were dif-
4.5 μm in width. The average length of the nidpiece
ferent. Culture from group 1 resulted in the iso-
is 12.2 μm while the tail is about 54.8 μm long (Saeed
lation of pure cultures of facultative anaerobes
et al 1989). The overall length of buffalo sperm is
(Escherichiacoli,staphylococciand beta-haemg-
greater than that of cattle (75.4 vs 69.3 μm).
lytic streptococci), whereas cultures from group
2animals were invariably mixed with ohligate
Examination of semen
anaerobes such as Fusobacterium and Prevotella
spp., as well as E. coli and Arcanobacterium pyogenes
Seimen is usually collected with a conventional
(Jadon et al 2005).
bovine artificial vagina (AV) (see Ch. 30). Either
a female or a castrated or intact male buffalo can
be used as the teaser.The temperature of the water
Male reproduction
jacket of theAV should be about 40-42°C,and the
pressure within the AV should be adjusted to suit
Anatomy
individual bulls. Sperm concentration is increased
by allowing two or three false mounts before the
The reproductive organs are similar to the bull of
actual collection.The normal ejaculate collected
Bos bovisbut the testesand scrotu are snallerand
with an AV is creamy to millky white in colour and
the penile sheath is less pendulous. As in cattle, the
varies from 1-6 ml in volume, although exceptional
testis and epididymis can be palpated through the
bulls can give up to ll ml of semen; it has a sperm
scrotal wall, and the prostate, seminal vesicles and
concentration of between 1 and 4x10cells/ml.The
ampullae of thie ductus deferens can be palpated per
values of ejaculatory volume and sperm concen-
rectum.
tration are higher in river than in swamp buffalo;
the motility of spermatozoa is lower than in cat-
Puberty
ile. Semen can also be collected with cattle electro-
ejaculators.
In river buffalo bulls, testis size shows a curvilin-
The parameters of semen quality are affected by
precoital sexualexcitement,number offalsemounts,
between5 and 15months,rapidlybetween 15 and
age,season ofyear,frequency of collection,diet and
25 months and again slowly between 25 and 38
fitness of the bull.The temperature/humidityindex
months ofage.The plasina iestosterone concentra-
adversely affects thevolume of semen produced,
tions are low up to 21months of age and increase
depresses sperm concentration and initial motility,
thereafter. In these bulls, the prepubertal period
and increases the production of dead and abnormal
seems toextendup to 15monthsofage(Ahmad
spermatozoa.The decline in serum thyroxine dur-
el al 1984). Spermatogenesis commences at about
ing summer depresses feed intake andmetabolism
12-15 months in both buffalo types. However,
and thus decreases sperm production. Similarly,
sexual maturation, as indicated by the presence of
increased body temperature has adverse effects on
motile spermatozoa in the ejaculate, is attained at
initial motility and the number of dead spermato-
about 24-25 months.Thefaster-growing F1 river x
zoa in the ejaculate Bulls with obvious testicular
swamp cross-breeds reach puberty earlier than the
asymmetry yield considerably fewer spermatozoa
slower-growing swampbuffaloes.
per ejaculate. The presence of pathogenic bacteria,
e.g.Pseudomonas spp.and E.coli, can reduce sperm
Spermatogenesis
Among farm animals, the buffalo has one of the
Artificial insemination
shortest spermatogenic cycles. The durations of the
seminiferous epithelial cycle and spermatogenesis
In the Indian subcontinent, Al has been practised
are 8.6 and 38 days respectively (Sharma & Gupta
in theriverbuffalofor over 40yearsbut haslagged
1980). In general, the frequencies of the cell stages
behind its use in cattle largely because of the diffi-
in buffalo and cattle are comparable.
culty of detectingoestrus.In addition,lower fertility
831
Part
171 Exotic species
rates obtained with chilled or frozen semen are
ratesbased onrectalpalpationinswampbuffaloes
anotherconstraint to thewidespreaduse ofAl in this
usuallyrange from20-75% duringa3-4-month
species.Moioli et al (199s) have shown that buffalo
breeding-season,depending upon the nutritional
spermatozoa subjected to freezing and thawing have
andlactational stalus ofthe females at joining.The
a shorterlife span inthe female genital tract than
first-service pregnancyrate for the river buffalovar-
fresh semen.
iesbetween50%and75%fornaturalserviceand
Buffalosemen differsfromcattle semen in someof
30%and50%forAlwithfrozensemen.
itsmetabolicandphysiological properties:forexam-
ple,sperm DNA-RNA,phospholipid and enzyme
Female infertility
content.Because of these differences, the methods
and particularly the composition of the extenders
The reproductive efficiency of the buffalo is lower
used for cattle are unsuitable forfreezing buffalo
than thatofcattle.Delayed sexualmaturityseasonal
spermatozoa.Thus,thereremains a need to develop
effectsonthereproductivecycleandextendedcalving
moreeffectiveextenderstopreservebuffalo semen
intervalsundertraditionalmanagemenisystemspro-
in thechilled or frozen form.Neveriheless,various
vide few opportunities for a buffalo to calve during
the most favourable months of two successive years.
extendershavebeen developedforfreezingbuffalo
semen with varyingresults.These include,lactose-
Both infectious andnon-infectiousfactors contrib-
egg-yolk-glycerol,lactose-fructose-egg-yolk-glyc-
utetothelongcalvinginterval,especiallybecauseof
erol andTris-egg-yolk-glycerol.A greater than 20%
anoestrus,repeat breeding and abortion.
use of egg-yollkdoesnot enhancecryoprotectionbut
canlessensperm forwardmotility inthecervixas a
Anoestrus
result ofincreasedviscosity.An equilibrationperiod
of 6-9 hours and glycerol concentrations of 5-7%
As incattle,twoforms of anoestrusoccurinthebuf-
falo.In the first form, the animal possesses a pal-
are most frequently used.
Extended semen is placed in 0.25or 0.5ml straws
pable CLinone ovarybuthasnotbeen detectedin
or paillettes, each containing 30 million sperma-
oestrus as a result of suboestrus or silent oestrus,
tozoa. The straws are then exposed to nitrogen
whereas,in the second form,the animal has no
palpable CL and does not exhibit oestrus because
vapoursat-120 to -140°C and s1ored in liquid
nitrogen.Rapid thawing（at 37Cfor 10 seconds） is
sheis acyclical (true anoestrus).Ina clinical survey
preferred over slow thawing.The posi-thaw progres-
amongcasesofreported anoestrus,58.4%were true
anoestrus,33.3% silent oestrus and 8.3%ofbuffa-
sivemotility ofbuffalosemenvariesfrom35-60%.
loes had infantile genitalia (Samad et al 1984).
ThetimingofAIinbuffalofollowsthe am/pmrule
Ahighincidence of trueanoestrus occursduringhe
used in cattle(see Ch.31).Theoptimum timing of
hotsummermonths.Clinicalexaminationrevealsthat
Alis atthe endofstanding oestrus,somewhat later
both ovaries are small andinactive,while theuterus is
than incattle(Moiolietal 1998).One oftheways
faccid.Blood levelsof calcium,phosphorus,glucose
todeterminethiswouldbetoassesswhen thecow
refuses to stand to be mounted by the teaser bull.
Unfortunately,this isnot practicable incommercial
calbuffaloes.Inmostcases,thedisorderresolves spon-
herds, so Al isnormally performed 24 hours after
taneouslywiththearrivalofmorefavourableclimatic
conditions and adequatefeeding.Themosteffective
thefirst signsofoestrus(Oswin Perera 1999)
treatment seems tobeuseofaPRIDfor10-12days,
followedbyeCG atthetime ofwithdrawal.
Fertility and infertility
In thepast,silentoestruswasbelievedtobeamajor
problem in buffalo breeding but recent evidence
Evaluationoffertility
suggeststhatitisduetothepooroestrusdetection
intheseherds.The incidence has been drastically
Female fertility in thebuffaloiscommonly expressed
reduced in herds whereroutineoestrus detection
in terms of the calving interval. A buffalo produces,
practiceshavebeenimplemented (Jainudeen 1984).
on average, two calves every 3 years.Caution should
Treatment ofsilent oestrusin buffalocows with
be exercised in interpreting pregnancy rates based
PGFresultedin91%showingvisibleoestrussigns
onnon-return ratesin the buffalobecause of the
within 48-80hours and a 55%pregnancy rate to
inherent difficulty of detecting oestrus.Pregnancy
firstinsemination(Samadetal1981)
832
Chapter
1331
Reproduction in thebuffalo
Cystic ovaries
include E.coli,A.pyogenes and Staplylococcus aurens.
The high incidence has been atributed to natu
The incidence ofcystic ovaries is lower in buffa-
ralmating by the infected bulls,unlygienic calv-
loes than in cattle.Among buffaloes, the condition
ing management, persistence ofinfection from the
is more common in thehigh-producingriver buf
puerperal period,mid-cycleinseminations and the
falothan in the suckled swamp buffalo.Ina sur-
malpracticeofstinulatingmilkletdownthrough
vey,cysticovaries accounted for 6%ofreproductive
theintroduction ofinstruments,the tail of the ani-
failureinover12000riverbuffaloesinIndia;most
mal or the hand into the vagina.Furthermore,in
cases occured before day 45 post-partum(Rao &
buffaloes,because thevulvar labia are not closely
Sreemannarayanan 1982). The clinical findings and
opposed, there may well be a greater chance of an
treatment are similar to those in cattle (see Ch. 22).
ascendinginfection.The methods of treatment are
the same as for those cattle (see Ch. 22).
Repeatbreedingand abortion
Repeat breeding is animportant cause of lowrepro-
Male infertility
ductiveefficiencyin thebuffalo;theincidencevaries
Genetic infertility in buffalo bulls is characterized
from15-32%andseemstobelowerinanimalskept
individually on small holdings than in large herds.
by testicular hypoplasia and endocrine abnormali-
ties, resulting in underdevelopment of testis and
Similarly,theincidence is lower in heifers than in
seminiferous tubules with arrested spermatogenesis.
adultbuffaloesup to thethirdparity;thereafter,the
incidence decreases,probably because of culling of
Acquiredinfertilityismostlikelytobeduetoinfec
tions that produce inflammatory changes including
affectedanimalsfrom thebreedingstock.
The incidence of specific infections that cause
orchitis,epididynitis,seminalvesiculitisandtestic
repeat breedingand abortionin cattle,such as bru
ular degeneration.The inhibitoryfactor for sperm
motilityintheseminalplasma ishigherinbuffalo
cellosis,leptospirosis,campylobacteriosis,trichomo-
niasis and infectious bovine rhinotracheitis(IBR),is
than incattle semen(Rao1984,Ahmadetal1988)
verylowin the buffalo.Non-specificuterine infer-
Hligh environmental temperatures duringthe sum-
mer months exert a deleterious effect on libido,as
tions,leading to clinical or subclinical endometri
well as semen quality. Several sperm defects have
tis,are among themajor causesofrepeat breeding.
Poor quality of semen,luteal dysfunction,delayed
beenreported,buttheirrelationshiptofertilityhas
ovulation or anovulation can also be responsible.
notbeen ascertained,
Nutritional deficiencies resulting in,for example,
low serum calcium andphosphorus concentrations
Improving fertility
and hypoglycaemia have also been implicated.
Significantly higher antisperm antibody titre in
ln thepast,attention was given mainly to the con
the serum of repeat breeder buffaloes than in nor-
trolof infectious diseases andpathological condi-
mal cyclical,pregnant orvirgin heifers suggests that
tions affecting fertility. However,with the recent
this may be responsible for pregnancy failure in
development of sensitivemethods for measuring
someofthese animals(Saeedetal1995).Abortion
reproductivehormonessuchasLlandprogester-
caused byBrucella abortus occursduring the latter
one,veterinarians arenowpayinggreater attention
half of gestation.
tothenon-infectiousfactorscontributingtoinfertil-
ity in the buffalo.
Selective breeding among river breeds, cross-
Endometritis
breeding between river and swamp breeds and
A highincidenceofendometritis hasbeenreported
improvementsin nutrition can advance theonset
ininfertile river buffaloes,beingresponsible for
ofpuberty.Similarly,managementpractices such as
46%ofvariousreproductivedisorders(Samadelal
early weaning,a high plane of feeding and proper
1984). Among cases of non-specific uterine infec-
protection during the hot summer months can
tion in his study, first-degree endometritis,sec-
advance the restoration of postpartum cyclical ovar-
ond-degree endometritis and postpartum metritis
ian activity andreduce thelengthof calvinginter.
were recorded in 56.2,16.0 and 24.2%of buffa-
vals.Pregnancy rates in repeat breeding buffaloes
loesrespectively.Thecommonorganisms isolated
can be improved through double insemination at
833
Part
71
Exolic species
an interval of 6-8 hours during the samc oestrus
In vitro embryo production,
period, tie use of GnRH at the time of insemina-
including jn vitro maturation,
tion or intrauterine antibioticinfusion 24 hours
fertilization and culture
after insemination.
The difficulty of detecting oestrus cant be overcome
The first buffalo calf born following in vitro
by two methods of oestrus induction at a predeter-
mined time: (1) premature luteolysis of the CL with
et al i991). The poor recovery of usable oocytes
PGFα or a synthetic analogue and (2) the creation
from buffalo ovaries has been a major constraint
in ihe development of successful in vitro systems
The first method is of limited value in lactating or
(see Ch. 35) for this species. Oocytes can be recoy-
suckled buffaloes because ofthe high incidence of
ered by follicular aspiration of ovaries obtained
true anoestrus. Since PGFa causes abortion. buf-
after slaughter, aswell as ultrasound-guided trans-
faloes should be examined for pregnancy before
vaginal ovum pick-up in vivo.However, scarifying
treaument.
the ovarian surface with a surgical blade followed
by immediate rinsing and tapping the ovary to
release oocytes into the culture medium results in
Superovulation and embryo
a better recovery of good-quality follicular oocytes
transfer
than using needle puncture and aspiration meth-
ods.Buffalo ovaries with CLs yield a lower num-
ber of good-quality oocytes than ovaries without a
Although the first buffalo calf born following
functional CL, probably because of the inhibitory
embryo transfer occurred in the [1SA in 1983, fol-
effects the CL has had on follicular growth (Samad
lowing the non-surgical collection of a 7-day blas-
etal 1998, Samad 1999)
tocyst and non-surgical transfer to an unrelated
Culture media,including tissue culure mediun
river buffalo (Drost et al 1983), the application of
(TCM-199), bovine synthetic follicular fluid and
Ham's F-10 are equally good for in vitro matura-
stantially thiat in Bos tairns (see Ch.35).This has
tion of buffalo follicular oocytes. Supplementation
been due to:(1) the poor superovulatory response
ofTCM-199with serum from a cow in oesiius or
using a variely of different gonadotrophin prepara-
serum from a buffalo in oestrus or pro-oestrus
tions andpostulated tobe due to a lowprimordial
improves in vitro maturation and fertilization
folliclepopulation and high atresia rate and (2) the
rates.Improved development of in vitro matura-
poor response to oestrus synchronization protocols
tion/fertilization-derived two-cell embryos to the
(see above), particularly a poor luteolytic response
morula stage can be achieved through conditioning
to PGFa. There have been considerable improve
the culture media with buffalo oviductal epithelial
ments in recent years.
cells (Samad 1999). There are high rates of oocyle
According to Anwar & Ullah (1998),embryos are
maturation (70-90%), fertilization [60-70%), and
in the oviduct around s5 hours and in the uterus
cleavage (40-50%) but low rates of blastocyst for-
about 108 hours after oestrus.They are at the 8-16-
mation (15-30%) aid calving (10.5%) (Nandi et
cell stage at 85 hours and form a morula at 108
al 2002).
hours, a compact morula at 125 hours and early
Other assisted reproduction technologies that
blastocyst at 141 hours post-oestrus; blastocysts are
have been used in buffaloes are embryo sexing and
predominant at 156-176 hours after oestrus. Thus,
nuclear transfer (see Ch. 35).
embryo recovery at day 6-7is recommended
Animals with high peripheral plasma progester-
one concentrations at the start of the superovula-
References
lory treatment produce better results than those
with low progesterone concentrations.The rela-
AhmadM,LatifM,AhmadMetal 1984Theriogenology
tively lower ovarian response to superovulation
treatment in buffaloes compared with similar
22:651
AhmadM,AhmadN,AnzarMetal1988VetRec122:229
treatments in rattle might be due to poor ovarian
Anwar M,Ullah N1998Theriogenology 49:1187
Anzar M,Ahmad M,Khan IH et al 198S Buffalo|4:149
follicular atresia.
Arora RC,Pandey RS 1982 Gen Comp Endocrinol48:43
834
Chapter
[33
Reproduction in thebuffalo
Baruselli PS,Muccioli R,Visintin GAetal 1997
Perera BM1980J Reprod Fertil Suppl54,157.Citedby
Theriogenology 47:1531
Oswin PereraBM1999
Batra SK,PandeyRS1982Biol Reprod 27:1055
Perera BM,Abeygunawardena H,ThamoleramAetal 1981
Bongso TA,Hilmi A,Basrur PK1983Res Vet Sci 35:253
Theriogenology15:463
Chohan KR,Chaudhry RA,Awan MA,Naz NA 1992 Asian
PrakashBS2002In:National WorkshoponAnimal Climate
AustIAnim Sci5:583
Interaction,Izatnagor,India,p33-47.CitedbyMadan&
Coclrill WR 1974 In:Cockrill WR(ed)Thehusbandry and
Prakash 2007
healthof the domesticbuffalo.FAO,Rome,p48-56
PrakashBS,MadanML1984Theriogenology22:241
DeRensis ELopez-Catius F2007Theriogenology 67:209
PrakashBS,MadanML1985Theriogenology23:325
Drost M,Wright IM Jr,Cripe Ws,Richter AR 1983
Qureshi MS,SamadHA,Habib Getal 1999AsianAust 
Theriogenology20:579
Anim Sci12:1019
Rajamahendran R,Jayatilaba KN,DharmawardenaI,
Nations.Livestock Production Statistics,Rome,ltaly
ThamotheramM1980AnimReprodSci3:107
Fischer H 1987In:Proceedingsof theInternational
Rao AR1984 In:Proceedingsofthe 10th International
Symposium onMillBuffalo Reproduction,lslamabad,
Congress onAnimal Reproduction and Artificial
Pakistan,vol 1.p139
Insemination,vol 4,p xiv-34
Jadon RS,Dhaliwal GS,land SK2005Anim Reprod Sci
Rao LV,Pandey RS 1982|Reprod Fertil 66:57
88:215
Rao LW,PandeyRS1983IEndocrinol98:251
JainudeenMR1984In:Proceedingsof the10thInternational
RaoAV,Sreemannarayanan O1982Theriogenology
Congress on Animal Reproduction and Artificial
18:403
Insemination,p xiv-42
SaeedA,Chaudhry RA,Khan IH,KhanNU1 1989 Buffalo
Jainudeen MR.HafezESE 1987In:Hafez ESE（ed)
5:99
Reproduction in farm animals,5thedn.Lea and Febiger,
Saeed MA.Aleem M.Chaudhry RA,Bashir1N1995 Buffalo]
Philadelphia,vol 4,p297
11:295
JainudeenMRBongsoTATanHS1983aAninReprodSi
Samad HA1999Final projectreport.Departmentof Animal
5:181
Reproduction,UniversityofAgricultureFaisalabad,
JainudeenMR,SharifuddinWBashirAhmadF1983bVet
Faisalabad,Pakistan
Rec113:369
Samad HA,Nasseri AA 1979 In:Proceedingsof theFAO/
JainudeenMR,Sharifuddin WYapKC,Abu Bakar D1984
SIDA International PostgraduateCourseonAnimal
FAO/IAEA Division of Isotopes.Vienna
Reproduction,lppsala,Sweden
JanakiramanK.Desai MC,Amin DRct al 1980 IndianJAnim
Samad HA,Abbas SK,Rehman Nu 1981 PakVet ] 1: 117
Sci50:601
Samad HA,Ali CS,Ahmad KM,RehmanNLI 1984 In
KakerMLRazdanMN,GalhoraMM1980IReprod ertil
Proceedings of the10th International Congresson
60:419
Animal Reproductionand Artificial Insemination,vol 4,
Madan ML,PrakashBS2007SocReprod Feril Suppl 64:261
pxiv-37
MadanML,Singla SK,Jailkhani S,AmbroseD1991 World
SamadHA,KhanIQ,RehmanNU,AhmaN1998Asian
Buffalo Congress,Varma,Bulgaria,vol 2,p11-17.Cited by
Aust ] Anim Sci 11,491
Madan&Prakash2007
SharmaAK,Gupta RC1980Anim Reprod Sci3:217
Mondal S.Prakash BS,PaltaP 2003Indian]Anim Sci 73:405
Shimizu H 1987 In:Proceedings of the International
Nandi S.Raghu HM,Ravindranatha BM,Chauham MS2002
Symposium on MillkBuffaloReproduction,Islamabad.
ReprodDomestAnim37:65
Pakistan,vol 1,p166
OhashiOM1994BuffaloJ10:61
Singh ] 1990 PhD thesis,National DairyResearch Institute,
Oswin PereraBM 1999Reprod Fertil Suppl 54:157
Deemed University,Karmal,India.Cited by Madan&
Palta P,Jailkhani S,Prakash BSet al 1996 Indian J Anim Sci
Prakash 2007
66:126
Usmani RH 1992Buffalo8:265
Palta PMondal S,PrakashBSMadanML1997Theriogenology
47:089
835
34
Chapter
Sharon Redrobe
Normal reproduction, reproductive disease and
infertility in pet small mammals
The anatomical,physiological and pathological dif-
Adkins et al 2001).This classification system is out-
ferences relating toreproduction between pet small
lined in Figure 34.1 for the species discussed in this
mammals andthespeciesthataremore familiar
chapter.
to veterinary practitioners (i.e. dogs and cats) are
described in this chapter Many species could be
included as‘pet smallmammals';however they will
Sexing small mammals
be restricted to those species that are commonly
kept as pets, or will be in the near future;they are
Rodents
listed inTable34.1.
The technique forsexingrodents,once learned,can
Classification of small mammals
evenbeperformed onnewborn animals.In therat.
mouse,gerbil andhamster,aventralpapillaisseen
between the hind legs in both sexes. In the male it
Rabbits and rodents are examples of eutherianmam-
is the tip of the penis, in the female it is the ure-
mals (placental mammals) and the sugar glider and
thral papilla.The distance between the anus and
shorttailedopossumareexamplesofmetetherian
the papilla（known as the ano-genital difference)is
mammals(marsupials).
greaterin themalethan thefemalewithineach spe-
Rabbitsbelongto the orderLagomorpha and
cies.When learning this technique,it is useful to
rodents to theorderRodentia.Themodern system
have one ofeach sex initially,as the absolute dis
used toclassifyrodentsusestheshapeof thelower
tance varies between the species.The nipples are
jaw as the primary characteristic. Many older ref-
moreobviousin thefemaleofallspeciesfromthe
erences use the zygomasseteric system (suborders
ageofapproximately 6 days.The guinea pig and
Protrogomorpha,Sciuromorpha,Hystricomorpha
chinchilla females have a membrane between the
urethral orifice and the anus except during oestrus
time there was a minority scientific opinion that
andatparturition.Thepenisoftheguineapigand
theguineapigandothercaviomorphs shouldnot
chinchilla can be exiruded by gentle pressure,and
be classified as rodents but should be classified
the testes can be gently palpated either sideof the
under a separate but relatedorder,as Lagomorpha
anus.An ospenisispresent,andsometimesit can
is to Rodentia (Grauer et al 1991).Studies pub-
be palpated.Both sexes of guinea pig have an obvi-
lished since2002 however,using wider taxon and
ous pair of teats in the inguinal area. The large
genesamples,haverestored the consensus that the
urethralpapilla inthefemale chinchilla canbe con-
order Rodentia is monophyletic (Cao et al 1994,
fused with a penis;conversely, there is no obvious
836
Chapter
1341
Reproduction inpet small mammals
Table34.1 Common and scientificnamesforsmallmammal species
Common name
Scientificname
Othercommonnames
Chinchilla
Chinchilla laniger
Long tailed chinchille
Gerbil
Meriones unguiculatus
Mongolian gerbil,cawed jird
Guinea pig
Caviaporcellus
Cavy,cavie
Hamster,Chinese
Cricetulus griseus
Striped hamster
Hamster,Djungarian
Phodopus sungerus
Dwarf hamster
Hamster,Syrian
Mesocricetusauratus
Golden hamster,common hamster
Mouse
Musmusculus
Commonmouse,housemouse
Rabbit
Oryctolagus cuniculus
Europeanrabbit,bunny
Rat
Rattus norvegicus
Brownrat
Shcrt-tailed opossum
Monodelphis domestica
Brazilian opossum
Sugar glider
Pretaurus breviceps
Lesserglidingossumonyglider,flying squirre
Order Rodentia
（Figs. 34.2-34.5) or opening of the vulvar slit in
Suborder Hystricamorpha
females(Fig.34.6).In immature animalsit is use-
ful to note the vulva is more attached towards the
Infraorder Hystricognathi
anus forming a slit(Fig.34.7) and the penile struc-
Pavorder Caviomorpha
tureiscompletelyround,terminatinginasmall
Family Cavidae-includes guinea pig
hole.There is no os penis. The female rabbit is
Family Chinchillidae-includes chinchila
called a doe,the male a buck.
Suborder Myomorpha
Superfamily Muroidea
Family Cricetidae-includeshamster
FamilyMuridae-includesratmouse,gerbil
Order Lagomrorpha
Family Leporidae-includes rabbit
Fig.34.1Classification of commonrodents and rabbits.
penileprotrusion in themaleunless itis everted
manually for sexing.Chinchillas may also be sexed
by comparing the anogenital distance; the papilla
is against the anus in the female but separated by a
band of tissueinthemale,whose penis canberead
ily extruded.The male guinea pig is called a boar,
the female a sow.
Rabbits
The sexing of rabbits, once learned, can be per-
formedaccuratelyevenonnewbornanimals
although,as with most techniques,practice and
Fig.34.2Perineal area ofanentire male rabbit in the absence
familiarity are required. Slightpressure on the
of digitalpressureover theperipenileareaandprepuce.Note
genitalia causes eversion of a small penis in males
the tworelativelyhairlessscrotalsacs.
837
Fig.34.3 Entire male rabbit in which pressure is applied over
Fig.34.5Perineal areaofacastrated malerabbit inwhich
theperipenile area causing protrusion af the penis.Note how
digital pressure is applied to the peripenile area causng
muchlarger thepenisis than that ofthecastratedmale in
protrusion of thepenis.Note thatit is smaller than that of the
Figure34.5.
entiremaleshown inFigure34.3.
Fig.34.4Perineal area of a castrated male rabbit in the
absence of digital pressure over theperipenile area.
differencesfrom thatof themale.
838
Chapter
1341
 Reproduction in pet small mammals
hamsters and chinchillas. The changes in gerbils
are not so obvious and this technique is not use-
ful in rabbits. Vaginal cytology smears are general
obtained by gently introducing a blunt probe into
the vagina and wiping the probe on to a drop of
saline on a microscope slide for examination at
x40 and x100 magnification.Alternatively vagi-
nal lavage can be performed, with aspiration of
the fluid from which a smear is made.Dilute new
methiylene blue can be used for staining. Care
should be taken to prevent vaginal trauma and to
avoid repeated probing,which may lead to pseu-
dopregnancy in sorme species.
Artificial insemination
The main advantages of artificial insemination
(Al) are:the ability to inseminate many females
from a single ejaculate, removing the behav-
ioural requirement of female receptivity, enhanc-
ing individual fertility using tined insemination
and hormone therapy, reducing the risk of vene-
real infections. The correct timing of insemina-
tion of the rabbit can be gauged by assessing the
Fig.34.7 Perineal area of a juvenile femiale rabbit. Note that
colour of the vulva, with a 75% conception rate
the vulva appears to be more cosely attached to the anus,
giving it a more slit-ike appearance.
achieved when the vulva is red, falling to 40%
when dark red or 55% when pink. Ovulation can
be enhanced by treating with 35 Iu of equine
Breeding systems
chorionic gonadotrophin (eCG) 10 days after
parturition and 48 hours before oestrus is
required, followed by gonadotrophin-releasing
Breeding systems can be described strictly as:
hormone (GnRH) at insemination. The rou-
·permanently mated groups in which the male and
tine use of eCG in lactating does consistently
female(s) are housed 1ogether for mating and par-
increases the proportion of receptive does at
turition using monogamous (one male with one
the time of Al and tlerefore their long-term
female), or polygamous (one male with multiple
productivity. Applied just before insemination,
females) systems
alternative methods,including modifying hus
· temporary mauing groups where the female is sepa-
bandry (a change of cage, gathering does), 'buck'
rated forparturition; haremsystems are those where
effect, short dam-litter separation, feeding pro-
the male and female(s) are separated for parturi-
grammes and light stimulation, may improve
tion only,whereas hand-matcd systems are those
fecundity but ihey may also decrease kit growth
where the adults are introduced for mating only.
(Theau-Clement 2007)
AI using theintraperitoneal deposition of semen
The breeding systems for various species are out-
in combination with oestrus synchronization is
lined in Table 34.2.
very useful for production control in colonies of
guinea pigs. Ovulation may be synchronized by the
Reproductive techniques
subcutaneous implantation ofprogesterone-filled
Silastic tubing (Ueda et al 1998). Conception and
implantation rates havebeen reported to be 100%,
Vaginal smears and oestrusdetection
while gestation length and litter size data were
Vaginal smears to monitor the reproductive
comparable to those of naturally mated females
cycle and detect oestrus are useful in rats, mice,
(Ueda et al 1998).
839
Part
7
Exotic species
Species
Range of
Average
Expected
Duration-
Mating
Postpartum
litter size
no.litters
productivity
ofeffective
system(s)
mating
peryear
perfemale
breeding life
Chinchilla
1-3
2
8-9
2years
Monogamy,harem
Gerbil
4-7
7
45
12-18months
Monogamy,harem
Yes
Guinea pig
3-4
4
14/year
18months
Polygamy or harem;
Yes;takecare
12 sows to 1boar
with nutrition
Hamster,
4-8
4
20/year
12-18months
Monogamy;or take
Yes
Chinese
femalestomalesfor
mating
Hamster,
2-4
5
20/year
12-18montns
Monogamy
Not known
Djungarian
Hamster,Syrian
5-7
7
40
12-18months
Monogamyor
3days post-
harem (Syrian only),
weaning
hand-mated
Mouse
8-11
7(to17)
Up to150
6-12months
Monogamy,
Yes,though
depending
polygamy,harem
often inferile
upon strain
Rabbit
8-9
4
80-120
2-3years
Female taken to
Yes;take care
male,hand mated
with nutrition
Rat
9-11
7(to15)
Upto200
12-18months
Monogamy,harem
depending
on strain
Short-tailed
3-14
60-80
2years
Pairs
Not described
opossum
2
2
10-20
5years
Polygamy
Yes
Induction of parturition
nocturnal.There are now a large variety of breeds
kept as pets,ranging from the Skg Flemish Giant
Oxytocin has been used in guinea pigs and rabbits at
to 1kg Dwarf Lops.Pet breeds in the UK are cur
theendofgestation toinduceparturition,although
rently dominated byDwarf Lopbreeds,which are
an increased neonatal mortality is reported.
small,weighing1-2kgwith short lopears andfore-
Prostaglandinsmay alsobeused.
shortened faces.Smaller breeds tend to mature ear-
lier and havesmaller litters.
Normalreproduction
Anatomy
The important aspects of reproduction of these spe-
The urethra opens into the vagina, so rabbits do
cies is summarized inTable34.3.
not have a separate externalurethralpapilla like
rodents.Rabbitshave twoseparateuterinehorns
Rabbit
with two separate cervices;there is no uterine
body. The reproductive tract and associated liga-
Natural history
ments are surrounded by adipose tissue,even in
TheEuropeanrabbitcommonlykeptasapet,evolved
a lean animal.Maleshave aroundpenile sheath
on the grasslands of Europe and Africa and is a strict
from which a penis can be extruded (Fig.34.3).The
herbivore.Wild animals live in large family groups
large scrotal sacs areobvious inthematuremale
in burrows underground emerging to eat grasses in
(Fig.34.2).The inguinal canals remain open after
the morning and evening, as they are crepuscular or
testicular decent at 12weeksold.The femalehas a
840
Chapter
1341
Reproduction in pet small mammals
Table 34.3 Reprocuctve data of small mammals
Animal
Average
Sexual
Oestrus
Gestation
Size of
Ageat
Adult
life span
maturity
period
litter
weaning
weight(g)
(years)
(weeks)
(days)
Chinchilla
10-15
8months
Seasonally
111
2or3
6-8weeks
400-500
polyoestrous
(1-4)
(M<F)
30-35 days
Nov-May
Gerbil
1.5-2.5
10-12
Every4-5days
24-26
3-6
21-28days
70-130
(M>F)
Guinea Hig
4-7
Male8-10
15-16-daycycle
60-72
2-6
3-3.5weeks
750-1000
Female 4-5
(average 65)
Hamster,
1.5-2
6-10
Every 4 days
19-20
3-5
21-28 days
70-100
Russian/Chinese
Hamster,Syrian
1.5-2
6-10
Every4 days
15-18
3-7
21-28days
80-140
(M>F)
Mouse
1-2.5
b-E
Every4-5cays
19-21
5-10
18days
20-40
Rabbit
6-10
4-5months
Induced ovulation
28-32
2-7
6wecks
Varieswit
Jan-Oct/Nov
breed(1-8 kg)
Rat
E
>6
Every 4-5days
20-22
6-12
21days
400-800
Short-tailed
3-5
4-5months
Induced ovulation;
14-15
5-14
6-8weeks
60-150
opossum
bimodal oestrous
cycle 14 days and
32 days:embryonic
diapause
Sugar glider
12-15
Male12-14
29 cays: all year;
16(plus70
2
90-150
months
embryonic
pouch time)
Female 8-12
diapause
months
slit-like opening (Fig. 34.6). Does should be bred
oestrus detection. Does may not be receptive to the
at between 4 and 6 months of age. A rabbit's breel-
same buck twice, and receptivity is diminished dur-
inglife islimited by thehigh incidenceof uterine
ing lactation and at times of poor nutrition. One
tumours,which may exceed 79% in does aged 4
buck can service 25 does.The doe is taken to the
years and over (Greene 1941,Adams 1970).In the
buck's cage and left for 10 minues, and then taken
male rabbit, sperm counts are much reduced over
to another buck if not mated. Artificial insemina-
the age of 6 years.
tion is used commercially and is very successful. Up
to 25% of does fail to ovulate after mating. This is
often blamed on insufficient luteinizing hormone
Oestrous cycle, breeding and copulation
(LH) but is also affected by season of theyear,with
The rabbit is an induced ovulator and does not have
lower conception rates in autumn (short days). The
a regular oestrous cycle,but may remain in oestrus
high proportion ofrabbits that refuse mating,which
for prolonged periods of time during which ovarian
may be as high as 50% at any one time in a colony,
follicles develop and regress, ensuring that a num-
may further complicate breeding.The early use of
ber of follicles are always available for ovilation.
human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) in rabbit
This results in a rhythm of receptivity. Typically,
breeding was found to produce ovulation and con-
the doe is receptive for 7-10 days followed by 1-2
ceptionfrom Al,evenif thefemalerefused copula-
days of non-receptivity while a new wave of folli-
tion.Nowadays GnRH is preferable to hCG as it is
cles is recruited. Vaginal smears are not useful for
non antigenic and just as effective.
841
Part
171
Exotic species
Mating behaviour is brief in rabbits.The male may
neonatal mortality.Wherever possible, littermates
urinate on the female before mounting. A receptive
 should be housed in groups post-weaning to facili-
female will crouch and raise her hindquarters for
tate group hotising. while early post-partum mat-
mating. Copulation typically consisis of six to ten
ing,resulting in only a few days interval between
vigorous thrusts, after which the male may cry out
early weaning and parturition,will increase pro
and fall over. A vaginal plug is formed and expelled
ductivity, it places a huge demand on the doe's
within a few minutes.Ovulation occurs10-14
reserves;thereforenutrition should be optimal if
hours after copulation. A second ovulation can
this system is employed.
occur 30-40 hours later,which could result in lit-
ters of mixed parentage (superfecundation, see Cl.
Guinea pig
4). Pseudopregnancy in rabbits tends to occur after
unsuccessful mating or vaginal probing. Functional
Guinea pigs are native to the mountains anid grass-
CLs develop. and the uterus and mammary glands
lands of South America,they live in small groups
undergo changes similar to pregnancy. The doe
ofup to 5-10 individuals.The Andean Indians con-
makes a nest at the end of pseudopregnancy, usually
sider them a special food delicacy.They were domes-
around day 17-19.
ticatedin South America around 1000 AD.They are
crepuscular i.e. most active at dawn and dusk, and
Pregnancy and parturition
are strict herbivores. They were brought to Europe
in the sixteenth century,and as a result of selective
The majority of growth of the reproductive iract
breeding, many different breeds have now been
and fetuses occurs after day 15 of gestation.
produced.
Manual palpation to detect pregnancy is accu-
rate after day 12, when the fetuses feel smaller
Anatomy (Figs.34.8,34.9)
than the kidneys, but larger than faecal pellets.
Real time B-mode ultrasonography (see Ch. 3） is
The sow has pairedovaries and uterine horns
an effective, non-invasive method to determine
leading to a shared uterine body and cervix. The
fetal rumber and pregnancy rate in lagomorphs
ovaries are positioned quite cranially and dorsally,
(Griffin et al 2003). Pregnancy is maintained by
just posterior to the kidneys. These structures are
the CLs. The onset of parturition is due to their
surrounded by adipose tissue in obese guinea pigs,
regression. Does typically make a nest by pulling
complicating reproductive surgery. The male repro-
out sone hair 1 week before parturition. Nesting
ductive tract is distinguished by having paired, long.
boxes with bedding material should be provided
coiled vesicular glands (or seminal vesicles) within
for breeding does. The box should be availahle for
the abdominal cavity ventral to the urethra, which
several days prior to littering to permin the doe to
can measure up to10 cm long and may be mistaken
exhibit normal nesting behaviour.Kindling usu-
ally occurs overnight or early in the morning, and
both anterior and posterior presentation is nor-
mal. Dystocia is extremely rare and usually is due
to fetal oversize. Parturition is usually complete
within 30 minutes.The hairless young are suscep-
tible to hypothermia.
Lactation
Nursing in rabbits is brief and infrequent, usu-
ally confined to the night or early evening. This
is often confused with mismothering or neglect,
as nursing is rarely observed. Rabbit milk compo-
sition is: 15% protein, 10% fat and 2% carbohy-
drate. Growth is rapid, and the young emerge from
the nest at 3 weeks of age.Kits are weaned between
Fig.34.8Perineal area of a female guineapig:ncte the close
proximity of the vulva to the anus
6and 8 weeks,earlier weaning causing increased
842
Chapter
341
Reproductioninpetsmall mammals
again sealed over and will only reopen at partu-
rition.Superfetation (see Ch.4) can occur where
a fertilemating occurs 16 days later,at thenext
oestrus. Inevitably the pups conceived later, and
gestated in the second horn,are born prematurely
with thefirstlitter anddonot survive.
Pregnancy and parturition
The guinea pig placenta is haemochorial (see Ch.2).
TheCLs arethe sourceofprogesteroneforthefirst
30 daysofgestation,after which the fetoplacental
unit maintains the pregnancy.Pregnancy detection
by manual palpation is possible from day15,when
Fig.34.9Perineal area of a male guinea pig:note the slight
5mm structures are detected increasing to 15mm
protrusian of the peniswhendigital pressure isaplied over
theprepuce.
ovalsbyday25.Around day15,the diametersof
the developing fetuses are larger than faecalpellets
on palpation.The guinea pig does not build a nest
for uterine horns. Males also possess a bulbo-
and parturition occurs at any time of day. If the lit-
urethralgland,coagulatingglandandprostategland.
terislargeparturitionwillgenerallybeshorterwit
The single paired mammary glands are inguinal and
smaller pups.A smaller litter,common in primipa
can also be present in males.The penis has an os
rousyoungfemalesorelderlyfemales,oftenresults
penis and two horn-like projections. The inguinal
in large pups and may increase the risk of dystocia.
rings remain open throughout life.
Parturitionisusuallycompletewithin30minutes.
Thetwopubicbones separate at the symphysis to
Oestrous cycle,breeding and copulation
almost 2cmwithin 48hoursofparturition,widen
ingto2-3cm atthetimeofparturition.
One boar can be housed with one to ten sows,or
bredinpairs;the femalemay beremovedforpar-
Lactation
turition.The young are precocious (fully furred,
eyes open, teeth erupted), just like mini-adults.
The young are precocious, being fully furred and
Guinea pigpro-oestrus lasts about 36hours,with
withtheireyesopen atbirth.They donotsucklefor
vaginalswellingandruptureofthevaginalmem-
the first 12-24 hours. Guinea pigmilk composition
brane.Vaginal cytology reveals nucleated and
is:4% fat,8% protein,3%lactose.Weaning natu-
cornifiedepithelial cells.Amethod fordetermin-
rallyoccursat3weeksbutcan occur earlier asthe
ingthestageoftheoestrouscycle,bymeasuringthe
young take solid food from 1 week old. Intensive
electrical impedance of lievaginal mucous mem
breeding of the sow can result in lactation/preg-
brane,has been reported in the guinea pig（Bartos
nancyalopecia.
&Sedlacek 1977).The membrane remains open
for 2-3days topermit mating.Females inoestrus
Chinchilla
exhibit thelordosis reflex;oestrususuallyoccurs
during the night.Infertile matings do not result in
Chinchilla originated from South America.The
pseudopregnancy.Spontaneous ovulation occurs
name chinchilla（little Chincha),was coined by the
10hours afterthe onsetofoestrus.Matingbehav-
Spanish settlers afterseeing ChinchaIndians wearing
ioursin guineapigsconsistsofthemalecirclingthe
their pelts in ceremonies.Huntingby Europeans for
female,who will have shown lordosis, then nib-
theirpeltsalmostdrovethechinchilla toextinction
bling and licking her before mounting, with hind-
inthe early 190os.The current captivepopulation is
quarters elevated.Copulation consistsofone or
thoughittohavedescendedfrom1lanimalstaken to
two intromissions.The male may then groom and
California in the1920s.Chinchillasconsume70%
perform perineal marking.A vaginal plug forms
of theirfoodintake atnight.Petspeciesare derived
in thefemale after mating,whichfalls out after 48
fromwild Chinchilla laniger;C.laniger and C.brevi-
hours,at which time the vaginal membrane has
caudata occur in the wild in small numbers.
843
Part
171
Exotic species
Anatomy
females even have difficulty rearing two.The dam
stands tosuclle hheyoung.The young are precocious
Inthefemaletherearetwo uterinehorns andtwo
atbirth,beingfullyfurred,withtheireyesopenand
cervices.Thevagina is closed bya membrane,which
abletowalkwithinanhour.Solidfoodis taken at1
opens at oestrus and parturition. There are three
week of age,with weaning at 6-8weeks.
pairs ofmammary glands,a single inguinal pairand
two thoracicpairs.Thereisnotrue scrotum in the
Ratsand mice
male.The testes liewithin theabdomen or ingui-
nal canal, which remains open.There are two post-
All pet and laboratory rats,with their myriad of
analsacs thatmaycontain thecaudal epididymis.
coloursandstrains,arederivedfromthewildNorway
The female has a large urinary papilla,which can be
rat,Ratus norvegicus,which reached Europe from
confused withapenis.Theurethra opens at the end
Asia inthe18thcentury.The trueblackrat,Rattusrat
of this structure,and theslit-likevulva opens atthe
tusismaintainedin somezoos.Theproteincontent
base, although is often sealed by a membrane.
of the food used for breeding rats and mice should
be more than 18% for optimal results.The lighting
Oestrouscycle,copulation,gestationand
regimen should remain unaltered during breeding
parturition
oftenrats andmicerespondwell toa12-hourlight
and 12-hour dark lighting photoperiod.Too little or
Chinchillas are seasonally polyoestrous and can
toomuchlightcanreducefertilityinfemales.
producetwolittersbetweenNovemberandMayin
theNorthernHemisphere.Vaginal smearstodetect
Anatomy(Figs.34.10-34.13)
oestrus and pregnancy are useful in chinchillas.
Neutrophils,small andlargeintermediate andpara
Thereproductivesystemofthemalerathaslargepaired
basal cellsarenotfoundin thesmear duringoestrus,
vesicularglands,abulbourethralglandandaprostate
when it consists of superficial epithelial cells only.
gland.Themouseis similar.Theinguinal canal remains
During pregnancy, neutrophils, generally of medium
open throughout life, although testicular descent occurs
density, are present, together with parabasal cells
at around 15-50 days of age. The female possesses a
smallandlargeintermediatecellsatalowormedium
bicornuate uterus that ends in paired ossa uteri and cer-
density,whereassuperficial epithelialcells are only
vices.Theurethra exits at the base ofthe clitoris.The
femalerat has six pairs of mammary glandswhich are
Inductionofovulation andoestrusinthechinchilla
obvious from a few days of age and can be used for sex-
ingFertilityinmales andfemaleswanesat around18
las expel waxy plugs from thevagina, up to 5 cm in
months of age.Thefemale mousehas paired clitoral
length,at the start ofoestrus,which should not be
glands and five pairs of mammary glands (three tho-
confusedwiththe ejaculate plug,which remainsin
racic pairs and two pairs in the inguinal region).
thecanalforseveral hours andonrareoccasionsmay
need toberemovedmanually.Chinchilla areusually
housed in singlepairs;themalebeingremoved at
parturition.Females can be very aggressive towards
males.Chinchilla breeders often use a free-access
tunnel system,which allows amaletovisitmany dif
ferentfemales,butenableshimtoescapeshouldone
of the females become aggressive.In such a system,
thefemalesarefittedwith acollar thatpreventsthem
from following the male through the escape tunnel.
Chinchillas have the longest gestational period of
any rodent. Pregnant chinchillas often experience
constipation.If more than two young areborn,the
thirdmaydieofhypothermiabeforethedamcan
dry its coat;even if this does not occur the dam often
neglecis it,and hence breeders often either adopt
Fig.34.10 Neonatalrat pups:(left)male(right)female.
euthanasia ofone,orhandrearingof uriplets.Sone
844
Chapter
1341
Reproduction in pet small mammals
Breeding
Ratsandmiceshould beprovidedwith suitable
bedding material to make a nest. This is impor-
tant inthermoregulationof themicroenvironment
and keeps the young together for efficient lacta-
tion.Disturbance to the animals should bemini
mized during late pregnancy and early lactation
toreduce theriskofmismotheringor cannibal
ism. Separating males and females before parturi-
tion avoids mating immediately post-partum and
prevenis trampling of the young.The newborn are
hairless.
Fig.34.11 Perineal area of adult rats:(left) male（right)
female.
Oestrous cycleand copulation
Although rats are spontaneous ovulators,activ-
iry around mating can influence breeding success.
Repeated copulation beforeejaculation increases
breedingsuccess,whereasmating afterejaculation
tends to inhibit sperm transport and prevent preg-
nancy.Grouphousingoffemalesinhibitsoestrus
and the presence of a male can synchronize
oestrus;this so calledwhitten effect’is weaker
in the mouse than the rat.Females in oesirus
aremore active andshowlordosiswhenstroked.
Vaginal smears are useful to detect oestrus.At the
beginningofoestrus,thereare75%nucleated and
25%cornified epithelial cells present.One or two
ejaculationstypicallyoccurover15-20minutes,
usually,overnight.A vaginal plug is formed and
dissolves orisexpelled afterafewhours.That mat-
Fig.34.12 Neonatal mousepups:(left）male(right) female.
ing has occurred is confirmed by the presence of
sperm in a vaginal smear or the presence of a plug
in thevagina or on thecage floor. Therat oestrous
cycle is extremely sensitive to the influence of
light,with3 days constant light leading topersis-
tent oestrus,hyperoestrogenism,polycystic ova-
ries and endometrial hyperplasia and metaplasia.
Pseudopregnancyis rare.
Pregnancy, parturition and lactation
Just before parturition,the female tends to extend
ent for 1-4 hours.Dystocia is extremely rare and
may only occur if dead fetuses cannot be expelled.
Cannibalism of the young may occur, especially
by primiparous dams that are disturbed or stressed
during the neonatalperiod.Lactation involves the
Fig.34.13 Perineal area of adult mice:(left)male (right)
transferofmaternal antibodiesviacolostrumforthe
female.
first 18 days.
845
Part
Exotic species
Hamsters
glands are stimulatedby androgens andcan become
thickened and greasy; they are probably used for
The four main pet species of hamster are Syrian
territorial marking of their tunnels in the wild.The
[Golden), Chinese, Djungarian (Russian, Siberial,
penis,whichisretractedwhen themaleisnotmat-
Armenian) and European.The Syrian hamster is
ing,has two distal lateral prongs and a dorsal prong
the most common type of pet.All the present cap-
and contains an ospenis.The femalepossesses a
tiveSyrian hamsters are thought to have descended
duplexuterus,anundividedsectionof8mmwith
from threewild-caught individualscaptured inthe
each horn measuring 20mm.There are seven pairs
Syrian desertin1930.Therearemany captive strains
of nipples.
and colours ofthegolden or Syrian hamster.Once
thoughttobeextinct inthewild,theSyrianhamster
hasmorerecentlybeenlocated inSyriaandisnow
Oestrouscycleandcopulation
listed as endangered by theInternational UInion for
Conservation of Nature (luCN).
Hamsters areprone to fighting (the female can be
very aggressive) if not introduced very carefully.
Anatomy (Figs.34.14,34.15)
Neutral territory is used for mating or the female
is introduced to the male's cage one hourbefore
The largepaired testes and theprominent,paired
dark,and carefully supervised.Alternatively,male
sebaceous glands present over the caudal region of
and female can be housed in pairs from before
the spine readily identify the malehamster.These
puberty. Chinese hamsters can be bred in monog-
amous pairs(Festing 1970).The introduction of
the Syrian hamster and the Djungarian hamster
as animalmodelsfor the study ofpinealphysi-
ology were milestones in the understanding of
pineal function.A marked‘critical photoperiod
i.e.a daylengthdividinglong-dayfrom short-day
responses, has been described in the Syrian and
theDjungarian hamster.In theSyrian hamster,the
critical photoperiod is 12.5 hours of light per day
(Gaston&Menaker 1967,Elliott1976),whereas
about 13hoursoflightper day,whichcorresponds
to thefact that Djungarian hamsters live athigher
latitudes(Hoffman 1982).Photoperiods shorter
thanthiscriticalvalueinduce,ormaintaingonadal
Fig.34.14Perineal area ofmaleSyrian hamster.
regression;longerphotoperiodscauserapid recru-
descence or maintain high gonadal activity.
Hamsters are polyoestrous spontaneous ovula-
tors,and generally reproduce well without assis-
tance. Mating is confirmed by the presence of the
copulatory plug.The mature female hamster is a
solitary animal. The oestrous cycle lasts 4 days,
with a white vaginal discharge present on day 2;
pet owners often mistake this as being abnormal.
A 90% pregnancy rate may occur following mating
on day 3.Vaginal cylology can beused to moni-
tortheoestrouscyclebutcareshouldbetakennot
to swab the two lateral pouches within the vagina,
whicharelinedwith cornifiedepithelium.Atpeak
oestrus,8hoursbefore ovulation,the femalewill
show lordosis to a male; copulation typically lasts
Fig.34.15Perineal area of femaleSyrianhamster.
30minutes.
846
Chapter
1341
Reproductioninpet smallmammals
Pregnancy,parturition and lactation
(Wiedenmayer1997a,b).Although delayedimplan-
tation can occur in many small mammalian species
Handling of the recently mated hamster should
if they are alsolactating,it ismostmarked in theger
beavoided,as the embryo implants 5-8 days fol
bil,when gestation can be delayed up to 1.9 days per
lowing mating and disturbance during this time
pup when three or more pups are nursing.
adversely affects pregnancy rates.The Syrian ham-
ster has the shortest gestation period of any euthe-
rian mammal, at 15-16 days.Dystocia is very rare.
Sugar glider
The female should be cleaned out and given nesting
materialafewdaysbeforeparturition then leftwith
Sugar gliders(Figs.34.16-34.19) are small,noctur-
sufficient food for7-10 days10avoid disturbance.
nal marsupial mammals.They are arboreal animals
Cannibalism is not uncommon in hamsters,partic-
native to New Guinea and eastern Australia. They
livein groups of six to ten animals and occupy group
ularly in primiparous dams.The newborn arehair-
less. Mating occurs 3 days post-weaning.
nests in tree holes. During periods of cold weather
or food shortage,they may become torpid for up to
16hoursperday.Theyhavea‘glidingmembrane
Gerbil
Gerbilsare solitary,desertanimals.ingle sexgroup
canbemaintained in captivity.Gerbils have four
pairs of nipples.
Reproductive physiology
Gerbils are polyoestrous, spontaneous ovulators
and generally reproduce well without assistance
(Brain 1999).Vaginal cytology may beused to deter-
mine the stage of the cestrous cycle.Mating is con-
firmed by presence of the copulatory plug. Gerbils
should be placed in breeding pairs before they are
7weeks old. Monogamous pairs are formed for
life,ie.if one partner dies, the remaining animal
may not breed with another.Male and female can
Fig,34.6Femalesugarglideshowingfaecesbeingexpelld
beleft togetherwithyoung,as themale assisis with
from the singleopening to thecloaca.
rearing the young. The newborn are hairless. Gerbils
must beprovidedwith suficient beddingmaterial
to construct a burrow and nest.This is important
inthethermoregulation ofthemicroenvironment,
and keeps the young together for efficient lactation.
The positioning and structure of breeding cages are
important, as direct visual contact with other gerbils
can result in aggressive behaviour and reduced breed-
ing performance. The use of opaque breeding cages
should beconsidered(Van denBroeket al 1995).As
significant fightingandeven deaths can occur dur-
ing the establishment ofbreeding pairs, careful selec-
tionandmonitoringisnecessary,withconsideration
given to pairing in a‘neutral’ environment Norris &
Adams1972).Disturbancetotheanimalsshouldbe
minimized during late pregnancy and early laciation
to reduce the risk of mismothering or cannibalism.
Failure to provide suitablematerial for burrow con-
Fig.34.17Female sugarglidershowing thepouch,whichis
present only in the female.
struction can lead to stereotyped digging behaviour
847
Part
Exotic species
Oestrouscycle,pregnancy andweaning
Sugar glidersAre seasonally polyoestrous.The
oestrous cycle last 29 days, and gestation is short
at 15-17 days.At parturition, the young migrate to
thepouch,wherethey remain for70-74days.They
remainin thenestuntil 120 days ofage.Breeding
in AustraliaoccursbetweenJune and November.
The adult females in thecolony only breedwith the
dominant males.Typically they are monotocous,
although about20%of births aretwins.
Short-tailed opossum
Fig.34.18Male sugar glidershowing thelargedorsal head
Husbandryprocedures havebeen developed for
scentglandpresentonlyinthemale,afterparting thehair
theshort-tailedopossum in which several colo-
thatcoversit.
nies have become self-sustaining for up to4years
(five generations).Individual adult animals (80-
155g)canbemaintainedin singlecages,although
larger cages with floor areas of at least 2000cm²
arerequired forbreeding.Dietconsistsprimarily
of ground meat, dried milk powder, wheat germ
and vitamin supplements.Alternating males in
thebreedingpairs stimulates reproductive activity.
The short tailed opossum will reproduce through-
out the year under laboratory conditions (Fadem
et al 1982).
Reproductive disorders, diseases
and infertility
Fig.34.19 Male sugar glider.Note theprotrusion of the
forkedpenis,whichoftenoccurs duringrestraint,and the
Non-infectious
single scrotum,which isonapediclemore cranial than that of
eutherian mammals.
Environment
Small mammals can be sensitive toanumber of
(patagium),which extends between the front and
environmental factors, which may predispose to
hind legs to enableglidingfromaheight;theydo
disease and thus affecting their breeding capacity.
notfly.
Care should be taken to avoid:heatstroke,ultra-
sound(manyrodents andothersmall mammalscan
Anatomy
hear the noise emitted from computer equipment),
lighting(care shouldbe taken with photoperiod，
Thefemalehasapouchwithfournipples.There are
especiallyinthosespecieswhichareknown tobe
two uteriand twolong narrowvaginas thatopen into
seasonal breeders),overstocking and lack of nesting
a blind-ended structure divided bya septum.Males
material or nesting areas.
have a large prostate gland, two pairs of Cowper's
glands and three paracloacalglands.The testes are
VitaminEdeficiency
locatedinascrotumsuspendedfromthebodybya
narrowbandof tissue.The penis isbifid.The male
Vitamin E deficiency can be the cause of reproduc
urinates from the proximal part of the penis, not
tivefailureand nutritionalmyodegenerationin
from theforkedend.
rabbit breeding colonies.The diagnosis is based
848
Chapter
1341
Reproductioninpet small mammals
on thepresence oflowvitaminEconcentrations
Neoplasia-rabbit
in rabbitdoe's liver（5.73yg/g)associated with
Uterine adenocarcinoma is the commonestneo
degeneration of tongue, skeletal and heart mus-
cle.Treatment by supplementationofthe diet with
plasm in rabbits,becoming much more common
with increasing age. In a classic study, 4% of does
wheatgerm oil will restore fertility and prevent
abortion,stillbirth and neonatal death(Yamini&
haduterinecancerbetween2and3yearsofage,ris-
Stein1989).
ingto80% at5-6years(Greene1941,Adams 1970);
therewerenodifferencesbetweenbreedingandvir-
gin does (Ingalls et al 1964).
Vitamin Cdeficiency in guinea pigs
Guinea pigs have an absolute requirement for vita-
Cystic ovaries
min C supplementation in thediet,as they lack the
enzyme L-gulono-gamma-lactone-oxidase needed
Cysticovaries arecommoninguineapigs,with one
for conversion of vitamin C from dietary precursors.
study finding them in76%of necropsied females
Thebasicrequirementof10mg/kgbodyweight/day
aged between 18 and 60 months of age. Breeding
from the dietrises to30mg/kg/day during pregnancy
records indicate that fertility is markedly reduced
in affected females over 15 months of age. Cystic
andlactation.Signsofdeficiencyincludepoorskin
and hair quality,lameness,dental disease and uro-
endometrialhyperplasia,mucometra and endo-
lithiasis,aswell as inferrility.
metritis,orfibroleiomyomaswereseen in39% of
guinea pigs with cystic ovaries but in only one of
6%guinea pigs without cystic ovaries(Keller et al
Eclampsia
1987);bilateral flank alopecia is often associated
lt is recommended that guinea pigs receive supple-
with thisdisorder.Cysticovarian diseasehasbeen
mentary calcium(4mg/kg/day)during late preg-
identified inolder females of other small mamma-
nancy to prevent eclampsia.Sinceproblems may
lianspecies:theywilldevelopanenlargedabdo-
occur at parturition,careful monitoring at day 65
menandthe ovariescan be detectedonpalpation,
of gestation is required. Sows with eclampsia will
by radiography and ultrasonography. Effective
havemusclespasms,convulsions,appeardepressed
treatmentisbyovariectomyorovariohysterectomy;
and may die.Treatment involves calcium glucon-
medical treatment using LH analogues is not always
ate at 1 mg/kg intravenously, but the prognosis is effective.
guarded.
Dystocia
Pregnancy toxaemia(ketosis)
Althoughuncommon inmostsmall mammals,dys
This occurs most commonly in guinea pigs 1-2
tocia can sometimes occur.Most smallmammals
weeks beforeor after parturition.Anorexia isa
givebirth duringthenight,sooftenwhen the damis
riskfactor,plusprimiparity and obesity.The sow
found sheis collapsed,dehydrated and theprogno-
becomes lethargic, salivation is excessive and
sis is poor. Generally if the animal has been strain-
collapse is cominon; sudden death may occur.
ingforover30minutesintervention isrequired.In
A toxicform caused by fetalpressureon the aorta
most cases,an emergency caesarean operation is
leading to uterine ischaemia and fetal death,sim-
indicated.Stabilization and support ofthepatient
ilar to a disorder recorded in pregnant women,
using fluid therapy, calcium and glucose supple-
has been described (Bishop 2002).Ulterinehae-
mentations asindicated are important components
morrhage and disseminating intravascular coagu-
for a successful outcome.The use ofoxytocin isto
lation may also occur. Diagnosis is made on the1
be cautionedunlessithasbeen ascertainedthat the
detectionofletonesonthebreathorintheurine-
fetus isofa sizeand disposition(seeChs8,9)to
acidicurine（normal herbivoreurine is alka-
pass through thepelvis easily,and thus radiography
line). The animal may also be hypoglycaemic.
is required.Dystocia is rare in guinea pigs,but may
Prognosis is guarded and treatment consists ofoccurin obese sows or those bred for the first time
supportive therapy, fluids,and correction of the aged more than 9-12 months of age as the pelvic
ketosis using glucose or dextrose and emergency
symphysis may have fused and is incapable of sepa-
caesarean operation.
ration,thus preventingnormal unimpeded passage
849
Part
Exotic species
of theyoung. Sows should be bred from3 months
Mastitis
of age andbeforethey are1yearoldtoprevent this
This diseaseisgenerallyassociated with unhygienic
problem.
conditions. It is often caused by environmen
tal bacteria such as Stapiylococcus,Streptococcis,
Infectious diseases
Klebsiella and Proteus spp.and Escherichia coli.
The affected gland(s) are hard, hot and painful
Rabbit syphilis
and the dam may be anorexic and pyrexic.Death
Rabbit syphilis is caused by Treponema cumiculi. In
canresilt.Theyoungshould befostered orhand-
one study,thegroup infectedwith syphilisexperi-
rearedandantibiosis should beused to control
encedmortality of approximately50%of neonates,
infection in the dam.
with 50% runting of surviving neonates (Froberg
et al 1993). Skin lesions in rabbit syphilis are usu-
Stillbirths and neonatal mortality
ally highly suggestive of the disease but it is occa-
sionallydifficulttodifferentiatetheselesionsfrom
Handling of dams and in the neonatal period
those ofother slin diseases.Lesions are found
should be avoidedtoprevent cannibalism,partic
most frequently around thenose(s7%cases)fol-
ularly by primiparous darus.The provision of suit-
lowed by the genitalia (35%), lips (32%), eyelids
ablenestingmaterialprivacyseparatingfromothr
(19%)and anus(16%).Sneezing isobserved in
females and males as necessary, and adequate nutri
33%of cases where nasal lesions arepresent(Saito
tion areimportant factors to consider.Rodents and
&Hasegawa1984).Incasesofmaternallyacquired
othersmall mammalscanhearultrasound andthis
infection, lesions are initially found mainly on the
noise,undetectable by humans,may be the cause
face.Rabbits should be examined carefully, not only
ofcannibalism and poor conception rates.Sources
for facial lesions but also for lesions of the genitalia
include computers,air conditioningunits andrun-
and anuslocationseasilyoverlookedand,although
ning water.
not pathognomonic, strongly suggest a diagnosis of
Neonatal rodent diarrhoea is usually of viral aeti-
syphilis.Accurate diagnosis requires using histopa-
ology,e.g.rotavirus,corona virus,parvovirus.These
virusesmayalsoadverselyaffectconceptionand
tionofpenicillinat150001u/lgfor6weeks,with
birth rates. Sendai virus infection in a naive (rodent)
treatment postponed if signs of dysbiosis occur.All
colonyresultsinprolongedgestation,neonatal death
breeding animals should be inspected frequently,
andrespiratory signs in the adults.Coccidiosis can
especially attimes ofmating andparturition.
bea particular problem in weanling rabbits;hygiene
is important to prevent exposure. Proliferative ile-
itis affects weanling hamsters aged 3-10 weeks and
Staphylococcal andPasteurella infections
can lead to death.The infectious agent is Lawsonia
Arecent survey onrabbit farms found that staph-
intracellularis.Clinical signs include lethargy weight
ylococcal infeclions caused mastitis (33%),sub-
loss,diarrhoeaand hunchedpostureduetoabdom-
cutaneous abscesses (10%) and pyometra (9%).
inalpain withdeathresulting within48hours.
Staphylococcisaureusinfectionswerethemostsevere
Treatment of neonatal disease includes supportive
problem,theorganismbeingisolatedfrom70%of
therapy of fluids(including glucose),warmth,nutri-
infected animals.Pasteurella species were more prev-
tion and antibiosis.
alent in cases ofpyometra and pneuimonia(Segura
Stillbirths and neonatal deathsmay increase in
et al 2007).Pasteurella multocida and S.aureus are
primiparous or immature dams,especially guinea
both common causes oforchitis and endometritis
pigs,which may have gestations of less than 66
inrabbits,loweringconception rates.
days.Specificinfections include aflatoxicosis from
mouldyhay andsepticaemia causedbyPasteurella
spp.(rabbits)or Bordetella spp.(guinea pigs）.Early
Postpartumsepticaemia
fetaldeath and abortion occurs with infections
Chinchillashavebeenreporled to developpostpar-
(typically Bordetella,Staphylococcus,Salmonella,
tum septicaemia. Signs may include hypothermia,
Streptococcius spp.),metabolic disorders (eclamp-
collapse,anorexia,feveranddecreasedmilkproduc-
sia orketosis)or poor nutrition of the dam during
tion.Supportive care and antibiosis arerequired.
pregnancy
850
Chapter
341
Reproductioninpet small mammals
Infertilityinvestigation
CaoY,Adachi I,YanoTA etal 1994 Mol Biol Evol 11:
593-604
Theinvestigation ofinfertilityshould takeinto
Elliott IA1976Fed Proc35:2339
account many factors,including:
FademBlI,Trupin CL,MaliniakEetal 1982LabAnim Sci
·age of breeding,whether too old ortooyoung(both
32:405
FestingM1970ZVersuchstierkund 12:89
sexes)
FrobergMK,FitzgeraldT1,HamiltonTRetal1993Inct
presence of systemic disease
Immun61:4743-4749
●nutritional deficiency, either specific factors, eg.
GastonS,MenakerM1967 Science 158(803):925-928
Graur D,Hide WA,Li WH1 1991 Nature351:G49-652
vitaminE or general underfeeding,or overbreed-
Greene HSN 1941 J ExpMed73:273
ingleadingtopoorcondition
GriffinPC,Bienen L,Gillin CMet al 2003Wildl Soc Bull 31:
environmentalstressors suchasphotoperiod, temper-
1066
ature, noise levels (including ultrasound), frequent
Hoffman RA1982 ProgClin Biol Res 92:153
IngallsTII,AdamsWM,LurieMBet al 1964 Natl Cancer
disturbancenadequateestmatralrestingra
Inst 33:799
·infectionsortumour ofthereproductivetract
KellerLS,Griffith JW,Lang CM 1987Vet Pathol 24:335
Norris ML,Adams CE1972IReprodFertil 31:447
overuseof themale,leadingloreducedspermcount.
SaitoK,Hasegawa A2004Vet MedSci 66{10):1247-1249
Segura P,Martinez.1,Peres Betal 2007Vet Rec160:869
References
Theau-Clement M 2007WorldRabbit Sci15:G1
Lleda H,KosakaT,Takahashi KW1998ExpAnim47:271
Van denBroek FAR,Klompmaker H,Bakker Retal 1995
AdamsCE1970J Reprod Fertil Suppl12:1
Anim Welfare 4:119
Weir Bl 1973ReprodFertil 33:61
AdkinsRM,Gellke EL,RoweDetal 2001 Mol Biol Evol 18:
777-791
Wiedenmayer C1997aAnimBehav53:461
Bartos L,Sedlacek J 1977LabAnim 11:57
Wiedenmayer C1997bAnim Welfare 6:273
BekyurekT,Liman N,Bayram G2002 LabAnim 36:51
Yamini B,Stein S1989JAm VetMed Assoc194:561
BishopCR2002VetClinExoticAnimPract5(3):507-535
BrainPF1999In:PooleTB(ed)TheUFAWhandbookon
the care and management of laboraiory gerbils, 7th edn.
Blackwell Science,Oxford,p345-355
851
Part
181
Assisted reproduction
35Assisted reproductive  technologies.....855
Ingrid BruckBoghand
TorbenGreve
35
Chapter
Ingrid Bruck Bogh
and Torben Greve
Assisted reproductive technologies
Introduction
Definition
Reproduction is basically the physiological pro-
In animal husbandry, breeding and the selection
cess, which guarantees the preservation of the spe-
cies and in a natural setup it requires mating. This
for special phenotypic characteristics or superior
physical encounter can be circumvented by differ-
performance has been conducted by humans for
ent technical means, which involve human inter-
thousands of years,butit was not until the lastcen
tury that artificial breeding techniques were devel-
vention.In a closer context,ART'which may have
oped, allowing an increase in selection efficiency.
relevance for the veterinary practitioner, comprise
artificial inseminarion (which is dealt with in Ch.
Several of these artificial reproductive technologies
(ART), including artificial insemination, embryo
31),embryo transfer including superovulation and
oestrous syrichronization, in vitro production and
transfer and in vitro embryo production (IVP), were
manipulation of embryos including production of
initially developed in livestock animals for genetic
progress or in smaller animal species to establish
transgenic embryos and chimera, oocyte recovery
and oocyte transfer as well as cryopreservation of
Tesearch models, but have increasingly been mod-
oocytes and embryos.
ified and subsequently have found application
also in companion animals. Some of these tech-
niques, such as intracytoplasmic sperm injection
Milestones in the development of
(ICSI), oocyte recovery and gamete intrafallopian
assisted reproductive technologies
tube transfer (GIFT), were primarily developed
in the human as a thierapy for sub-or infertility.
In 1890, Heape carried out the first successful
and have since also been adapted to different ani-
embryo transfer in rabbits (Heape 1890) and the
mal species either to circumvent specific causes of
first calf following embryo transfer was born in 1951
(Willett et al 1953).Research and development in
research. Within the context of this book, the pres-
ent chapter will describe the basic principles of dif
in carle. In the 1960s, a technique for non-surgical
ferent ART, focussing on the clinical aspecis, which
embryo transfer was introduced (Mutter et al 1964,
are relevant to the veterinary practitioner,includ-
Sugie 1965, Greve 1986)andhigher embryo yields
ing pathological and biosecurity aspects. Thus,
from selected individuals were obtained by hor-
emphasis will be on ART in large domestic animal
monal induction of multiple ovulations (superovu-
species.
lation). During thelast 20years, hormonal regimens
855
Part
8
Assisted reproduction
for superovulation in cattle have been refined and
ovulated oocyte (Brackett et al 1982). During the
combinedwith subsequent transfer of fresh or cryo-
following years, the techniques for in vitro pro-
preserved embryos,a techniquecalled multiple ovu-
duction of bovine embryos improved rapidly and
lation and embryo transfer (MOET).Today, this
soon itwas possibleto produce calvesfrom in
techniquehasbecomea routineprocedure inmany
vitro matured and fertilized oocytes (Lu et al 1988,
countries and more than 600000 in-vivo-derived
Xu et al 1988).Today,the complete in vitro tech-
bovine embryos were transferred torecipients
nique with maturation,fertilization and culture
worldwide in 2005,mainly in Europe and North
has found a wide application bothi as a research
and South America (Thibier 2006).
tooland inveterinary cattlepractice,In 2005,the
In the horse,increasing interest in maximizing
number of transfers of in-vitro-produced bovine
thereproductivepotentialofgeneticallyvaluable
embryostorecipientsworldwideexceeded260000,
animals led to the first successful non-surgical
most transfers being conducted in SouthAmerica
transferofanequineembryoin theearly1970s
(Thibier2006)
(Oguri &Tsutsumi 1974,Allen&Rowsen 1975,
In1991,two foals conceivedbyinvitrofertiliza-
Vogelsangetal1979).Since then,concertedefforts
tion ofin-vivo-maturedoocyteswereborninFrance
have improved the technique such that accept-
(Palmeretal1991,Bezardetal 1992)but,inspite
able pregnancy rates can be achieved (Imel et al
ofworldwide attempts,this siccesshasnever been
1981, Squires et al 1985, Vogelsang et al 1985).
repeated.Instead,ICSIisa more reliablemethod
However, in 2005 only about 14000 equine
for the in vitro production ofequine blastocysts
embryos were transferred to recipients accord-
and the first IcsI foal was born in 1998 after surgi-
ingto statisticsfrom theInternationalEmbryo
cal transferinto the oviduct(Cochran et al 1998).
Transfer Society（lEIS:Thibier 2006),two major
Subsequently,in vitro culture of the early embryo to
limiting factorsbeingthelackofefficientmeth-
blastocyst stage has been added, allowing for non-
ods for superovulation and for cryopreservation
surgical transfer(Lietal2001),but nevertheless the
ofembryos in mares.
techniquehas sofarelicitedno widespread com
Thefirstlambswerebornafterembryotransfer in
mercial interest.
1949(Warwick&Berry 1949).In sheep andgoals,
The birth of the first mice and calf following
embryotransferistodayusedinordertointroduce
cryopreservation was reportedinthe early 1970s
newbreeds orbreedswith certain desired traits,but
(Whittinghametal1972,Wilmut&Rowson1973)
ihe application islimitedbecauseofthehigh cost
andthisled to anentirelynewsituationforARTfor
and low efficiency of the technology(Rangel Santos
domestic animals. Cryopreservation made it pos-
2007). According to IETS data, approximately
sibletostore embryosformanyyearsand transfer
25 000 sheep and 7000 goat embryos were trans-
themindependentlyofthesiteofrecovery and date
ferred in2005（Thibier2006)
obtained.Thishas beenextremelyimportantboth
In the pig,the use ofembryo transfer for com-
forresearchpurposes in rodents and many other
mercial breeding purposes has been, and is still,
species,and for commercialembryo transfer in the
very limited.On the other hand, the technology is
domestic animal species (breeding programmes,
widely used forresearch.In 2005,approximately
internationaltrade).
30000 porcine embryos were transferred and a high
Willadsen's original studies on embryo cloning
proportion of these were used for research purposes
insheep(Willadsen1986)initiatedanotherimpor-
（Thibier 2006). One might expect that the success-
tantareaforbothresearchandcommercialuseof
ful application ofvitrification of porcine embryos
ART, and the birthi of the sheep‘Dolly'(Wilmut et
might lead to theuse of embryo ransfer techniques
al1997),producedby somaticcellnuclear transfer
for international movement of embryos, and for
(SCNT),meant a great leapforward for production
preservingimportant genetic material in outbreaks
ofnot only cloned but also cloned and genetically
of serious infectious diseases
modified animals. Transgenic animals of various
Meanwhile,another ART,in vitro embryo pro-
species are today generated for production of essen-
duction,was developed in several species.The first
tialpharmaceuticalproducts or as animal models
childconceivedby invitro fertilization (IVF)was
for the study of human diseases.Ultimately,SCNT
bornin1978（Steptoe&Edwards1978)followed
embryosmaybeused toproducetrueembryonic
in1981bythefirstcalfproducedafterIVFofan
stem cells designed foreach individual.
856
Chapter
35
Assistedreproductivetechnologies
Practical usesofartificial
in the genital tract.Although interest in commer-
reproductive technologies
cial embryo transfer programmes is still limited,the
recent inprovements in superovulatory regimens are
Breeding
promising and may change the demand for embryo
Oneof themajoradvantages ofusing technologiessuch
uransfer in future.Furthermore,advances in meth-
as embryo transfer, superovulation and cryopreserva-
odsfor thecryopreservation of embryosmaylead
tionisthebreeding aspectwherethetechnologiescan
to easier management, since there will benoneed
beused toincreasethenumberofoffspringfrom ani-
for recipient synchronization.Nevertheless,several
malsof highgeneticvalue.Incattle,a systeimaticuseof
breeding associations impose linits on the number
superovulation, embryo collection and embryos trans-
of progeny, or will not allow registration at all.
fer hasbeenusedintheso-calledMOETbreedingpro-
Withtheimplementationofultrasound-guided
grammes,whereyoungfemalesproduced byembryo
transfer areusedtocreatelargefull-siborhalf-sibfam-
and in conjunction with in vitro embryo production,
ilies,from which information isretrieved ona poten-
it is now possible to use this technology as both a
tial bull's sisters rather than his daughters (Fig. 35.1).
supplement to,and a replacement for,the tradi
Thiswill increasetheselectionintensity andreducethe
tional in vivo production of embryos. In this way,
generation interval.The MOET programmes include
embryosmaybeproduced fromanimalswithnon
establishmentofacentralbreedingherd,fromwhich
heritable infertility (age,blocked oviducts, endo-
allgenetic selection is basedon records obtained
metritis,for example),from animalsknown tohave
withintheherd.Avariety ofMOETprogrammeshave
been introduced from the mid-1980s and the genetic
from prepubertal and pregnant animals and in the
advantage has been demonstrated by this method in a
eventof certaindeath,where ovariesmayberecov-
largenumberofbulls（Christensen1991,Lohuis1995,
eredfrom thedeadanimalandoocytesmaysubse-
Callesen etal 1996).
quently be processed in vitro.IVP has also altracted
Horse owners may choose different methods of
interestfortheconservation ofendangeredspecies,
ART for various reasons: multiple offspring from
whereembryosevenmaybetransferredto another
dams and/orsireswith high geneticvalue,offspring
species.Thislatter aspect is still at the experimental
from mares that are in competition or from subfer-
level butARTisbeingincreasingly usedinthebreed-
tilemareswherethecauseisnotrelatedtoproblems
ing programmes of wildlife parks and zoos.
Soren Ernst Madsen,TransEmbryo,Denmark.)
857
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
Twinning
animal species may also be applied in human
ART. The cloning era has clearly shown the impor-
In certain beef cattle species, twinning may be an
tance of epigenetic influences on the phenotype,
attractive prospect,whereas it is unwanted in dairy
andthecombinationoftransgenesisandcloning
herds.With the transfer oftwoin-vivo-or in-vitro-
isnowausefultoolforproducinganimalmodels
derived embryostoeachrecipient,itispossibleto
withhuman diseases,thus allowing the develop
obtain a calving rate above normal.Embryos should
mentofmethodsforbetterdiagnosisand treatment.
be placed in both horns,as this will improve the
Derivingstem cellsfromSCNTembryosmay be one
number offetusesthat survive(Sreenan&Beehan
wayofobtainingtrueembryonicstemcellscompat-
1976,Greve&Del Campo 1986).One mighthave
iblewith theindividualperson.
envisaged that the technology would gain a broader
applicationwith the useof IVP embryos,which can
be produced at a lower price (Lu & Polge 1992).
Superovulation, insemination
Nevertheless,ithas notbeen used widely in prac
and recipient synchronization
tice,asit requires expensive equipment,advanced
training and in some countries is even prohibited
Purpose
bylaw.
Superovulation,also called superstimulation,isa
Exportandimport
treatmentintendedtoincreasetheovulationrate
and number of available oocytes in the donor
Disease transmission with in-vivo-andin-vitro-pro
animal,withoutdisrupting thephysiologicaland
ducedembryosis describedlaterin this chapter,but
endocrinological processes associatedwith oocyte
itshouldbeemphasized thatmovementoflivestock
maturation,ovulation,fertilization and embry-
at the embryo level issafer and preferablefor animal
onicand fetal development.Superovulation is a
welfarethan thetransportofliveanimals,whether
prerequisite for successful application of embryo
young or adult. Embryos have also been exported
transfer,particularly in species with a physiologi-
andimportedthroughouttheworldtoimprovethe
callylowovulation rate(cattle,sheep and horses)
performance of the indigenous catle populations.
and the descriptionof superovulation will focus on
In additiontoapotentialgeneticgain,embryo trans
these species.A close synchrony of oestrus between
fer into local recipients will also allow the offspring
thedonor and therecipientiscrucialfor obtain-
toacquireimmunity throughcolostrum.However,
ing optimal pregnancy rates, and is obviously an
it should be emphasized that the training of people
importantpartoftheentireembryotransferplan-
toensureahighlevelofmanagement isimportant
ning process.
inordertoachievethe anticipatedproductiongains.
In many countries, the price of embryos will pre-
Hormones
vent the use of this technology and artificial insemi-
nation (Al) using semen from sires of high genetic
Follicular stimulation
meritisprobably a bettermeans of achievinggenetic
improvement.
Two distinct groups of follicle-stimulating hor-
mones have been used for superovulation.The
original hormone used for superovulation in rumi-
Research
nants was pregnant mare's serum gonadotrophin
Apart from the above mentioned applications,the
(PMSG), now designated equine chorionic gonado-
developmentofARThasplayedaninvaluablerolein
trophin (eCG), which is a glycoprotein produced by
understanding basic cell biology events during nor-
the endometrial cups of pregnant mares (see Chs 2,
mal and abnormal fertilization and embryogenesis,
3).ltcan bepurified from serum and has botha
including:placental development,ultrastructure,
follicle-stimulating hormone(FSH)- and luteiniz-
gene expression,chromosomal studies,epigenetics
ing hormone(LH)-likeeffect.Followinginjection
andmetabolism in particular by comparing in-vivo-
in cattle,it has a half-life of approximately 5 days
produced embryos and embryos produced invitro or
(Schams et al 1978).eCG has both advantages and
by cloning.The experience obtained from domestic
disadvantages.The advantageis thatihe drugis
858
Chapter
351
Assisted reproductive technologies
relanively cheap and has to be administered only
Superovulation, insemination and
once. The disadvantage is a variable and unpredict-
synchronization regimens in cattle
able FSHl:Lll ratio and that the residual amount
A vast anount of data is available concerning
ofeCG may have a continuous superstimulatory
superovulation in relation to embryo transfer in
effect after ovulation and thus cause development
of postovulatory oestrogen-producing follicles. The
cattle[Mapletoft 2006),and in tie following the
practical importance of this informalion has been
prolonged and elevaled oestrogen production may
disrupt fertilization and early embryonic devel-
summarized.
It must be stressed from ihe outset: superovulation
opment and, therefore, attempts have been made
of cattle is subject to a high degree of unpredictabil-
to reduce the allegedly adverse effecis of residual
ity and variability and may cause frustrations for the
amounts of circulatingeCGbyinjectingeCG antise-
ruin approximalely at the time of oestrus (Dieleman
owner of the donor and the veterinarian (Callesen
&Bevers 1987).Nevertheless,other data in cal-
el al 1986,Callesen& Greve 2002）. Tlius,fron the
start, the owner should receive detailed information
tlehave shown that this does notimprove embryu
and veterinary guidance about the shortcomings
The second generation of superovulatory hor-
ofsuperovulation and the procedure as a whole,
mones is FSH, a pituitary gonadotrophin purified
before entering into an embryo transfer programme.
from the pituitary glands of pigs (pFSH), sheep
However, there are a number of routine clinical and
managemeni procedures that may be undertaken in
(oFSH) or horses (eFSH). In contrast to eCG,pitu-
itary gonadotrophin has a short half life of approxi-
order to increase the likelihood of success.
mately 6 hours and must be administered twice daily
for 3-4 days in order to obtain the desired effect.
Donor selection
Compared with eCG it is expensive, but most FSH
One of the routine measures is the careful assess-
preparations have a more consistent FSHI:LH ratio.
ent of potential donors.They should be in positive
energy balance and cows losing weight following par-
Inductionofoestrus
turition are particularly poor candidates for induc-
In order to achievesuperovulation,thedonormust
tion of superovulation.In general,they should have
come intooestrus a few days after theinitiation of
had two regular oestrous cycles before commence-
theeCGorFSH injections,which requires induction
ment of superovulation and be otherwise gynaeco-
ofluteolysis as iu isnolonger thepractice1o await
logically normal. Age, parity and season (except heat
the spontaneous occurrence of oestrus. Induction
stress) appear to have a minor influence on the sub-
of luteolysis is normally achieved with injections of
sequent outcome of superovulation,but there may
prostaglandin (PG)F, or analogues but insertion
be a certain breed effect. Ultrasonography may be
of vaginal or subcutaneous progesterone-releasing
used prior to superovulation to ensure that thete is
devices may also be used to suppress the LH surge
a degree of ovarian follicular activity (Adams 1994,
until ovulation is desired.
Singh et al 2004),but correlation hetween the ultra-
sonographically visualized number of small and
Induction of ovulation
medium-sized ovarian follicles at the time of ini-
tiation of hormone treatment and the subsequent
Two hormones may be used, either human cho-
number of ovulations, is not high (Purwantara et al
rionic gonadotrophin (hCG) or gonadotrophin-
1993).
releasing hormone (GnRH), eilher used alone or in
combinationwith prostaglandin
Standard superovulation protocol
At the time of initiation of the gonadotrophin
Recipient synchronization
treatment,the veterinarian must ensure that there
Recipients are norimally synchronized with prosta-
is an active CL. The standard superovulation pro-
glandin or progesterone-releasing devices and a very
tocol (Fig.35.2) is as follows: around day 9-11
close synchrony with the donor's oestrous cycle is
after oestrus/ovulation,when thesecondfollicular
always altempted.
wave is emerging,the donor receives one injection
859
Part
8
Assisted reproduction
Donor
Recipientselectionandmanagement
A close syncdirony betweendonor andrecipient
oestrus is imporiant lo achieve high pregnancy
rates(Hasler etal1987).Therecipients willreceive
twodoses ofprostaglandin given 11daysapart,
the last injection given 24 hours before the
D0D1D2D3D405D6D7D8D9D10D11D12D13D14D15D21
donor's injection,as the recipienthas a longer
response time to oestrus in comparison to the donor.
Recipient
The reason for this is an earlier rise in the donors
oestrogen （E.) concentrations,which in tun will
trigger an advanced LH surge.
Fig.35.2Hormonalregimenfor superovulation andoestrus
Measures to improve the superovulatory
synchronization in cattle.
response
Many attempts havebeen made to improve the
superovulatory response to the conventional mid-
cycle superovulatory regimen and the existing
ofeithereCGorFSHadministeredtwicedailyin
knowledge -gained by ultrasonography (Adams
decreasingdosesfor3-4days.48-72hours after
1994, Ginther et al 1996)-concerning the folli-
theinitial injection ofthesuperstimulatorytreat-
cular wave paltern through the oestrous cycle.This
ment,oestrus isinduced bymeans ofone or two
has helped in the design ofnew andmore effective
injections of prostaglandin, and oestrus will nor-
protocols for themanipulation and control of the
mally occur within 48 hours afterwards. Since
follicularwave emergence(Boetal2006,Mapletoft
oestrus may occur earlier,it is advisable o observe
2006).
the donor closely for signsof oestrus from around
Takinginto account thefollicularwave emergence,
36 hours after prostaglandin treatment. The LH
it ispossibleto design a protocolinwhich thestart
surge coincides with the occurrence of oestrus,
oftheFSHtreatmentcoincideswith thetimeofthe
i.e.42-45hours aftertheprostaglandininjection
wave emergence, as well as the timing of Al, thus
(Callesenet al 1986)and the donor willovulate
reducing the time spent by staff involved and opti-
from 24-30 hourslater.Therefore,insemination
mizing the number of fertilized eggs obtained （Bo
shouldbe performedtwice,at 12and 24hours
ei al 2006).However,in some countries there are
after the onset of standing oestrus;it has been
restrictions on the use of certain hormones in ani-
shown that more frequent inseminations have
malsintended for human consumptionand,more
no advantage(Greve 1981,review by Callesen &
importantly,there seems tobeonlya slight and sta
Greve2002）
tisticallyinsignificantimproveimentin theoutcome
Itisextreinelyimportanttousehiglhi-qualitysemen
ofthe treatment.
(Stroud&Hasler2006),as the semen transport in
Recombinant bovine somatotropin (rbsT)has
the superovulated female may be impaired, as doc-
been shown to increase the number of growing
umentedby the relativelyhighrate of unfertilized
follicles (Gong et al 1993) in cattle and thus, theo-
oocytes (uFOs)and a low number of supernumer-
retically,could be used to improve the super-
ary spermatozoa in the zona pellucida of embryos
ovulatory response.However,a recent study by
recoveredfromsuperovulatedanimalsascompared
Hasler et al (2003),using repeated superovula-
to non-stinulated (Saacke et al 1994).A certain bull
tions in a commercial organization involving
effecthas alsobeen seen(Callesen &Greve 2002)
embryo transfer in dairy cattle,failed to demon-
andithasbecome increasinglyclear that there isa
strate a positive effect of this treatment in terms
farm-to-farmvariation that isprobablyinherent to
oftotal number ofembryosandnumberofgood
the management on thefarm.
qualityembryos.
860
Chapter
35
Assisted reproductive technologies
Superovulation,insemination and
Disadvantages and variability
synchronization regimens in the
of superovulation treatment
horse
Superovulation has at least two major problems,
Superovulation
firstlythe efficacy ofthe gonadotrophins (purity,
FSHI:LH ratio) and the complex planning and man-
Inthepast,attemptstoinducemultipleovulations
agement of the superovulatory protocol in relation
in the mare have resulted in only marginal success.
tothe emergence of thefollicular wave.Secondly,
Paradoxically,eCGisineffectiveninducinga suer-
there exists an inherent between-animalvariation
ovulatoryresponseinthemare（Day1940,Betteridge
in terms of thenumber andquality ofoocytesand
&Mitchell1974),presumably becauseofinsufficient
embryos produced.
binding to theFSH receptors in the mare's ovarian
Superovulation always results in aberrant steroid
tissue(Stewart&Allen 1979).Different treatment
hormonalprofiles in thefollicular fluid,as well as
regimens with pFSH have only resulted in an insig
in the peripheral circulation （FSH,LH,E,and P）
nificant increase in the average ovulation rate of
Thus,there are significantly elevated levels ofE,and
fewer than2ovulations,evenwhen quitelargedoses
Paround the time of,and following, ovulations
were used (Ivine1981,Squires etal1986,Fortune
and inmostdonors theLH surgeis elicited sooner
&Kimmich 1993).GnRH or GnRH analogue treat-
due to an earlier increase in E, In some donors,
ment ofmares duringanoestrus has a moderate
theLH peak is lower or absent.All,or just some,of
superovulatory effect (Johnson 1987,Ginther &
these aberrations may lead to impaired oocyte mat-
Bergfelt 1990) but in cyclical mares GnRH treatment
uration,reducedoocytequality,lackaffertilization
hasnoeffectandresults in downregulation of the
anda lower embryo quality (Callesen et al 1986,
pituitarygland,with ovarian inactivity as a conse
Callesen1995).The onlyhormonal analysis that
quence (Montovan et al 1990, Watson et al 1992,
may be ofpractical relevance is themeasurement of
Fitzgerald et al 1993,Pedersen et al 2002).Active
plasma P,around the timeofoestrus,as elevated
immunization against the α subunit of inhibin has
levels are predictive of a poorresponse.
beenusedsuccessfullytoincreasethe ovulationrate,
whilepassiveimmunizationonlyhadamoderate
effect.Immunoglobulins against inhibin neutral-
Thedonorfollowing superovulation
ize the circulating inhibin and reduce the inhibi-
tory effect onFSH fron the pituitary.However this
andflushing
method/has not been used commercially because
Within approximately 30 days for heifers,and
ofvariable results,as well as the need for repeated
40-60daysforcows,thedonorswill return tonor-
vaccinationand several adverse reactions after both
malcyclicity andthefertilityisgenerallynormal
active andpassiveimmiunization[McCueetal 1992,
(Greve 1981).Nevertheless, through the profound
1993,McKinnon et al 1992).
alterations in the endocrine profles,superovulation
Ithas been hypothesizedthatthe relatively
may obviously affect the subsequent fertility of the
restricted area availablein the ovulationfossa,com-
donor,and it is important that the owner is made
binedwiththelargesizeofthepreovulatoryfollicle
aware of this.Embryos may be left in the uterus fol-
in the mare,might be a limiting factor for superovu
lowing flushing and,in order to avoid spontane-
lation(McCue1996).Howeverareportin which a
ous abortion around day 50-60 of multiple fetuses,
mare spontaneouslyovulated12follicles ofdiam-
etersrangingbetween18and22mmwithin2days,
assoon aspossible,prostaglandin should begiven
followed by ultrasonographic identification of six
at theend of thecollectionprocedure andpossibly
embryonic vesicles on gestation day 17 (Bruick et al
repeated some days later.A certain proportion ofani-
1997b), shows that there is no intrinsic limitation
malswillnotreturn tonormalcyclicity,astheymay
preventing superovulationin this species.Although
experience an anovulatory period or even develop
themechanism forthis spontaneous superovula-
cystic ovarian disease (see Ch.22).These should be
tionhasneverbeen determined,itillustrates clearly
submittedforgynaecologicalexamination,andpro-
that the diameter of the preovulatory follicle is
longedtreatmentwithprogesteronemay inmany
not necessarily a measure of follicular and oocyte
circumstancesalleviate thieproblem.
maturity, and that he normal mechanisms for
861
Part
181
Assisted reproduction
selecting a dominant single folliclemay sometimes
be overridden,
the degree of synchrony between the oestrous cycles
Successful superovulation,with ovulation rates
of donor andrecipient is less crucial in mares than
ranging from 1.7-4.6 ovulations/oestrus, has been
in cattle. No significant difference in the pregnancy
achieved using equine pituitary extract (Douglas et
rates after embryo transfer on day 7 afier ovulation
al 1974,Lapin& Ginther 1977,Woods &Ginther
was found if the recipient ovulated 1 day before or
1984, Squires et al 1986). Currently, the most effec-
up to 3 days after the donor mare（+1,0,-1,-2,
tive protocol to induce multiple ovulations in the
mare is a regimen with twice-daily injections of
nancyrates if therecipient ovulated2or3days
eFSH, initiated 5-8 days after ovulation when a CL is
presentand thelargest folliclehiasreached 20-25 mm
pregnancies and foalings can be achieved after early
in diameter.On the second day ofeFSH treatment
embryos are transferred to ovariectomized recipi
prostaglandin is administered to induceluteolysis.
The eFSH treatment is continued for 3-5 days until
the first trimester ofgestation(Hinrichs et al1987).
the largest follicle(s) reach 32-35mm in diameter.
This method has a major practical inplication for
After an interim period of 36 hours, the mare is
commercial embryo transfer in mares, since embryo
treated with hCG to induce ovulation (Alvarenga et
transfer programmes are often hampered by the
al2001,Scoggins etal2002,McCueetal2007).This
unreliability of recipient synchronization and the
regimen has resulted in an average of approximately
unavailability of sufficient numbers of recipient
4 ovulations and 1.5 embryos per treated oestrous
mares.
cycle(Niswender et al 2003,Welchetal2006).Thie
The breeding technique (natural service or Al) is
relatively intensive treatment regimen and the cur-
generally secondary, provided semen quality and the
rent price per dose renders superovulation treatment
timing of breeding in relation to ovulation is opti-
in thie mare an expensive procedure. As in cattle,
mal.Ifthere is uncertainry concerning the qualiry
there is variability in the superovulatory response,
of frozen semen, or the possibility of the intensive
especially in older mares（Squires &McCue2007)
monitoring necessary forAl with frozen semen,the
and so far there is no information available on the
use of fresh or chilled semen is preferred (see also
effect ofrepeated supeiovulatory treaiments onthe
Chs26,31).
mare's long-term fertility.
Synchronization and insemination
Superovulation,insemination
and synchronization regimens
For oocyte and embryo transfer,the time of ovu-
lation has to be synchronized between donor and
in sheep and goats
recipient mare. This is generally attempted by two
Superovulation
separate injections of prostaglandin during dioestrus
to indure liteolysis, and treatment with hCG or
Techniques for superovulation are very similar for
GnRH analogue during oestrus when the preovu-
both specics (Armsirong & Evans 1983) and the
latory follicle reaches 35mm in diameter in order
gonadotrophin preparations used are the same
to induce ovulation. Nevertheless, the course of fol-
as those used in the cow,namely eCG or oFSH.
licular development varies considerably between
Gonadotrophin treatment is usually initiated in
individual mares,and the onset of oestrus depends
mid- to late cycle, and prostaglandin is administered
greatly on thesize of thefolliclespresent atthetime
24-72 hours later, inducing oestrus witlin 24-36
of prostaglandin injection.Thus, simple synchro-
hours.Oestrus and ovulation can also be controlled
nization with one prostaglandin injection during
by an iniuravaginal progesterone releasing device:
dioestrus is often suboptimal,andthe adiministra-
sheep are treated for 12-14 days and goats for
tion of two prostaglandin injections approximately
14-18 days using this method. Superovulation can
10 days apart can improve the synchrony, or alter-
also be induced outside the normal breeding sea-
natively lhiree recipients should be available per
son. The use of eCG antibodies has been attempted
donor mare.Timed induction of luteolysis can also
in sheep but without significant improvement of the
be combined with a previous prolonged treatment
superstimulatory result.
862
Chapter
35
Assisted reproductive technologies
Embryo recovery(collection)
Insemination
and embryo transfer
Inseminationisusually achievedbynatural service
orAl,usingfreshlycollectedsemenevery12hours
Purpose/general principles
from thetimeofoestrus.However,fertilizationfail-
ure can occur commonly in the ewe, particularly
Following superovulation,theembryos are recov
when the ovaries are overstimulated and response
ered from eithertheoviduct or theuterus.In all spe
t0 gonadotrophin is high.This can be overcome by
cies,early attempts torecover embryos used surgical
surgicalinsemination directlyinto theuterus,either
methods through a midventral laparotomy (Polge
by laparotomy or by a laparoscopic technique (see
1977) and flushing of the oviduct and uterus.This
Ch.31).Synchronization ofdonor and recipient
techniqueis stillpractised in specieswherecervical
oestrous cycles is normally achieved by progester-
catheterization is difficult and the procedure cannot
one-releasingdevicesandanasynchronyof2days
be controlled by transrectal palpation(sheep/goats,
willgive acceptable pregnancy rates(wilmut &
pigs, dogs and cats). As a consequence, it is more
Sales 1981).
labour-intensive and poses a greater risk (anaesthe-
sia, adhesions) to the donor animal. A semi-surgi-
cal techniqueinvolvingendoscopyforrecovery of
embryos from the oviduct hasbeen developed both
Superovulation,inseminationand
for pigs and cattle (Besenfelder etal 1997,review by
synchronizationregimens in pigs
Besenfelder 2006).
In cattle and horses,non-surgical techniqueswere
Superovulationandinsemination
developed tocollectembryosfrom theuterus(cat-
Induction of superovulation of sows andofgiltscan
tle-Drost e1al 1976,Elsdenetal 1976,Greve et
involvetheuseof twovery differentregimens.These
al 1977, Newcomb et al 1978;horses -Oguri &
are described below.
Tsutsumi 1974,Imelet al 1981) This was a major
In sows,hCGis administered 3 days after wean-
advance for the application of embryo transfer in
ing to induce ovulation and, 15 days later,lute-
the commercial development of new breeding strat
olysis isinduced by means of two prostaglandin
egies, especially in cattle.
injertions given12 hours apart (l-lazeleger&Kemp
1999).To stimulate follicular growth,eCG(1000or
Embryo collection and transfer
1500iu) is administered approximately 1 day after
incattle
the last prostaglandin injection.More ovulations
areachieved with thehigh eCGdose.Ovulation is
Embryo collection
induced 72 hours later with hCG(7501U) and the
Bovine embryos enter the uterus around day 4 and are
sows are inseminated 36 and 42 hours after hCG
injection.Recipients receive the same treatment
collected 6-8days after theonset of standingoestrus,
when the embryos are at the morula and blastocyst
apartfrominsemination.
In gilts, there are two possible methods:(1)
stages and still surrounded by the zona pellucida.
insemination and induction of abortion with pros-
Before the embryo recovery procedure, the
laglandin around day 26,and subsequent super-
superstimulatory response is assessed by transrec-
tal palpation (Fig.35.3) and/or use of transrectal
ovulationwitheCGor(2)useofallyltrenbolone
ultrasonography; the latter method giving a more
in combination with eCG and hCG(Cameron et
al 2004). In the latter method, following a nau-
accurate estimate of the number of CLs and anovu-
ral oestrous cycle,the pigs arefed allyltrenbolone
latory follicles.However,the exact number of CLsis
difficult o assess, particularly in animals with mul-
(20g/day)for18 daysand,24hours after cessation
ofthistreatment,theyreceiveaninjectionof1000
tipleCLs.If thereareonly one or two CLs,or there
IUeCGfollowedby750IUhCGapproximately72
arefollicularcysts,itis advisablenottoproceedwith
the recovery procedure. Epidural anaesthesia (see
hourslater.Mating(naturalor artificial insemina-
tion)is then perforimed two or three times start-
Ch.12)using lidocaine isnormallyused toprevent
ing approximately 24 hours after hCG.The latter
straining and defecation,However,some animals
method is preferred.
may aspirate air into thie rectum (ballooning) as a
863
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
careful not to penetrate the uterus just after passing
through the last cervical ring.
Itis customary to flush each horn separately;
flushing of thewhole uterinebody can beused,but
requires more uterine manipulation than the sep-
aratehorn flush.Modified Dulbecco's phosphate
buffered saline(DPBS), supplemented with 1-2%
bovine serum albumin （BSA)or fetal calf serum
(FCS)and various antibiotics,is normally used fon
recovery(Greveet al 1977).Protein supplementa-
tion oftheflushingmedium isimportantinorderto
preventadhesionof theembryostotheplasticware
（filters,dishes and tubing)butitis essential to assure
that the protein source is not contaminated with
virus(e.g.bovineviral diarrhoea(BVD)).Two differ-
ent embryo collection (flushing)methods may be
used:continuous flow (Fig.35.5) or repeated inter-
rupted collection using injection and evacuation of
Fig.35.3Cattleovarywithmultiplecorpora lutea after
30-50ml medium(Fig.35.6).The flushing volume
superovulationwitheCG.
varies between animalsbut in general approximately
0.5litres isusedperhorn,cowsrequiringmorethan
heifers.Whatevermeihodisused,itisof theutmost
consequence of theepidural,which makes thepro-
importancetorecoverall themediumthathasbeen
cedure more difficult.I is important to minimize
infused,as the embryos may be present in the final
contamination andtheperinealregionistherefore
residues.
washed and disinfectedcarefullywith a mild disin-
The flushing medium is transferred to a specially
fectani, including the inside of the vulvar lips.
designed filter with a pore size of 70μm, allow-
The embryo collection catheter most widely used
ing somatic cells （e.g.red blood cells)and certain
is a Foley rubber catheter（Fig.35.4)of different
debris topass through whileretainingthe embryos
brands and sizes;a catheter 70cm long and 14, 16
(150-200jm in diameter）.The filter content is
or 18Gismost commonlyused for cows andheifers
transferred to a Perri dish marked with squares,and
respectively.The catheter is guided through the cer
vixintothe desireduterinehorn undercarefultrans-
rectal coniroland,whenthetipofthecatheteris in
themidpartofthehorn,theballoonisinflatedwith
air or saline. Care should be taken not to damage the
endometrium during the passage of the instrument
and duringtheinflationprocedure,as this maylead
topoor recovery oftheflushing medium and/or
bleeding, with subsequent clotting, leading to diffi-
culties in embryo identification.In heifers,it may be
TV
necessary to use a cervical dilator,but onemust be
Fig.35.4Foleycatheterused for non-surgicalembryocollec-
Fig.35.5Schematic drawingof non-surgical embryo collec-
tion incattle,balloonextendecwithair.
tionincatileusing continuousflushingby thegravityflow.
864
Chapter
351
Assisted reproductive technologies
Fig. 35.6 Embryc recovery in a heifer using the interrupted
Fig.35.7 In-vivo-prodluced cattle embryos recovered on day
flowprinciple.
6-7 after oestrus.
the filter botrom is washed several rimes with addi-
guished. It may be difficult to make a very clear dis-
tional flushing medium. Sedimentation in a funnel
tinction berween excellent and good quality embryos,
or glass cylinder can be used,but mucus and other
which arecharacterized by the embryobeing spheri
debris may mask the embryos during the subsequent
cal without signs of blastomere degeneration. In the
search in the Petri dish.The Petri dish is searched
fair category, some blastomeres may have degener-
under a stereomicroscope at x50-100 magnification
ated, and are lying ouiside the trophectoderm and
and, once the embryos are identified, they are trans-
are not participating in the formation of the embryo.
ferred to a smaller dish containing DPBS supple-
In the poor category, very few of the blastomeres are
mented with 5-10% FCS.
normal. The UFO may assume different shapes and
sometines appear to be degenerate, or may contain
degenerated, unevenly distributed ooplasm.
Assessment of embryo quality
In-vivo-derived bovine morulae and blastocysts
Embryonic stage and quality are evaluated in a Peui
are very robust and may be maintained in the appro
dish, which should contain noblood or other debris.
priate medium in a small Petri dish,or in anAI straw
The morphological evaluation of embryos includes
at room temperature for up to 24 hours without los-
assessment of the stage and quality of the embryo and
ing their viability. If stored at 4°℃, they will give sat
follows the guidelines from theInternational Embryo
isfactory pregnancy rates even after storage up to 48
Transfer Sociery (Stringfellow 1998). Among the fer-
hours after recovery (Lindner et al 1983). Moreover,
tilized eggs recovered on day 6-7, most embryos are
in-vivo-derived embryos are very tolerant to freezing
at the compact morula, early blastocyst, blastocyst or
and vitrification (see below).
expanded blastocyst stages (Fig. 35.7). Hatched blas-
The results of embryo recoveries are subject to large
tocysts will rarely be present if collections are con-
variations(Stroud & Hasler 2006),as they depend
ducted before day 8 afier oestrus. A compact morula
on the response to superovulation. Nevertheless, in
contains at least l6 cells and the surface of individ-
general one may expect that:
ual blastomeres may be discerned. While in the early
blastocyst there is a small blastocoele cavity, it is often
·5% of the donors are not flushed because of a
poor superstimulatory response
possible to distinguish the inner cell mass and the
· non transferable or nonviable embryos are recov-
trophectoderm. During the observation in the dish,
the embryos may ‘pump' and form a smaller or larger
eredfrom20%of theaninals
blastocoele cavity; it is believed that this is a sign of
·the total number ofembryos and LIFOs per donor is
good health and quality. Significantly, a similar mech-
around eight to ten and of these, approximately six
anism is rarely seen with in-vitro-derived embryos.
embryos are considered tobe transferable (Callesen
The embryo quality is scored as excellent, good, fair
etal1996,reviewbyCallesen&Greve2002,Stroud
or poor, and additionally UFOs have to be distin-
&Hasler 2006,Mapletoft2006,Merton 2007)
865
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
Embryo transfer
Theembryomayeitherbetransferredto therecipi
ent immediately after recovery or be cryopreserved
and transferred later.IETS data show that approxi-
matelyhalfoftherecoveredembryosaretransferred
fresh and the other half after cryopreservation,buit
manyofthecryopreservedembryosarenotsubse
quentlythawed and transferred(Thibier2006),pos-
sibly because of lackof demandresulting from the
decreasing genetic value of these embryos compared
with later generations.
Until the mid 1970s,embryos were transferred
surgically into thetip oftheuterinehorn,either
Fig.35.8 Embryo transterprocedure in a heifer using an
through amidventralmidlineincision orlater
embryo transfercatheter fittedwith achemise.
through a flankincision.These techniques-in par
ticular the midventral approach -were tedious and
involved surgicalriskto the animals.Since then,
intotheuterinelumen andpulling thehorn over
virtuallyallbovine embryoshavebeentransferred
the catheter.Any endometrialtraumawithbleed-
by non-surgical means through the cervix,yielding
ing must be avoided. In terms of pregnancy rates
pregnancy rates similar to those obtained following
(average50-70%),there areconsiderablevariations
surgical transfer,i.e.about50-60%(Greve&Lehn-
fromoperator tooperator,fromfarm tofarmanda
Jensen1979,Wright1981)
very significant effectof embryoquality,withexcel
Prior to ransfer,the embryos are washed 10 times
lent and good giving the highest pregnancy rates
according to the manual of theIETS(Stringfellow
(70-80%) (Mapletofi 2006).
1998)andeachembryois thenloadedintoa0.25ml
After embryo transfer, pregnancy loss beyond ges-
sterile insemination straw (e.g.IMV). The straw is
tationday45isaround5%andthusverysimilar
placed in an ordinary insemination(Cassou) pipetle
to that after artificial insemination,with poor qual
(see Ch.31)or a specially designed embryo trans-
ity,frozen embryos resulting in thehighest loss
fercatheter,whichisamodificationof theordinary
(Callesen et al 1996).
insemination pipette.
The oestrous cycle of the recipients must be syn-
chronized with that of the donor and prior to trans
Embryo collectionand transfer
feritmustbeascertainedthatoestrushasoccurred
in horses
within±24hoursofthedonor（Hasleretal1987)
Embrya collection
and thata functional CL is present.The synchrony
betweenrecipient and embryo developmental stage
Inmares,the embryo enters the uterus at the
may be a more reliable parameter than oestrus syn-
morula stage, approximately5/ days after ovula-
chronyhus,morulaeshould,rexample,betran-
tion(Betteridgeetal 1982,Hinrichs&Riera 1990,
ferredtorecipients that are at day 6,and blastocysts
Freeman etal 1991)and,in an embryo transfer
to recipients at day 7.
programme, embryos are generallyrecovered 6-8
It is advantageous to use epidural anaesthesia
daysafter ovulation at themorula or blastocyst
and,aswith the donors,theperineal region must be
stage (Figs.35.9-35.11).For comfortable working
cleaned carefully.In cattle,embryos are always trans-
conditions,mares are restrained in a crush; seda-
ferredtotheuterinehorn ipsilateral totheovary
tion is often unnecessary （Fig.35.12).An initial
bearingtheCLinordertoblocktheluteolyticmech-
thorough cleaning of the perineal area is essen-
anism (see Ch.3). The embryo transfer catheter,
tial. The tip of a Foley or silicone-flushing cath-
fittedwith achemise,ispassed through thecervix
eter is inserted manually through the cervix into
undertransrectal control andgentlyiniroducedinto
the uterine body.The balloon of the catheter is
the mid-part of theuterinehorn,where the embryo
inflated just cranialtothe cervixandtheentire
is deposited (Fig. 35.8).The technique involves
uterus is filled by gravity flow with DPBS supple
acombination of gently pushing the catheter
mentedwith1%FCS,which especially prevents the
866
Chapter
35
Assistedreproductivetechnologies
Fig.35.9 Equine morula recovered in vivc on day 7 after
ovulaticn.
Fig.35.12 Non-surgical embryo collection in a marc on day 7.
smaller embryos from adhering to the plastic ware.
Thevolume oftheflushingmedium varieswith the
mare's age and parity but in general the uterus will
accept 1-2 litres.It is imporiant to install as much
fluid as the uterus will accept,in order to ensure
that all endometrial folds are distended before the
flushing medium is collected through a 70pm fil-
Fig.35.10Equine blastocystrecovered in vivo on day7after
ovulation.
ter. Flushing is repeated three times, and oxytocin
may be given prior to thelast colleciion to enhance
the recovery of the remaining fluid. LInlike cattle,
the recovered flushing medium rarely contains red
blood cells.Immediately after recovery,the donor
can be treated with prostaglandin to induce oestrus
and allow embryorecovery toberepeated aftera
14-18-day interval.
On Day 6,just upon entry into the uterus,the con-
ceptus has a similar size to UIFOs (approximately
150-250jm in diameter:Betteridge et al 1982,
tocoeleformsmeasuring200-600μmin diameteron
et al 1982).This allows macroscopicidentification
of the embryoin theflushingmedium from approx-
imately day 8.At this stage,the zona pellucida has
been shed, so that the conceprus is now surrounded
by a capsule,which preserves its spherical shape
Fig.35.11 Unfertilized ovum reccvered from a mare together
until approximately gestation day 17 (Fig. 35.13).
with a fertiied egg.
Since the passage through the uterotubal junction
867
Part
81
Assistedreproduction
Embryotransfer
As for the derr,there are preferable requirements
for the recipient with respect to age, parity, fertil-
ity and,additionally,temperament.As mentioned
before, synchrony between stages of the oestrous
cycle of donor and recipient should bewithin+1 and
-3days(see p.862).Alternatively,ovariectomized
mares treated with progesterone during the first tri-
1cm
mesterofgestationhaveproved tobeuseful asrecipi-
ents(Hinrichs et al1987,Squires et al 1989).
Equineembryos caneitherbetransferredto a
recipient immediately after recovery, or after cool-
ing to 5°℃for 24hours,or aftercryopreservation
Fig.35.13Twin equine embryosrecovered simultaneousy
(seebelow).For non-surgical transfer,tlie embryo is
onrespectivelyday11and14afterasynchronousovulation.
transferred under lightmicroscopyto an insemina-
Note thatboth embryos arefloating at the surface indicating
a lower specificgravity than theflushing medium.
tionstrawsituatedforeaseofidentificationbetween
an airbubbleanda second fluid column.Thetip of
theinsemination catheter ispositioned in theuter-
inebodybeforetlieembryoisgentlyreleased.The
requires asignal from the earlyembryo,mostprob
ably PGE, (Weber et al 1991), recovery of an UFO is
method of transferinto thesynchronizedrecipientis
in principle similar to that used forAl but, to ensure
always a sign that a fertilizedovun has also passed
extra sterility,thorough cleaning and disinfection
through the uterotubal junction.
Embryo recovery rates are correlated with embry-
oftherecipient'sperinealarea andcoverageofthe
transfer instrument with a sterile chemise(guarded
onic age,with higherrecovery onday8than onday
6（lulianoetal1985,Squiresetal1985a,b）.Inyoung,
meihod) are essential.As an additional measure to
ensurestrilityandavoidstalandinleaseit
fertileexperimental mares,embryoecoveryratesof
been suggested that the cervix is retracted caudally
up to 70-80%can be achieved on day 7,but lower
using cervical retraction forceps(Fig.35.14) inserted
recovery rates are usual when workingwith mares
intothevaginainsideaPolansly speculum,beforethe
inpractice.Thus,pregnancy rates after transfer vary
greatlyendingnthefrtilityoftheonor,t
tipof theinseminationcatheterisintroduced through
the cervix;thisremoves the need formanual intravagi-
lion and recipient,as well asthe technical skills of
nal manipulation(Wilsher et al 2004).
the operator;a mare's age has a significantinfluence.
Apart from an increased pregnancy loss (reviewed
by Ball 1988), the age-related decrease in mare fer-
tility canbe attributed toprolonged follicular devel-
opment,a decreasein oocytequality and alterations
in the endometrium resulting in a decrease of the
microcotyledon surface density (Carnevale et al
1993,Brinskoetal1995,Camevale&Ginther1995,
Wilsheret al2003).Thus,therequirements forthe
donorare:optimalfertility,3-10yearsofage,firstr
function,adequatebody sizeand nutritional stalus
and good temperament.Needless to say,embryo
qualityplaysamajorrole,andmorphologicaleval-
uationusinglightmicroscopybeforetransfer,ay
giveanindicationofthesubsequent developmental
competence ofthe embryo.Nevertheless,morpho-
logical embryo qualitywill not always be accurately
Fig.35.14Cervical forcepsused for embryo transferin the
mare.
predictive.
868
Chapter
351
Assisted reproductive technologies
After non-surgical guarded transfer of day7 and 8
Embryo transfer
embryos, pregnancy rates of 50-75% can be achieved
In goats and ewes, embryo transfer is performed
(luliano et al 1985, Squires et al 1999)
under general anaesthesia using either a midventral
laparotomy or laparoscopy.A short period of general
Embryo collection and transfer
anaesthesia,without the need for endotracheal intu-
in sheep and goats
bation,is generallyused,anditis important that the
rear end of the animal is elevated, particularly when
Embryorecovery
using the laparoscopic approach. It seems that lap-
In the ewe and the doe goat, embryos are collected
aroscopy is as effective as laparotomy but it requires
3-7 days after oestrus surgically under general anaes
considerably more experience 1o obtain good preg-
thesia through a midventral laparotomy (Moore
nancy rates.
1982, Raino 1992). 1he animals are placed in dorsal
recumbency, preferably on a table,which allows the
hind part of the animals to be elevated (Fig.35.15).
Embryo collection and transfer
Following access to the abdominal cavity, the ovary,
in pigs
oviduct and part of the uterine horn are exteriorized
Embryo collection
and the number of CLs is counted in order to predict
likely embryo recovery rates.Using a blunt needle
Reviews of the principles,involved in porcineembryo
fitted on a syringe, approximately 50 ml of modified
transfer, have been published by Day (1979) and
DPBS saline containing 1% FCS is infused either into
Polge (1982).Embryos are collected 3-7 days after
the tip of the horn or through the oviduct, and the
Destrus under general anaesthesia through a mid-
medium is collected in Petri dishes via a Foley cath-
ventral laparotomy:the technique has notchanged
eterplaced in the distal part of the horn.Procedures
much over the years (Day 1979,Polge 1977,1982).
for identification,isolation and quality assessment
Having gained access to the abdominal cavity, the
are very similar to those previously described forcat-
following procedure is performed bilaterally as
tle.The recovery rate is generally between 90% and
follows:
100%,and the number of embryos collected varies
·the ovary,oviduct anduterus are exteriorized and
between and within breeds. Approximately three to
a specially designed curved glass tube or a Foley
ten embryos per donor can be expected. Attempts
catheter is'inserted into the uterine lumen approx-
to use semi-surgical techniques (laparoscopy) for
imately50cmfrom theuterotubal junction
embryo recovery of tubal-stage embryos have been
·the medium,normally DPBS supplemented with
made,with similar recovery rates compared to sur-
1% FCS, is flushed through the oviduct using a
gical methods(Besenfelder et al 1994,review by
blunt needle inserted into the ampullar region
Besenfelder 2006).
· the fluid is gently massaged through the uterine
glass tubeor theFoleycatheter
·identification and isolation arevery similar to the
procedures described for cattle but, in terms of
embryo quality, either good-quality embryos and
UFOs or only UFOs are found.
Because of the higher lipid content in the cytoplasm,
porcine embryos are darker than their bovine coun-
spermheads arefoundwithinthezonapellucida.
The recovery rate is generally very high,as might be
expecied when 25-30 embryos are normally har-
vested at each collection. Embryo collection may
also be performed using a laparoscopic technique
Fig. 35.15 Laparoscopic colleclion of goat ermbryos.
(Besenfelder et al 1997).
869
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
Transcervical embryo collection (non-surgical)
tobesupplementedwithatechniquethatallows
repeatedrecoyeiryofmultipleoocyiesfromselected
1999) but has not gained widespread use, as it
individuals without jeopardizing their health and
requires prior resectionofthemajorpartofthe
future fertility.In the past,oocyteshavebeen recov-
uterus.Even then,therecoveryrateislow,yielding
ered from live cowsand mares,primarilyforbasic
only about sixembryospercollection.Recovery by
research, using laparoscopy, laparotomy, colpo-
means of laparoscopy has also been attempted but
tomy/ovariectomyorblindneedlepenetrationofthe
has not resulted in a sustainable technology.
abdominalwallvia theparalumbarfossa(Brackett
etal1982,Lambertetal1986,Mckinnonetal1986,
Hinrichs & Kenney 1987, King et al 1987, Palmer
Embryotransfer
etal1987).
Embryos areusually transferred surgicallythrough
Obviously, a surgical approach can only be used
a midventral laparotomy, in which the tip of the
ona limitednumber ofoccasions ineach animal;
uterinehornis exteriorizedand 20-30 embryos are
however, the introduction of ultrasonography to
placedin thispart of theuterus.Since theywill sub-
theveterinary fieldin thelate 1980s played an
sequentymigrateintothecontralateralhon,bilat-
importantroleinenablingthecollectionofoocytes
eral transfers are notnecessary (Dzuiket al 1964).
repeatedly from the same individual.Initially,
The pregnancy rate is generally around 70% and
transcutaneousultrasound guidance was used to
embryos survivalaround60-65%,yieldingalitier
monitorparalumbarpuncture(Callesen etal1987,
size of five to seven.
Gotfredsen 199i)but soonthe techniqueof trans-
Embryos may also be collected and transferred
vaginal-ultrasound-guided follicular aspiration,
by means of laparoscopy, when, after flushing.
which was first developed in humans (Gleicher
they are transferred into the fallopian tubes of gilts
et al 1983,Dellenbach et al 1984),was modified
(Besenfelder et al 1997). The pregnancy rate follow-
and successfullyapplied toaspirateoocytesfrom
ingendoscopictransfercanbeexpectedtobefrom
cattle and mares(Pieterse elal 1988,1991,Bruck
60-8o%,and implantation sitesaroundfiveto six.
etal1992,Co0ketal1992).
Atranscervicalembryotransfertechniquehasbeen
Transvaginal-ultrasound-guided oocyte aspira-
developed for sows (Polge &Day 1968,Hazeleger&
tion,also called OPU,is arapidminimally invasive
Kemp 1999) inwhicha specially designed embryo
technique forretrieving oocytes repeatedly from a
transfer catheter is placed deep into the uterine
donor animal.Thus,it allows either the collection
horn. The pregnancy rate depends on the stage of
ofoocytesforIVP(cattle)oroocyte transfer(mares)
development at which the embryos are transfered,
[romgeneticallyvaluableanimalsthatwouldnor-
withmorulae combinedwith blastocystsyielding
mally be considered infertile,because of oviduc-
a significantly higher rate(55%) than transfers of
talocclusions orapoorsuperovulatoryresponse.
morulae(i0%).The overall pregnancy rateis about
Circumventingheritableinferility mustobviously
30%,with a litter size of around six to seven.A
be avoided.
modificationofthistechniquehas alsobeen usedin
gilts,resulting in higher pregnancy rates of around
Technique
70% and a litter size of around seven (Martinez et
al2004).With experience,it is possible to insert
OPU is generallyperformed in catleunder epidu-
the catheter into the uterine horn within about 2-3
ralanaesthesia, occasionally combined with seda-
minutes in 80% of the gilts.
tion, and in mares after sedation and analgesia.
Basically,the technique requires a 5 or 7.5MHz
transducer incorporated into a needle guide, which
Ovum pick up and oocyte transfer
canbeinserted into thevagina ofa cow or mare.
The ovary is grasped by the hand transrectally
Purpose
andgentlypulledcaudallytowardsthetransducer
head (Fig.35.16).When a suitable follicle is posi-
If IVF is tobe considered as a management tool in
tionedcorrectlyinrelationto thepuncturelineon
commercial livestock breeding programmes or as a
the monitor, an aspiration needle (approximately
routine treatment of sub-and infertility,itrequires
G0cm in length)is inserted into thefollicularcavity.
870
Chapter
35
Assisted reproductive technologies
3-4-day intervals prevent a dominant follicle being
selected and has proved to be the most efficient regi-
menforrepeatedfollicular aspirations,with ayield
oftwotoeight COCsduring each aspiration session
(Gibbons etal1994,Kruipetal1994,Broadbent
etal1997,Garcia&Salaheddine1998,Mertonetal
2003）.In mares,oocyterecoveryratesfrom subordi-
natefollicles are approximately30-50%,andfrom
preovulatory follicles after hCG treatment 70-80%
(reviewed by Bogh 2003).
In the early OPU studiesin cattle,no hormonal
stimulationwasusedbut subsequentstudieshave
shownthaupretreatmentwithFSHover 2-3days,
the so-called‘coasting'followed by follicular aspi
ration1.5-2daysafterthelastFSHtreatmentmay
Fig.35.16Schematicdrawing of transvaginal-ultrasound-
yieldalargernumberofoocyteswithimproved
guided folicular aspiration in the mare.
developmental competence.
Transvaginal oocyte recovery may also be per-
Its contents are aspirated and the folicular cavity is
formed on pregnant cows and mares during the
curetted and/or flushed several times with modified
first trimester, provided the ovaries are still acces-
PBStocreateturbulence(Pieterseetal 1988,1991,
sible by transrectal palpation,resulting in live off
Bricket al 1992)
spring (Lietal 1995,Meintjes etal1995a,b,Goudet
Withinthefollicular cavity,the oocyteis sur
etal1998,Cochranetal2000,Chastant-Maillardet al
rounded by many layers of cumulus cells, which
2003).
together form what is called the cumulus oophorus.
Oncedetachedfrom thefollicularwall,theoocyie
Consequences for the donor
surounded by cumulus cells is termed the cumulus
oophorus complex (COC).Flushing of the follicular
Ithasbeen documentedthattheprocedureoftrans-
cavity requires that the diameter of the follicle is at
vaginal follicular aspiration conducted under con-
least5mm inorder to avoid theCOCsbeingflushed
trolledconiditions iswelltoleratedbythecow and
backwards andforwardswithinthedeadspaceofthe
mare(Petyimetal2000,2002,Boghetal2003b).
aspiration needle; this will result in a considerable
Occasionally,follicular evacuation may result in
decreasein thenumber ofcumuluscellssurround-
intrafollicular haemorrhages(Gibbons et al 1994,
ing the 0ocyte(Brick et al 1997c).Alternatively, a
Bricket al1997c,2000b,Gastaletal1997,Kurykin
double lumen needle may be used(Bracher et al
&Majas2000,Petyim etal 2000,Chastant-Maillard
1993,Cooketal1993,Duchampetal1995).Oocyte
etal2003).lnaddition,prolongation of heluteal
recovery rates improve with increasingneedle diam-
phase in both cattle and mares may occasionally
eter,bevel length andvacuumpressurebut thelat-
occur,as some aspirated follicles luteinize, espe
teralsoincreasestheproportionofdenudedoocytes
ciallywhenpreovulatory follicles areevacuated
(Bols et al1996,1997,Fry et al1997).Since fertil-
(Duchampet al1995,Goudetetal 1997,Amiridis
izationratesand subsequent developmental com-
etal2o00);theprogesteroneproductionbeinglower
petence of denuded oocytes are reduced (Zhang et
and the life span of these CL-like structures shorter
al1995,Tangheetal 2003),acompromise in the
whenformedfromsubordinateratherthanfrom
vacuum pressuremust be sought.Currently,various
dominant follicles(Gibbons etal1994,Amiridis
modelsofneedleguideandaspirationsystem,based
etal2000,Petyimetal2000,2001).Repeated folli-
upon the different available ultrasound machines,
cularpuncturewillresultin theformationofmore
are used.
connectivetissueintheovarianstroma(Kruipetal
Recovery rates vary with species,individual ani-
1994,Kurykin &Majas 1996,McEvoy etal2002
mals,follicularmaturity and the experience of the
Boghetal2003a)but theanimals usually continue
person performing the aspiration (Merion et al
to cycle normally and fertility is uncompromised;
2003).In cattle,twice-weekly follicularaspirations at
they may even become pregnant (Pieterse et al 1991,
871
Part
81
Assistedreproduction
Kruip et al1994,Kanitz et al1995,Broadbentet al
et al2000,Carnevaleetal2003),wherethey arefer-
tilized in vivo.
1997,Brucketal2000b,Petyimetal2000,McEvoy
et al 2002,Bogh etal2003a).Repeated follicular
aspiration over several monthscauses an apparent
decrease in the number of follicles available,both
In vitro embryo production
in cows and mares (Kruip et al 1994, Duchamp
etal1995,Bonietal1997,Kanizetal2000,Merton
Generalprinciples/purpose
etal2003).
In vitro embryo production is normally designated
IVF but consists of three distinct phases, namely:
Additional applicationsof transvagi-
in vitro maturation of oocytes (IVM):in vitro fer-
nal follicularpuncture
tilization ofoocytes with capacitated spermato-
Thedevelopmentofthisrapidandrelatively sim-
zoa(IvF);and in vitro culture ofthe presumptive
ple technique for repeated follicular puncture and
zygotes (IvC). Collectively, the whole procedure is
evacuation,aswell as oocyte recovery,is not onlya
designaled in vitro embryo production(IVP)and
valuabletool for producingpregnancies from sub-
the embryos areIVPembryos.Chang（1959)pub-
fertiledonors(Looneyet al1994)buthas alsopro-
lished thefirstreport on the birth of rabbits after
vided opportunities for otherprocedures,such as:
IVFin1959and,soon after,livebirthsfollowingIVF
oocytetransferfrom donor torecipient(Carnevale
werereported in the hamster(Yanagimachi&Chang
elal2000),evacuationofanovulatoryfolliclesand
1963）andmouse（lwamatsu&Chang1969）.ln
follicular ablation（Bricketal 1995),as a research
the domesticspecies,Brackett et al (1982) were the
tool tostudy follicular development and to synchro-
first toreport the live birthofacalf following IVFof
nize follicular growth(Brick&Greve1996,Garcia&
in-vivo-matured oocytes aspirated from follicles at
Salaheddine1998,Bergfelt&Adams2000,Bricketal
laparotomyandsurgical ransferofthepresumptive
2000a,Shaw&Good2000,Kimelal2001,Bogh
zygotes to the oviduct of synchronized heifers after
elal2002).
24-48 hours culture.Thefirst calvesproduced after
Transvaginal-ultrasound-guided follicular abla-
IVMandIVFwerereportedbyHanadaetal(19S6)
tion can also be used in conjunction with superovu-
and almost simultaneouslyXuet al (1987) and Lu
latory regimens.Aspiration of all follicles of more
et al (1987) reported pregnancies and the birth of
than 5mm(Bergfeltetal1997),or only thedom-
offspringfollowingIVM and IVF.Hlowever,Xuet
inant follicles(Mertonetal2003),or a combina-
al(1987)culturedthenewly fertilizedeggs in the
tionoffollicularablationwithhormonal treatments
oviduct ofheifers(intermediaterecipients),flushed
with GnRH,E,and/or progesterone(Martinezet al
them from the uterus and transferred them tothe
1999,Amiridisetal2006,Boetal2006,Mapletoft
finalrecipient,yieldinganormalcalf.ivebirthswere
2006)will lead totheemergenceofanewfollicu-
also reported afler IVF from other species,includ-
larwave approximately3 days after aspiration,and
inglambsbyIVM/IVF(Chengelal1986),piglets by
atthat slagethe superovulatory treaiment may be
IVF (Cheng et al 1986),piglets by IVM/IVF (Maitioli
initiated.
etal1989)andeventuallyfoalsbyIVM/IVF(Palmer
In addition,oocyte transfer,also called gamete
et al 1991,Bezardetal1992)
intrafallopiantubetransfer(GIFT),maybeattempted
Itmust beemphasized thatIVPismost widelyused
as an alternative to in viuro embryo production in the
incatleandthatIVPembryosaremuchmorefra-
mare.Forthispurpose,in-vivo-maturedoocytesmay
gile’than thoseproduced in vivo.For areview and
berecovered28-36hours afterhCGtreatmentofthe
greater details onthe developmentofbovineIVP,
donormare,orimmatureoocytesmayberecovered
culture conditions and other aspects,see Gordon
from mares aftersuddendeathor euthanasiafor in
(1994) and Avery (2006). Details of the merits of
vitromaturation.The in-vivo-or partially in-vitro-
in-vivo-versus in-vitro-producedembryos will be
maturedoocytes aretransferredsurgicallyviaaflank
described later in this chapter.COCs from slaugh-
incision into the oviduct of either cyclical,insemi
terhouse-derived ovaries are generally aspirated
natedrecipients,whose oestrous cyclehasbeen syn-
fromfolliclesmorethan2mmindiameter,asthey
chronized,or of ovariectomized or non-ovulating
haveprovedtocontain developmentallycompetent
marespretreatedfor3dayswith oestrogen(Hinrichs
872
Chapter
351
Assistedreproductivetechnologies
dissecting individual follicles or slicing the surface
themedia in order to achieve invitro capacitation.
ofthe ovarieshave alsobeenused,butfor all practi-
Amotilefractionofspermatozoamaybeobtained
calpurposesthe aspiration techniqueispreferable
usinga varietyof differentmethods,suchas simple
for almost all species.
washing and centrifugation, swim-up techniques,
Following aspiration, the COCs are classified
density gradient centrifugation orfiltration through
accordingtotheriumberof layersofcumuluscells
glasswool;laboratoriesvaryintheirpreferredchoice
and the appearance of the ooplasm,although the
(Parrish&Foote 1987,Avery 2006).
lattermaybedifficultiftheoocyteissurrounded
The COCs and spermatozoa are normally cocul-
bya tight layer ofcumulus cells.Since the COCs
tured for6-24hours and during the very early period
originate from follicles at various stages of devel-
most cumulus cells are shed. Upon contact between
opment(non-atretic and atretic),their quality will
spermcelland thezona pellucida,theacrosomereac
vary.Irrespectiveofspecies,oocyteswithoutacumu-
tion is initiated,the sperm cell penetrates the zona
lus investment(denudedoocytes)andoocyteswith
pellucida andusuallyonly onespermatozoon enters
signsofdegenerationarenormallydiscardedprior
theperivitelline space,where itmaymovearound
to IVM. The presence of at least rwo layers of cumu-
prior to fusion with the oolemma (personal obser-
luscellsisindispensable in order to allow thebidi-
vation).The most efficient ratio of spermatozoa
rectional communication required for adequate
maturationandsubsequentfertilizationanddevel-
generally much higher than during in vivo fertiliza-
opment（Tangheetal2002,Gilrichstetal2004)
tion.The cortical granule reaction is somewhat dif
The selected COCs are placed in groups in culture
ferent forinvitro versus in vivo fertilization(Hlyttel
medium,which is normally TCM-199 supplemented
et al 1987) and for certain species, such as the pig.
with serum and hormones.Itmustbeemphasized
polyspermia isa serious obstacleto success.
thatanumber ofdifferentmedia are usedforthe
Thein vitro culture periodwill inevitablyvary with
variousspeciese.g.amsF-10,TALP,CR,Men
speciesandthepurposeofIvPandwithinthefirst
B2andNCSu
24hoursthe secondpolarbodywillbeextruded
During IVM ofhe COCs,most oocytesresume
(Fig.35.17). In catle, for example, the presumptive
meiosis and reach the metaphase Il stage by the end
zygotes are normally cultured for 6-7 days prior to
of the culture period.The cumulus investment sur-
transfer,butinexperimental studiesshorterand even
roundingtheoocyteexpandsandabout80-90%of
longerinvitro periods have been used.Themedium
the oocyteswill exurude thefirstpolarbody,which
ofchoice varies from species to species and coculture
isround and considerably smaller than the second
with cells(Fig.35.18);often serum and/or follicular
polarbody,which is extruded into the perivitelline
fluid is used (Lu et al 1988, Eyestone & First 1989).
spacefollowingfertilization.Thecytoplasmicmatu
ration occurs simultaneously with thenuclearmatu-
ration.ltistheintention tomimicinvivo maturation
asclose aspossiblebut it is clear that,although the
nuclear kinetics of the in-vivo-and in-vitro-matured
oocytes maybe similar,the in-vivo-matured COC
ismuch stickier thanits in-vitrocounterpart.Hyutel
et al (1997) has described the details of the oocyte
maturation process.When the oocytereaches the
Mll stage,IVF is initiated.Therefore,the duration of
theIVMphasewill vary according tofollicularmatu-
rity,thein vivomaturation period for that particular
species and culture conditions.
The spermatozoaused for fertilization must be
dures have been used for this purpose.High-ionic
strength mediumwasused byBrackelt etal(1982)
andamajorbreakthiroughforcattleIVFwasachieved
Fig.35.17In-vitro-fertilizedcattle zygote showingboth first
and second polar body.Note the difference in size.
whenParrishetal(1988,1989)addedheparin to
873
Part
8
Assisted reproduction
Fig.35.19 In-vitro-produced cattle embryos on day7-8 after
Fig.35.18 Eight-to 16-cell cattle embryos2-3days following
fertilization.
fertilizationcoculturedwithoviductepithelial cells.
ofthetraditional IVP system(10-15%vs 40%).It
Invitro embryoproduction in cattle
shouldalsobeemphasizedthatthenormalspindle
In 2005,commercialin vitro production ofcat-
formationisdisrupted inICSI oocytes.Cell biology
tle embryos reached a peak,with approximately
aspects, such as calcium fluctuation following ICSi,
260000 embryos transferred per year worldwide
have recently been described (Malcuit et al 2006).
（Thibier2006).Inaddition,numerous1VPembryos
Sex-sorted spermatozoa have been used to pro-
were produced for research purposes. Oocytes
duce IVP embryos and calves (Cran et al 1993,Lu et
areobtained either from slaughterhouse-derived
al 1999),and the overallimpression is that cleavage
ovariesorfollowingOPuI.Usingthefirst source,Lu&
andblastocystrates arelower ihanfollowingtheuse
Polge(1992) created a bank of cheap embryos from
ofunsortedspermatozoa.
animals of average genetic merit.
Pregnancy ratesfollowing transfer ofIVP embryos
From slaughterhouse-derived ovaries,an average
are generally lower (31-68%) than their in vivo
counierparts, with an average rate of 50-60%
and following OPu around 15 per animal. One
(Hasler 1998,2006).Asmentioned previously for
might expect that: 80%of theoocyteswill reach the
invivo transfer,factors such as embryo quality and
Mll stage,that there should be an s0%cleavagerate
recipientmanagementinfluencetheserates.
and thatfollowingIVC,40% should have reached
the blastocyst stage.The speed of development is
In vitro embryoproduction
different among the zygotes,which explains why
inthehorse
different developmental stages are seen on day7
(Fig.35.19). It should be emphasized that there is
In vitro production of equine embryoswasinitially
a very great animal-to-animal variation,not only in
considered to beapromising alternative to super-
thenumberbutalsointhequalityoftheaspirated
ovulation andembryo transferand in1990twofoals
oocytes(Tamassia etal 2003).
conceived following IVF of in-vivo-matured oocytes
ICSI has not been widely used in caitle but
were born in France (Palmer et al 1991, Bezard
descriptions ofembryo development(Keefer et al
et al1992）.In spite ofworldwide attempts, this has
1990,Zhang et al 2003) and the birth of live off-
never been repeated.Since then,refinement of the
spring has been reported Goto et al 1990,Chen&
IVF technique for the horse has progressed only
Seidel 1997, Horiuchi et al 2002).Freezing of blas-
slowly, which appears to be related to the inabil-
tocystsfollowing ICSI is alsopossible(Keskintepe
ityofthespermtopenetratethezona invitro.The
&Brackett 2000).Theincidence of normally fertil-
lowIVFrates can becircumventedby ICsI,allowing
izedoocyteswill be higherwithICSI using immo-
the establishmentofpregnancies and thebirth of
bilized than using killed sperm,and the blastocyst
live foals after transfer of early-stage enbryos into
rate isconsiderably lower than following theuse
the oviduct of recipients （Meintjes et al 1996,
874
Chapter
35
Assisted reproductive technologies
Squires etal1996,Cochraneial1998,Mckinnonet
IVPrequiresoptimization ofeachoftheindivid-
al 2000,Hinrichs et al 2007).Extension of the post-
ual technical steps: retrieval of oocytes and sperm,
fertilization culture period has recently provided
oocytematuration,sperm capacitation,fertilization,
thepossibility ofnon-surgical intrauterine transfer
embryo culture and embryo transfer.In horses,the
ofblastocysts,which wereproducedfrom in-vitro-
actual Ivp is generally the prerogative of an experi-
matured oocytes ferilized by ICSI (Li el al 2001,
encedresearch team and awell equippedresearch
Gallietal2002,Choietal2004)
laboratory.whiletheveterinarypractitionerpartici
Thefirstprerequisiteforsuccessful IVPisaccess to
pates with donor and recipient management, sup-
meiotically-competentoocytes andoptimization of
ply of high-quality semen and the actual embryo
Docyie retrieval and adjustment of IVM conditions
transfer.
to the different maturity stages ofrecovered COCs.
In-vivo-matured oocytes can only berecovered
Invitro embryoproduction insheep
from preovulatory folliclesby OPUand,because
and goats
of the lack of an efficient superovulation treat-
ment for mares,the availability of these oocytes is
IVP of sheep and goat embryos follows the gen-
limitedtoone or twoperoestrouscycle.Oocytes
eralprinciplesmentioned for caule and has been
recoveredfrom subordinatefollicles aregenerally
reviewedindetail byCognie(1999)and Cognieet
immature and have to be matured invitro.Thus,
al (2003): minor differences being the method of
in an equine IVP programme,oocytes recovered
oocyteretrieval and the IVM procedure. Obviously,
invivo24-36hours after hCGtreatment will still
conventional catle OPU cannot be performed
have toundergopartial IVM tometaphaseI,while
in small ruminantsbutCOCscanbeobtainedby
immature oocytesrecovered from subordinatefol-
laparotomy or laparoscopy-guidedovum pick-
licles (e.g. a mare after sudden death) are generally
up,yielding about six COCs and one or two blas-
immatureandwill havetobematuredinviurofor
tocysts per session (Tervit 1996,Kuhholzer et al
24-36hours.
1997).Regarding IVM,addition of cysteamine to
Many investigations have been undertaken to
the IVM medium will increase the blastocystyield
improveIVMconditions,andsuccessofIVMevalu-
in goats significantly (10%vs 50%).Following sur-
aledasnuclearmaturationratesvariesconsiderably
gical transfer of two IVP embryosper recipient,
amonglaboratories.Thereisampleevidencethat
lidding percentage and percentage of kids born
thesevariations areduelobiological and methodo-
per transferred embryo of approximately 60% and
logicalfactorssuchasageofmare,follicularsizeand
50%respectivelymaybeexpected.ICSIhias also
atresia, time of ovary transport and preparation of
been successfully accomplished in sheep,with the
oocytes,method ofoocyterecovery,culture media
birth of a male lamb(Caulet al 1996,Gomez et al
andculturetime;generallya Mllrateof50-80%
1998) but,as in caulethis method has not gained
maybe expected(reviewed byBogh2003).
widespread use.
Since IVF,as practised in cattle,is nota feasible
method,ICSI is currenily the method of choice.
Invitroproduction ofporcine
Choi,Hinrichs and their colleagues have contrib-
embryos
uted significantly to thedevelopment of ICslin the
horse.Currently,over 30% of the injected oocytes
IVPofporcineemhryoshasnotgainedwidespread
developintoblastocysts,both after invitro embryo
commercialuseand itis still used inan experimen-
culture andin vivo after transferintothe oviduct of
tal context.Several authors havereported the birth
arecipientmare（Choi etal 2003,2004,Hinrichs
ofpiglets following IVM,IVF and IVCofporcine
etal2005).Importantly,theseratherhigh develop-
0ocytes（Kikuchietal2002,Suzuki etal2006).For
mentalrateswereachievedwithimmatureoocyles.
review onIVPofporcineembryosseeNagai（1996)
Recently,ICSl with frozen-thawed sperm was per-
andPrather&Day（1998)
formedwithoutjeopardizing thedevelopmentalrate
In comparison to IVp methods in catle and
(Choi et al 2006),thus ICSl is a potential method
horses,itseemsimportant to extend theIVmperiod
for foalproduction from stallions with acquired
to 30-40 hours,In addition,the use of North
subfertility and stallions with limited reserves of
Carolina State LIniversity (NCSul) medium supple-
frozen semen.
mentedwithporcinefollicularfluidorfetalbovine
875
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
serum has inprovedtheblastocystrates consider-
IVP embryos develop faster than female embryos
ably (Long et al 1999, Peters et al 2001).
(Avery et al 19g2, Peippo et al 2001) but this char-
Thenuclearmalurationratereachesthesamelevel
acteristiccannotbeusedtoguaranteethiatembryos
as in cattle(80-90%),the cleavage rate approaches
40-50% and it might be expected that approxi-
higherproportion ofmales.
mately 20%of the fertilized oocytes reach theblas-
At an ultrastructural level, several differences are
tocyst stage.However,there is onemajorproblem
obvious regarding organelle distribution of e.g.
encountered inporcineIVP,namelythehigh inci
mitochondria and corticalgranules(Maddox-Hyttel
dence ofpolyspermicfertilization,whichis atleast
etal2003),and certain biochemical features such
30%;in addition severalchromosomalabnormali-
as fat content and protein composition (Farin et al
tieshavebeen documented (McCaulyet al 2003).
2001).
Reports on ICSI in pigs are scarce, although his
Fluorescencein situ hybridization studies(FISH),
technique has the advantage of avoiding the high
which allow localization of specificDNA and RNA
incidence of polyspermia.Kolbe & Holz(2000)
sequences,are suitable forchromosome analysis in
achievedacleavageratearound25%andobtained
cellsfromembryos.Viuffetal(1999)demonstrated
one pregnancy following surgical transferof 2-4-cell
thataround75%ofday7-8 IVPbovine embryos were
stages,and recent data have shown that even sex-
mixoploid,compared toonly25%oftheirinvivo
sorted sperm maybe used for thispurpose(Probst
counterparis (Fig. 35.20). Chromosomal anomalies
&Rath2003).
mayreducetheviabilityofIVPembryosand thus
chromosome analysis of a biopsy from an embryo
may thus beused to assessviability.Another impor-
In-vivo-versus in-vitro-produced
tantdifferencebeiween invivo andIVpembryosis
embryos and advanced quality
the incidence of apoptosis measured byTuNEL.IVP
embryos have a higher apoptosis index than those
measurements
produced invivo(Gjorretetal2003,Maddox-Hyttel
etal2003)anditis anticipated that ahigherindexis
It hasbecome increasingly clear that in-vivo-and
inverselyrelated toviability.Culturemedium,dura-
IVP-derived embryos are substantially different
tionof culture and the oxygen tension seem to influ-
both morphology and functionally. In-vivo-derived
ence the degree of apoptosis.
embryos are quite robust in response to different
Frequent stereo-and light-microscopicobserva-
environmentalconditions,such astemperatureand
tions ofoocytesandembryoscanbeused toassess
light,whereas IVP embryos aremore fragile and less
the developmental pattern of oocytes and embryos
tolerant.Itshouldbeemphasized thatimprovement
withoutinterferingwiththeirnormaldevelopment,
oftheculture conditions seems toreduce these dif-
and the timeintervalstofirst and subsequent cleav-
ferencesand itisstillunclearwhich stepin thein
ages seem particularly important (van Soom et al
vitroproduclion systemhasthemost significant
1997, Holm et al 1998,2002, Lonergan ei al 1999).
impact on embryo quality,although it appears that
Studies of this type areobviously tedious and time
IVC is the most sensitive part (Rizos et al 2002,
consuming,butsemi-automatictime-lapserecording
Lonergan et al 2003b).
systems are easier to use and beter estimate sequen-
Avery&Greve(1995）andvanSoom(1996）have
tial embryonic development kinetics (e.g. Peippo
describedindetailsomeofthefeatures anddifferences
etal2001,Holmetal2002）.In thelatter study,clear
between in-vivo-andin-vitro-producedembryos.IVP
kinetic differences wereobserved between in-vivo-
embryos are darker than their in vivo counterparts,
versus in-vitro-derived embryos cultured in vitro,
probablybecauseof theirhigherlipidcontent,they
as the 2nd,3rd and 4thpost-ferilization cell cycles
are less compacted,the total cellnumber is higher,
were shorter forin-vivo-derived embryos.Theinitial
the zona pellucida is more fragile,theratio between
cleavage time is known to becorrelated with embryo
ICM andTE is lower and the density is lower than in
quality, as measured by pregnancy rate and cryotol-
theirinvivo counterparts.Oneveryimportantfeature
erance of IVP embryos (Lonergan ei al 1999, 2003a)
is their increased sensitivity to chilling and to cryo-
andthereforekineticstudiesmaybeuseful topredict
preservation[Greveetal1992,Leibo&Loskutoff
embryoviability.Recently,thedevelopment ofmul-
1993).Incontrasttoin-vivo-producedembryos,male
tiphoton laser scanningmicroscopy,combined with
876
Chapter
351
Assisted reproductive technologies
A
B
C
Fig.35.20 Fluorescence in situ hybridization of catte embryos indicating normal diploidy (A), triploidy (B) and other types of
pclyploidy (C, D). (Courtesy of Dorthe Viuff, Denmark.)
specific intravital fluorophores,has been uised to
normal embryo development, e.g. activation of
visualizeparticularstructuralormolecular features
the embryonic genome (Viuff et al 1998, Watson
duringinvitro developmentofmammalian oocytes
et al 1999).Many studies have clearly shown that
and embryos. It appears that these techniques may
genes of developmental importance are expressed
in future be optimized to such an extent that subse-
differently when emhiyos are produced in an arti-
quent developmental competencemaybepredicted
ficial environment, and that these deviations may
(Squirrel et al 1999, Petersen et al 2008).
be used to evaluate the quality of a given culture
It must be emphasized that currently the only
system (Bertolini et al 2002b, Niemann et al 2002,
realistic method for embryo evaluation in veteri-
Rizos et al 2002). It has also becn documented that
nary practice is by means of the lighit microscope.
embryoswithdeviantgeneexpressionpatternhave
whereas the above-mentioned techniques require
increased sensitivity to cryopreservation as an indi-
very specialized equipment and training.
cation of poorer quality (lonergan et al 2003b).
The rapid advances in polymer chain reaction
Chromosomal anomalies are also more pronounced
(PCR)techniques(TR-PCRandDD-RT-PCR)have
in in-vitro- than in-vivo-developed embiyos (Viuff
had a major influence on the understanding of
et al 1999,2002).
877
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
Metabolic studiesofoocytesandembryoshave
individuallyin special microenvironments that
been useful, first of all to better understand the
allow for paracrine interactions. For this purpose
basic nutrient requirements of oocytes and embryos
several systemshavebeen developed,suchasamall
at different developmental stages, and thus to
dent in a four-well dish,the so-called well-of-the-
design more physiologically acceptable media for
well(WOW) system,(Vajtaetal2000),glass(the
in vitro culture.In theearly embryo,cell division
glass-oviduct system (GO;Thouas et al 2003)or
is an exponentialprocess thateach timerequires
agarcompartments(Peura2003).TheWOWsystem
the duplication of the essential cell components.
allows a consistent and high level of development
This poses a pronounced requirement for an effi
into blastocysts of IVPbovine embryos(Vajta et al
cient supply of energy substratesprecursors for the
2000), and has also been successfully applied to pro-
DNAand RNA synthesisofDNAandelectroncar-
ducecloned,zona-freeembryos(Boothetal200la,b,
riers. The most important energy sources for early
Vajta elal2001,2003).
embryosofseveralmammalian species arecarbo-
AninterestingtechniqueforIVCisbasedonmicro-
hydrates (Biggers et al 1967, Brinster et al 1967,
fluid technology.Beebeetal (2002)obtainedhigher
Boone etal 1978,Rieger & Guay 1988,Rieger et
blastocystdevelopmentrates ofmurine embryos
al1989,Brick&Hlyland 1991,Bricketal1997a).
with such equipment,andthetechniquehasalso
Furthermore,metabolic studies were developed in
provedtobeeffectiveforporcineembryos(Clarket
an attempt to evaluate embryo quality and viabil-
al2003,Walters et al2003).It may ultimately not
ity(seereviewbyDonnay2002)but thisapproach
onlyleadtoaneasiermethodofIVPbut alsofacili
needsconsiderableimprovement,onemajor obsta-
tatestudies on,forinstance,substraterequirements.
cle being the lack of a reliable and practically usable
non-invasivemethodforsingleoocytesorembryos.
In 1996, Thompson et al developed a non-invasive
Cryopreservationofoocytes
microfluorescent techniquetomeasuretherateof
and embryos
oxygen uptake,and Overstrom(1996) summarized
their work on studies using specific gas-sensing
Purpose/generalprinciples
micro-oxygenelectrodesforevaluatingthequality
of in vivo cattle embryos measured by pregnancy
The general cryopreservation principles are sim-
rates.Usinga similar approach on singlebovine
ilarforall mammalian cells andare described in
embryos,Shiku etal(2001) founda strongcorre
Chapter 31.Nevertheless,asembryosand oocytes
lation between the quality of embryo and oxygen
contain a fluid blastocoele,are surrounded by the
consumption. Recently, a micro-sensor technique
zona pellucida and contain considerably more
was developed to measure partial oxygen pressure
cytoplasm than spermatozoa,theloadingofcryo-
in the surrounding culture medium of individual
protectants and theintracellular dehydration and
IVP bovine embryo (Lopes et al 2005, 2007, Lopes
rehydration processes are different (Leibo 1977,
&de Souza 2006). Oxygen tension varied consid-
Lehn-Jensen 1986).
erably among and between in-vivo-and in-vitro-
The first successful freezing of cattle enbryos,
derived embryos,and there was a significant(Lopes
applying the principles developedbyWhittingham
et al 2006a) correlation between oxygen tension
etal（1972）in mice,was performed byWilmut &
and expression ofcertain developmentally impor-
Rowson(1973).It ledto thebirthof thecalf'Frosty
tant genes (Lopes et al 2006b). There was no impact
2',but the overall successrate of the techniquewas
of themeasurementsperseon the survivalrate of
low.Later on,the technique was refinedfor sheep
in-vivo-produced embryos after non-surgical trans-
andcattle（Willadsen 1977,Willadsenetal1978)
fer, which may render this technique a useful non-
andthisprocedurehassubsequentlybeenapplied
invasivetoolforqualityassessment.
to most other domestic species.The studies have
The culture systems are extremely important for
shown that day 6-7 sheep and cattle embryos at
developmentofIVP embryosanddomesticani-
morula, early blastocyst and blastocyst stage are
mal embryos seem to reach a higher developmental
moretolerantoflow-temperaturepreservationthan
rate when given the possibility to grow in groups of
earlierandlater developmental stages.
Themain principle in this slow rate freezing-thau-
many cases,it is necessary to culture the embryos
ingprocedureistouselowconcentrationsofthe
878
Chapter
351
 Assisted reproductive technologies
intracellular cryoprotective agent (CPA), normally
Jensen &Rall (1983).An alternative to slow freez
1.5inol/1glycerol or 1.5 ethylene glycol in DPBS
ing is thevitrification method, defined as glass-like
supplemented with 20% FCS. The embryos are
solidification ofsolutions at low temperaturewith-
equilibrated for 10-15minutes,then loaded into
out ice formation (Vajta 1997,Vajta et al 1997a, b).
a straw and placed in the chamber of a manual or
Rall&Fahy(1985)and Massipetal(1986)were
automatic freezer at -6°C. After approximately 5
the first to use this method sucressfully in mice
minutes, ice crystal formation, also called‘seeding'
and cattle embryosrespectively.lt has subsequently
is induced with a supercooled forceps (Fig. 35.21)
been used to cryopreserve oocytes and eimbryos of
and a slow freezing rate is used until -35°C, at
most other domestic animal species, in particu-
lar porcine embryos and IVP and cloned embryos,
liquid nitrogen at -196°C.
which are more sensitive to freezing than their
A good selectionofsimple freezing equipment
in vivo couinterparts [Li et al 2006a,Du et al
is now available at relatively low cost and this,
2007a, b).
together withthehigh survivalrateat leastofrumi
Vitrificationrequires addition of high conicen
nant embryos following freezing and thawing. has
trations of the CPA and ultra-rapid freezing and
advanced cryopreservation to a practically applied
warming with an inhereniriskof osmotic and toxic
routine procedure.
injuries. In contrast to the slow rate of freezing and
Exposing the straw for a short period of time to air
thawing, injuries by ice crystal formation and chill-
and then submerging it in a water-bath at 25-30°C
ing are virtually non-existent (Vajta et al 1997a, b).
forafewminutes is the best method of thawingirre-
In an improved modification of the vitrification
spective of species. When embryos are frozen/thawed
method, Vajta et al developed the so called open
in ethylene glycol, they can be transferred directly
pull straw (Ops) vitrification method,which basi-
(Leibo1984,Voelkel&Hu1992）,whereas embryos
cally reduces the fluid volume surrounding the
frozen/thawed in glycerol must be submitted to a
embryo duringvitrification to aminimum(Vajta
procedure where ihe CPA is removed stepwise prior
et al 1997a.b,1998a,b).
to transfer. Sucrose,a non-permeating CPA,may be
The vitrification procedure may vary from labora-
used to dilute the glycerol and this seems to improve
lory to laboratory and from species to species but
the embryo survival rates.
follows ihe OPS principles (Vajta et al 1997a,b,
Obviously,injuries may occur during freezing
199Sa,b,1999, Booth et al 1998, Holm et al
and thawing, and these include osmotic shock,
1999a,Jacobsen el al 2003). The meihod is as fol-
intracellular ice crystal formation, fracture damage
lows:(1) The oocytesor embryos areincubated for
and chilling injuries; detailed descriptions of these
about 30 seconds in holding medium (iCM-199
have been presented by Leibo (i977) and Lehn-
with20%FCS)containing 7.5-10% ethylenegly-
col and 7.5-10% dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO).
(2) They are transferred to medium containing
15-20% ethylene glycol,15-20% DMSO and 0.6%
sucrose for beiween 30 seconds and 2 minutes.
(3) They are loaded into the straws, either by sue-
tion or capillary effect, and then plunged into liq-
uid nitrogen. The oocyles or embryos are warmed by
immersing the straws into the holding medium at
37Ccontaining 0.3 mol/1 sucrose for about 1 min-
CELL FREFZER
ute; finally, the embryos are transferred to medium
11214
without CPAbeforebeingevaluated.
The vitrification protocol, in particular the equil-
ibration time, must be followed very carefully in
order to obtain satisfactory survival rates.Hligh con-
centrations of CPA,aswith vitrification,mayresult
in irreversible depolymerization of the microfila-
Fig.35.21Frcezing of cattle embryos in an automatic cell
ments and microtubules (Overstrom et al 1993).
freezer:induction of crystallization(seediny)
If the method is to be used commercially, cach
879
Part
8
Assistedreproduction
embryo mustbehandledandthestrawsmarked
comparativestudyit was found thatconventional slow
individually.Thus,the time required forvitrifica-
freezingandvitrificationofin-vivo-producedembryos
tion is likely to be at least as long as when using
yielded simitar pregnancy rates (vanWagtendonk-de
slow rate freezing.The above-mentioned methods
Leeuwetal1997).
may alsopose certainbiosecurityrisks as thestraws
IVP cattle embryos are less tolerant of chilling
areunsealed,andformostpracticalpurposes slow
andcryopreservation than theirinvivocounterparts
freezing is still the preferred method for preserving
(Greveetal1992,Leibo&Loslutoff 1993),and sey-
embryos under practical conditions.
eral studies have clearly shown that the pregnancy
Several methodsotherthantheOPSareavailable,
rate following transfer of IVP embryos is lower
for example the microdroplet [Yang & Leibo 1999),
than following the transfer of in-vivo-produced
the cryoloop (Lane et al 1999), the Cryotop method
embryos(Hasleretal1995).Possibly,a morefragile
(Kuwayama 2007)orvariousmodificationsofthese,
cytoskeleton and/or thehigher lipid concentration
whereby disease transmission in the liquid nitrogen
inIVPembryoscontributes to thereduced survival.
maybeprevented.
Vitrificationseemstobeapromisingalternativeto
Recently,efforts have also been direrted towards
preserve IVP embryos(Wurth et al 1994,Donnay
cryopreservation of oocytes and it has been shown
et al 1998).Thus,Vajta et al (1998b) achieved very
thatbothimmatureandmatureequineandbovine
high hatching rates when culturing 6-7 days old
oocytes can be vitrified in an open-pulled straws
blastocyst in vitro,and non-surgical transfer of
systemwithout affectingtheircompetence toreach
warmed OPSvitrified embryos has givenpregnancy
metaphase II(Hurtt et al 2000).While cryopreser-
ratesof about50-60%(Holmet al1999b,Jacobsen
vation of in-vivo-matured oocytes can,after transfer
etal2003].
toan inseminatedrecipient,lead tothe establish-
ment of a normal pregnancy and birth of healthy
Cryopreservation ofhorse embryos
offspring（Maclellanetal2002b,Squires et al2003),
cryopreservationofimmature oocytesislesssuccess-
Thefirstbirthofa foalfroma frozenembryowas
ful. Transmission electron microscopy and confocal
reporied by Yamamoto et al in 1982, followed
Jaser scanning microscopy show that cryopreserva-
byseveralothers(Sladeet al 1985,Czlonkowska
tionofimmature oocytes results incellular injury
et al 1985). In principle, it is possible to com-
near the sites of the gap junctions between cumu-
bine the different ARTs with cryopreservation
luscellsand the0ocyte（Hochi2003)andmeiotic
ofembryos.Pregnancies can be obtained from
spindle quality (Tharasanit et al 2006). The differ-
in-vivo-collected,in-vitro-matured oocytes after
ent aspects ofoocyte cryostorage have recently been
ICSI with frozen-thawed semen and subsequent
reviewed(Leddaetal2007)
IVC to the blastocyst stage,which are then con-
ventionallyfrozenandtransferredafterthawing
(Galli etal 2002).Nevertheless,developmental
Cryopreservation of cattle embryos
competence is obviouslyreduced with increasing
Approximately 45%ofall in-vivo-producedcattle
amount ofinvitro inierference,anditwas shown
embryos are frozen (Thibier 2006);the most com-
that this may in part be a result of exposure to cry-
monly appliedmethod isstill the slowrate freez-
oprotectantsthatalter the embryonicmetabolism
ing method, although vitrification is also used.
(Riegeretal1991).
Extensive data are available on pregnancy rates fol-
While freezing ofbovine embryos has found
lowing transfer of frozen-thawed embryos.Thus
routine application incommercialembryo trans
Hasleretal(1995) showed thatitispossible to
fer programmes, the cryopreservation of equine
embryos has been more complicated.The sur-
embryos. Embryonic loss following transfer of fro-
vival of equine blastocysts after cryopreservation is
zen-thawed embryos is slightlyhigher than that
obviouslycomplicatedbythedevelopmentofthe
reported for fresh embryos,and poor quality fro-
capsule,which apparently hinders the permeabil-
zen-thawedembryoswillevenexperienceaslightly
ity and equilibration of cryoprotectants(Legrand
increasedgestationlength(Callesen et al 1996).
et al 2000).There is a clear correlation of embry-
Vitrification was successfully applied to cattle
onic size and survival after cryopreservation,with
embryos as earlyas1986(Massip et al1986),and ina
embryosless than 300μm having higher survival
880
Chapter
35
Assisted reproductive technologies
rates(Boyle et al 1985, Squire5et al 1989,Hochi
Cryopreservation of sheep and goat
et al 1995,Caracciolo et al 2004).Partial rem0val
embryos
of the capsulewith trypsin treatment hasled toa
decreased percentage of necrotic cells after cryo-
Slowrate freezing of small ruminant embryos fol
preservation, although there was no clear advantage
lows the principles outlined for cattle and has been
in the term of pregnancy rates (Legrand et al 2000,
used extensively (Tervit & Goold 1984, Tervit et al
2002,Maclellan et al 2002a).
1986). Several vitrification studies have shown tha1
Several CPAs,including glycerol,ethylene glycol,
it is possible to achieve pregnancy rates of 50-60%
after direct transfer (Baril et al 2001, Hong et al
DMSO, methanol and 1,2-propanediol, have been
tested on equine embryos (Landim-Alvarenga el
2007), whereas direct laparoscopic transfer of vitri-
al 1993, Bruyas et al 1997, Young et al 1997, Bass
fied sheep embryos (Okado et al 2002a, b, Isachenko
et al 2004) but so far only glycerol and ethylene
el al 2003) yields lower rates[20%).
glycol have resulted in the birth of live foals when
theconventional slow freezingprocedurehas been
Cryopreservation of pig embryos
employed, and involve the highest developmen-
talrates （Slade et al 1985,Seidel et al 1989,Hochi
Pig embiyos at most stages of developrment are very
et al 1996). Equine blastocysis exhibit a higher per-
sensitive to cooling and freezing (Polge 1977), prob-
meability to ethyleneglycol than toglycerol (Pfaff
ably because of theirhigh lipid content.Nevertheless,
et al 1993)andethyleneglycol ora combination of
it was possible to produce offspring fron slow freez.
glycerol, and increasing concentrations of ethylene
ing of expanded blastocysts (Hlayashi et al 1989).
glycol conbined with vitrification resulted in preg-
It seems advantageous to use perihatching stages
nancies (Hochi et al 1994,1995,Caracciolo et al
(Kuwayama et al 1997),and removal ofthe lipid
2004,Eldridge-Panuska et al 2005), although so far
droplets improves the survival rates (Nagashima
there have been no reports of the birth of live foals
et al 1995,Dobrinsky et al 1998).
using this method,
However vitrificalion,the preferred method of
Thus, currently, the most practical commercial
choice for pig embryos, results in high in viro sur-
approach is to collect embryos for cryopreservation
vival rates (Vajta et al 1997b,Kobayashi et al 19y8,
just when they enter the uterus 6-6.5 days after ovu-
H-olm et al 1999a,Berthelot et al 2000).Many stud-
lation,before capsule development andwith a max-
ieshave subsequently shown thatvitrification isthe
imum diameter ofless than 300μm,even though
preferred method for both in-vivo-(Caneron et al
the embryo recovery rate for day 6 embryos is sig-
2004, Ushijima et al 2004) and in-vitro-produced
nificantly lower than for later stages. Tlhe embryos
embryos(Hirumaet al 2006) and recently the birth
are exposed at room temperature to increasing con-
of the first offspring from vitrified cloned porcine
centrations of CPA (e.g. 10% vv glycerol in DPBS)
embryos has been described (liet al 200Gb,Du et al
in two steps(5%for 10 ninutes,10% for20 min-
2007a, b).
utes), loaded into 0.25ml straws, sealed, cooled
from room temperature to -6°C at 1°C/min and
held at-6C for 5 more minutes. The straws are
Micromanipulation of embryos,
seeded, lheld at -6°C for another 5 minutes, and
cloning and transgenesis
subsequently cooled to -32°C at 0.3°C/min, then
t0 -35*C at 0.1°C/min before plunging inio liquid
Micromanipulation and bisection
nilrogen (Lascombes & Pashen 2000).
The thawing procedure for equine embryos
In thelate 1970s,Willadsen made great advances in
follows closely the general principles of thawing
developing techniques for the micromanipulation
embryos described above(Squires etal1989,Seidel
and bisection of embryos in domestic animal spe-
1996). Currently, only embryos less than 300μm
cies. In 1979, he produced identical (monozygotic)
in diameter can be frozen with reasonable suc-
cess and, with 6-6.5-day-old embryos, pregnancy
sheep embryos (Willadsen 1979). The technique
ratesofcloseto50-60%canbe achieved(Slade et
involved embedding the zygotes in agar prior to cul-
al1985,Squires etal 1989,Lascombes&Pashen
tureinligated sheepoviductsand subsequent surgi
2000).
cal transfer to synchronized ewes.A few years later,
881
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
the birth oftwin lambs andmonozygoticquadru
sheep-goat chimeras(Polzin et al 1987),ovine chi-
plets,monozygotic triplets and monozygotic twin
meras(Butleregal 1987) and cattle chimeras(Brem
calvesfollowingmicrosurgicalseparationof4-and
etal1984).Attemptstoproduceliveoffspringof
S-cell stage embryos wasreported(Willadsen 1981,
horse-donkey chimeras have not been successful,
Willadsen &Polge 1981).In 1981,Willadsen et al
although pregnancies were established (Pashen et
produced monozygotic cattle twins from embryos
al 1987). Chimera production has no direct practi-
collected non-surgically.In both sheep and cattle,
cal applications but the technology may constitute
thesuccessrateisinverselyproportionalto thestage
an important experimental tool for studiesof fetal-
of embryo development.Thus, if I6-cell stages are
maternal interaction.
used,development totheblastocyststageisverylow
andthecellnumbertoolowtoallowestablishment
Cloning
of pregnancy.
Asimplertechnique toproduceidentical twins in
As mentioned earlier,Willadsen （1981)made the
cattle from the morulae and blastocyst stages was
observation that separation and culture of blastom-
describedlater[Oziletal1982,Ozil1983,Willadsen&
eres from 16-cell stagescouldnot giverisetolive
Godke 1984,Williams et al1984,Picard et al
offspring.These findings led him to follow alter-
1986).The method involves openingthezonapel-
native means ofproducing identical individuals
lucida andcutting the embryo in twoparts either:
and in 1986hepublishedhisinitial results with
(1）insidethezona pellucidaleavingonehalfwithin
sheep embryo cloning (Willadsen 1986). In 1996,
the original zona and transferring the other half
Campbell et al produced live sheep offspring using
intoa surrogate zona,or (2） removing the embryo
differentiated cellpopulation ofembryoniccells.
proper and bisecting it on the bottom of the dish
Cloningwith cultuuredcellsfrom fetal and adult tis-
outsidethe zona,beforeiransferring the two halves
sues,theso-called SCNT,resultedinhebirthofhe
into theoriginal and a new surrogate zona obtained
sheep‘Dolly’(Wilmut eral1997）.The donor cell
from another oocyte.Initially, agar embedding prior
sourcewasthemammaryglandsbutcellsfromother
totransferwasused,butpregnancyrates after direct
tissues havebeenused successfully,for example:ovi-
transfer seem to be virtually identical(Warfield
ductalepithelialcells(Gotoetal1999),fetal fibro
etal1987)andsimilarusingfrozen-thawedembryos
blasts (Zakhartchenko et al 1999),granulosa cells
(Niemann et al 1987). Comparable pregnancy rates
(Wells etal 1999)and skin fibroblasts(Hill etal
may be expected as for whole embryos (Bredbacka
2000).Since then,this technology has been applied
et al 1992).
to a large range of species, namely cattle (Cibelli
Despite an increased calving ratefollowing trans-
et al 199s), mice (Walayama et al 1998), goats
fer of bisected embryos, and its possible use as a
(Baguisi etal 1999), pigs (Polejaeva et al 2000), cats
research tool where genetically identical individu-
(Shinetal2002),rabbits(Chesne etal2002),mules
als can be placed in different treatment groups (e.g.
(Woodselal2003),horses(Choietal 2002,Galli
nutrition and environment), this technology has
etal 2003),rats(Zhou etal 2003),dogs (Leeel al
never been widely used.Following the opening of
2005)and ferrets(Lietal2006b).
thezona,infection withBVDvirus during themicro-
There are two major components to cloning,the
surgery procedure would be a risk that must be taken
oocyteand the donorcells.Incattleand sheep,IVM
into consideration.
oocytes arenormallyusedas thisprocedure isrou-
tinelyperformed inmost laboratories.The genetic
material(Mll plate and the firstpolarbody)of the
Chimerism
mature cocytemust be removed in order to avoid
Experiments on interspecies sheep and goat chime-
ploidy abnormalitiesandarresteddevelopment
rismshowedthatmixingblastomeresfrom 4-and
(Willadsen1986).AstheMllisnotreadilyvisible
S-cell stage sheep and goat embryos can result in
using light-microscopy the polar body and part
the formation of viable blastocysts that,follow-
ofthe ooplasm anticipated to contain the meta-
ingtransfer,cangiverisetoviablesheep-goatchi-
phaseplateareremovedeitherbymicromanipula-
meras (Fehilly et al 1984a,b,Meinecke-Tillmann
tion using a suction pipette or by manual bisection
&Meinecke 1984).Following these initial studies,
with a scalpel blade (hand-made cloning (HMC),
severalother groups have successfully produced
described below).Aliernatively,removalof thie
882
Chapter
35
Assisted reproductive technologies
chromatin (enucleation) may take place after hav
ing stained theDNA with Hoechst,with subsequent
confirmation of complete enucleation under a fluo-
rescence microscope. The enucleated oocyte is now
called a cytoplast.The first HMC piglels were born
in 2006 (Du et al 2007c; Figs. 35.22, 35.23 ).
With traditional cloning, a so-called karyoplast,
B
meaning a somatic cell derived from either early
stage embryos (A), embryonic stem-cell-lilke cells
(B), cultured somatic cells from a fetus (C) or udder
(D) is injected under the zona of the enucleated
matured oocyte (Fig.35.24).Tlie cell membranes
are subsequently fused using a direct current elec-
tric pulse and the zygote is activated by means of,
D
Fig.35.24Cloning bynucleartransferusing various celtypes.
(Courtesy of Poul Maddox-Hyttel,Denmark.)
for example, 6-DMAP or calcium ionophore.It is
important that the oocyte and the donor cells are
in the relevant stage of their cell cycle (G0 or G1)
in order to achieve optimal reprogramming of the
donor cell genone, i.e. thiat the adull cell is able to
be programmed as a newly fertilized egg. In the ini-
tial experiments, the reconstituted embryo was cul-
tured in ligated sheep oviducts but, with the rapid
advanceiment of IVC,this is now the most common
procedure. The WOw system is very useful when cul-
ture of individual reconstituted embryos is desired,
Fig.35.22 Surgical transfer of cloned embryos to the tip of
as it creates a suitable microenvironment and pre-
one uterine horn in the pig
vents the zona-free zygotes and embryos from dis-
integrating, which they might otherwise do in a
normal-sized medium droplet. Comprehensive
reviews of the number of offspring following differ-
ent activation protocols and in vitro culture in dif-
fereni media are available(Brem &Kuhholzer 2002,
Dinnyes et al 2002, Campbell et al 2007).
The aforementioned results are based on the use
of micromanipulatory equipment, but a simpler
method has been developed in parallel with this
classical method, the so-called ‘hand-made clon-
ing’(HMC) (Peura et al 1998, Booth et al 2001a,b,
Vajta et al 200l,Oback et al 2003,Peura 2003).
No micromanipulatory equipment is needed and
the procedure can be described briefly as follows:
(1) At 21 hours after the start of maturation (Day
0), cumulus cells and zonae pellucidae are removed
and oocytes randomly bisected by hand on the bot-
Fig. 35.23 First piglets produced by hand-made cloning born
tom of a Petri dish. (2) Cytoplasts are selected using
in2006.
fluorochrome Hoechst 33342 and afluorescent
883
Part
181
Assisted reproduction
microscope, discarding the half containing the
(hGll) genes into the pronuclei of newly fertilized
nucleus. (3) After a two-step fusion with fibroblasts,
eggs (Hammer et al 1985). The technique has sub-
reconstructedembryos areactivatedwithcalcium
ionophore and dimethyl aminopurine.(4) Embryos
1990, 1993), and comprehensive reviews are avail-
are cultured for 7 days in SOFaaci medium (Holm
able （Wall et al 1996,Niemann & Ku1es 2000).
elal1999b)supplementedwith5%cattleserum
Several problems wereencountered with the off-
using the well of the well system (WOWs) (Vajta el
spring following injection of hGG, i.e. arthritis,ven-
al 2000) and then transferred to heifers or gilts or
tricular ulcers and lack of libido.
vitrified. Using the HMC technique, it is possible to
With the emergence of SCNT,it is now possible
bisect 95% of the oocytes, to fuse 85% successfully
to produce transgenic embryos by genetic modifi-
and obtain a blastocyst rate of about 50%. In our
cations of the donor cells prior to fusion with the
studies,where day 7HMC embryos were transferred
cytoplasts. This has been possible in pigs (Lai et al
2002), stieep (Schnieke et al 1997). goats (Reggio
of 48%but, by the end of the third semester only
et al 2001) and cattle（Cibelli et al 1998).In 2007
8% were pregnant and that seems to be the general
the first pigs carrying a transgene for Alzheimer's
level(Pedersen etal2004)
disease were born in Denmark (A.L. Jorgensen, per-
It must be emphasized that the success rate of
sonal communication2007).
cloning is generally still very low and rarely exceeds
The use of these genetically modified animals,
a blastocyst rate of 2-5%. This is due to a number
and products from them,are numerous. They
may be used (1) for basic research purposes,(2)
ming (methylation pattern;for review see Farin et al
as disease models for certain important human
2006,Campbell ctal2007)ofthesomaticcellnuclei
diseases, (3) as bioreactors, where important
resulting in aberrant expression of developmentally
pharmaceuticals(factor Vill;a,-antitrypsin, anti
important genes (Wrenzycki et al 2001, 2002, 2004,
thrombin Ill) maybeextracted frombloodormilk
Niemann et al 2002) and a high incidence of chro-
of farm animals and finally (4) for organ trans-
mosomal abnormalities (Slimane-Bureau & King
plantation from pigs to humans (xenotransplan-
2002) including entirely polyploid embryos(Booth
tation).Thus,in the future it might be possible to
et al 2000, 2003). Collectively, these abnormalities
use organs from pigs in which the gene coding for
will not only cause poor embryonic development,
α-1,3,
galactosyltransferase (GAl-epitope)has
but certainly also have lasting postnatal effects on the
been knocked out (Laiet al 2002). The most prom-
offspring (see below). Nevertheless, the efficiency of
ising areas are still the production of animals that
cloning of horses is surprisingly high, with a recent
may develop neurodegenerative diseases such as
report of a pregnancy rate of 25% after transfer of
Alzheimer's, and lactating animals yielding impor-
eight cloned horse embryos (Hinrichs et al 2006).
tant pharmaceuticals. One example is antithrom
SCNT per se isnot widely used in livestockpro-
bin Ill, which is produced from goat's mill and
duction,but for certain very valuable animals it may
can be used to treat patients with inheritable anti-
be used and in several countries the technology has
thrombin deficiencies.
been used in pets and endangered species. Hlowever,
It was anticipated that transgenic animals might
there are ethical concerns regarding these applica-
also be used for certain agricultural purposes,such
tions, and in some countries cloning of pet animals
as faster growth rate and increased disease resis-
and horses is not allowed. It should be added that
tance, but these applications have yet to be imple-
the legislation in most countries prohibits human
mented.A comprehensive review of transgenic
consumption of cloned animals, although there are
animal production has been published by Robl
no reports indicating thatmeat or millfrom cloned
et al (2007).
animals should present a risk for human health
Transgenic ofspring may also be produced fol-
(OECD report 2003).
lowing pronucleus injection with desired constructs,
Or by artificial insemination with spermatozoa car-
rying the desired construct.The latter method, des-
Cloning and transgenesis
ignated sperm-mediated gene transfer, has been
In 1985, the first transgenic pigs were produced
successfully applied in mice and pigs (Lavitrano
by injecting copies of human growth hormone
et al 1989).
884
Chapter
35
Assistedreproductivetechnologies
Large offspring syndrome
In 1991,Willadsen et al presented data from a large
cloning experiment in which blastomeres from non-
surgically collected embryos were used as donor
cells. The overall pregnancy rate was satisfactory
but late gestational lossheavy calves and congeni
talmalformationswereseenmorefrequentlythan
ina normal embryo transferprogramme.In 1996,
Walkeret al reported onthebirth of lambs of unusu-
ally high birth weight following IVP. In 1997,Kruip
&den Daas described the so-calledlarge offspring
syndrome'(LOS)whichisseenfollowingtransferof
IVP and SCNT embryos(see Ch.11).
A large quantity of data have confirmed this dis-
Fig.35.26Large placentomes ina clonedpregrancy on
order,in particular regarding transfer of SCNT
gestation day252.
embryos. It has the following characteristics
(Jacohsen2001):
·abortionandearly embryonicloss(Heymanetal
·increased fetal body mass (Willadsen et al 1991,
2002,Pace et al 2002,Fig.35.25)
Behboodyetal 1995,Hasleretal1995,Wilson
·placental abnormalities, initial retarded growih
etal1995,Schmidtetal1996,Walker et al1996,
rates andenlargedplacentomes(Hilletal 1999
Jacobsenetal2000,Bertolinietal2002b)
deSousa etal2001,Chavatte-Palmer etal2002,
·dystocia and theneed fora caesarean operation
2006,Bertolinietal2002a,Pedersen elal2004;
(Willadsenet al 1991,Behboody et al 1995,Farin
Fig.35.26)
&Farin1995,Hillet al1999)
·enlarged umbilicus and/or hydrallantois(Hasler
·decreased neonatal viability and increased peri-
1998,Hill etal 1999,Wells etal1999,Paceetal
natal mortality(Hasler et al 1995,Schmidt et al
2002)
1996)
·weaklabour(Schmidtetal1996)
·lethargic and acidotic calves with poor suckling
·stillbirih(Schmidtet al1996)
reflex （Garry et al 1996,Hill et al 1999, Pace
et al 2002)
·prolonged gestation (van Wagtendonk-deLeeuw
etal1998,2000,vanWagtendonk-deLeeuw2006)
·congenital malformations (heart failure, arthrogry-
posis,hydronephrosis;Willadsen et al 1991,van
So0m1996,Hilletal 1999,Pedersenet al2004)
biochemical abnormalities,immune dysfunction
and anaemia(Sangild etal 2000,Chavatte-Palmer
etal2002)
·chromosomal anomalies(Slimane-Bureau&King
2002,Booth et al 2003).
Itshouldbenoted that the above-mentioned abnor-
malities areseldomobservedinpigsandgoats,and
sofar they havenotbeenreportedincloned horses,
althoughthetotalnumberofclonedfoalsissolow
that it is difficult to assess whether these phenom-
ena occur in this species. It is also important to
emphasize that offspring of SCNT animals do not
Fig.35.25Cloned fetusbetweengestation day35and
carry anyof the above-mentioned defects,and the
day42.
second generation is entirely norimal.
588
Part
181
Assisted reproduction
Regarding the production and reproductive char-
(e.g.Schroderetal1990,Herr&Reed1991,Bredbacka
acteristics of cloned versus non-cloned offspring,
etal 1995,Thibier & Niebart 1995,Hasler et al
the obvious difference is the timing of the onset of
2002).The use of sex-sorted sperm may replace the
puberty,which according to some studies may be
need forPCR sexing ofembryos but,with the cur-
delayed in IVP and cloned animals (Pace et al 2002,
rent lowpregnancyrate using sexed sperm,particu
Jacobsenetal 2003).In addition,follicular develop-
larly in cows(seep.774）,there is still a need for
mentmaybealtered,withmoresmall follicles and
sexing of embryos(Lacaze et al 2007).
fewer medium-sized and large follicles in cloned
heifers(Pace et al 2002).
Genotyping
Although recent data clearly indicate that cer
tain IVP production systems do not result in LOS
A number of other single genes of interest are cur-
(Jacobsenetal2003,Breukelmanetal2004),and
rently availablefor analysis, somecoding for heri-
that there are considerableimprovementsin the in
tablediseaseslikecomplexvertebral malformation
vitrosystems,it isstill importanttoremember that
(CVM)in cattle(Agerholm etal2001).With the
IVP and SCNTrecipients and their offspring often
mapping of the cattle and pig genome and the rapid
require intensive perinatal care. Furthermore,the
expansion of the array technology,further progress
recipient dams often show no signs of impending
in this field can be expected.
parturition and, since the calves may be oversized,
In animal breeding and production,there is great
it will be necessary to use traction or a caesarean
interest in using such information about single
operation (see Chs 14,20）.As the umbilical ves-
genes,and even more for multiple genes codingfor
sels areofien enlarged,there is a tendencyforhere
various production traits (Rathjeet al 1997,Wilkie
to be substantial haemorrhage following rupture of
et al 1999,Georges 2001).However so far, this has
the umbilicus,as well as neonatal infections.Evenif
been used on animals rather than on embryos.From
the animals survive thefirst critical period,sudden
an embryo-technology point of view, this is because
death has been observed.The owners ofrecipients
advanced facilities and considerable experience are
carryingIVPorclonedoffspringmustbewarnedof
neededtoperform the embryobiopsieswith suffi-
these aspects.
cient accuracy andefficiency,as well as thelimita-
tionofthebiopsysizeto obtain sufficientDNAto
identify all the genes of interest. Until such practical
Sex determination and genotyping
problems aresolved,this technologywillhavelim-
ofembryos
ited use on embryos.
Sex determination
Biosecurity precautions
Sex or gender deterinination of embryos prior to
transfercould haveseveraladvantagesincattlebreed-
Manystudieshaveclearlyshownthattheriskofdis-
ing and production. Sexing of 2-week-old bovine
easetransmissionbyembryosislowerthanwithlive
embryos is possible by means of cytogenetic analy-
animals, providing the embryos are ireaied arcord
sis of an embryo biopsy (Hare et al 1976).Using
ing to guidelines set by IETS(Stringfellow 1998),
the bisection technique,where one demi-embryo
and asrecommendedbytheOfficeInternational
(morula orblastocyst) was sexed and the other trans-
des Epizooties (OIE), Paris (Appendix 3.3.1 of
ferredtoheifers,itwaspossibletoobtainsatisfactory
Terrestrial Animal Health code,available online at
pregnancyrates,even after lransferoffrozen-thawed
www.oie.int).
demi-embryos (Picard et al 1985). Other groups
Comprehensivereviews(Stringfellowetal2004,
have attemptedtosexembryosbymeansofH-Yanti-
Bielanski 2007,Givens etal2007) have summa-
gens(Wachtel1984,Avery&Schmidt1989)butthis
rizedtheessentialprecautionsneededtoavoid
method has notbeen applied.Determination of an
transmission of important diseases,including
embryos sexusingPCRf-specificsequnceshas
both in-vivo-andIVP-derivedembryos.Most stud-
been used in practice for a number of years,based
iesinvolving in-vitro-derivedembryos(with the
on an embryobiopsy taken eitherby hand-cutting
inherentriskof contamination withinfectious
or by usingmicromanipulation at themorula stage
agents and subsequent washing and transfer) and
886
Chapter
35
Assistedreproductivetechnologies
in-vivo-derived embryos(with theinherentrisk of
recovering embryos from infected animals,washing
Agricullural LIniversity, Copenhagen
and transfer) have shown that,with properwashing
Avery B,GreveT1995 In:Enne G,Greppi GF Lauria A [ed)
（10 times) including rypsin treatment,certain inc-
Proceedings of the30th International Symposium of thc
Societa Italiana peril Progresso dellaZootecnica,Milan,
tious agents such as infectious bovine rhinotrache-
11-13 September 1995,p171
itis andAujeszly's diseaseviruses can beremoved.
Avery B,SchmidtM1989ActaVetScand30:155
Embryoscollectedfromapersistentlyinfected ani-
Avery B,Jorgensen CB,MarisonVet al1992Mol Reprod
malareshowntocarryalargeamountofBVDvirus
Dev32:265
particles attached to the zona.Transfer of these
Baguisi A,Behboody E,Melican DTetal 1999 Nat
Biotechnol 17:456
embryosfollowingwashing according toIETSstan-
BakA,Callesen H,Meyling A et al 1992 VetRec131:37
dards resulted in calvesfree ofBVD(Baket al1992).
Ball BA1988Vet ClinNorthAm EquinePraci4:263
WithIVPembryosthesituationisdifferent.Many
BarilG,TaldiALCognieYetal 2001 Theriogenology56:299
oocytes are obtained from slaughterhouse ovaries
BassLD,Denniston Dl,Maclellan LJetal2004
andcouldbecontaminatedwithvariousinfectious
Theriogenology 62: 1153
agents.In addition, the zona pellucida of IVp-
BeebeD,WhelerMeringueHal002Thrigenolgy
derivedembryos allowsmoreintimatecontactwith
57:125
the infectious agents and thus makes it more diffi-
Behboody 1,Anderson RHl,BonDurant RH et al 1995
Theriogenology 44:227
cult to remove the microorganism from the embryo.
BergfeltDR,Adams GP 2000J Reprod Fertil Suppl 56:257
Inaddition,there arechances of contamination dur-
BerfeltDR,BoGAMapletoft R]etal 1997Anim Reprod Sci
ingthedifferent IVPprocedures.Thereforeitisnec-
49:1
essarynotonly towash theembryosten times,but
BerthelotEMartinal-BoteFLocatelliAetal2000
alsotosetbiosecurity standardsforthe abattoir and
Cryobiology 4l:116
the laboratories,including the media used for cul
BertoliniM,Beam SW,ShimHetal 2002aMol ReprodDev
ture.Addition of certain antimicrobial agents may
63:318
BertoliniM,MasonJB,BeamSWelal 2002bTheriogenology
alsobe advisable.
58:973
Obviously there will always be a risk of disease
Besenfelder U 2006In:Proceedingsof the 22nd Scientific
transmission with embryo transfer,and thus it is
Meeting of the European Embryo Transfer Association,
mandatory that in vitro and in vivo experiments
Zug,Switzerland,8-9September2006,p77
are conducted to ascertain that a particular disease
Besenfelder U,Zinovieva N,DietrichEetal 1994VetRec
cannot be transmitted using this technique. Using
135:480.
BesenfelderUModlMullerMetal1997Theriognology
theIETS（Stringfellow 1998,Wrathall &Sutmoller
47:1051
1998)andOIE(Appendix3.3.1ofTerrestrialAnimal
BetteridgeK,MitchellD1974JReprod Fertil39:145
Health code,available on line at www.oie.int) stan-
BeleridgeK),EaglesomeMD,MichellD etal 1982JAnat
dards,theimpression is that movement of livestock
135:191
attheembryo stageispreferablenot onlyfor eco-
Bezard J.Magistrini M,Battut 1et al 1992RecMedVet168:993
nomicandbiosecurity reasons,but alsocertainlyfor
Bielanski A 2007Theriogenclogy 68:1
Biggers D,WhittinghamDG,DinahueRP1967ProcNatl
thebenefitofanimalwelfare.
Acad Sci USA58:560
BoG,Barusilli PS,ChestaPMetal 2006Theriogenology 65:89
References
BoghIB2003Doctor ofVeterinary ScienceThesisDSR-
Forlagp 1-97
BoghIB,Bezard IDuchampGet al 2002Theriogenology57:
Adams GP 19g4Theriogenology42:19
1765
Agerholm JS,Bendixen C.Andersen Oet al 2001 J Vet Diagn
Bogh IB,Brink P,Jensen HE et al 2003a EquineVet J35:575
Invest13:283
Bogh IB,Jensen HE,Lehn-Jensen Hetal 2003b In:
AllenWR,RowsonLEA 1975JReprodFertil Suppl
Proceedingsof the 3rdMeeting of the EuropeanGainete
23:525
Group,avemyeonographrie
AlvarengaMACuMrummerEtal001
BolsPlVanSoomA,YsebaertMTetal1996Theriogenology
Theriogenology56:879
45:1001
Amiridis GS,Robertson L,Jeffcoate IA et al 2000ActaVe1
BolsPEJ,Ysebaert MT,Van Soom Aet al 1997
Hung 48:193
Theriogenology47:1221
Amiridis GS,Tsiligianna T, Vainas E 2006 Reprod Domest
Boni R,Roelofsen MWM,Pieterse MC et al 1997
Anim 4l:402
Theriogenology48:277
ArmstrongDT,Evans GL,1983 Theriogenology 19:31
BooneWR,Dickey JELuszczLJet al 1978JAnimSci47:908
887
Part
81
Assisted reproduction
Booth P Vajta G, Hoj A etal 1998 Theriogenology 51: 999
Campbell KHS,Fisher PChen WC etal 2007Theriogenology
BoothPI,Viuff D,Thomsen PD etal 2000CloningStem
G8(suppl 1):S214-S231
Cells2:638
Caracciolo dBenza V, Squires EL Zirarelli I. 2004 Reprod
Booth P Holm P, Vajta Get al 2001a Mol Reprod Dev 60:
Fertil Dev 16:165
377
Carnevale EM, Ginther OJ 1995 Biol Reprod Monogr 1:
Booth P,Tan SIHolm Petal 200lb Cloning Stem Cells 3:
209-214
191
Carnevale EM,Bergfelt DR,Ginther OJ1993Anim Reprd
Booth P,Viuff D,Tan S et al 2003 Biol Reprod 68: 922
Sci31:287
Boyle MS,AllenWR,Tischner M et al 1985 Equine Vet 
CarnevaleEM,Maclellan LJ,CoutinhoS ei al 2000
Suppl3:36
Theriogenology 54:981
Bracher V,Parleviet J.Fazeli ARetal 1993 EquiueVet]
Carnevale EM,MaclellanLl.Coutinho daSilva MAeial 2003
Suppl 15:75
1Am Vet Med Assoc222:60
Brackett BG,Bousquet D,Boice MLeial 1982 Biol
Catt SL, Cat1 W, Gomez MC et al 1996 Vet Rec 139:494
Reprod 27: 147
ChangMC1959 Nature 184:466
Bredbacka P Huhtinen M.Aalto J et al 1992
Chastant-Maillard S.Quinton H,Lauffenburger 1 et al 2003
Theriogenology 38: 107
Reproduction 125: 555
Bredbacka P,Kankaanpaa A,Peppo 1995 Theriogenology
Chavatte-Palmer P, Heyman Y,Monget R 2002 Biol Reprod
44:167
66:1596
Brem G, Kuhholzer B 2002 Cloning Stem Cells 4:57
Chavatte-Palmer P de Sousa N, Laigre P 2006
Brem G,Tenhumberg HKrausslich H 1984Theriogenology
Theriogenology 66: 829
22:609
Chen SH, Seidel GE Jr 1997Theriogenology 48:1265
Breukelman SP,Reinders JMC,Ionker FH et al 2004
Cheng WTK,MoorRMPolgeC198GTheriogenology25:14
Tlieriogenology 61:867
Che5ne P, Adenot PG,Viglietta C et al 2002 Nat Biotechnol
Brinsko SP,BallBAEllington JE1995Theriogenology
20:366
44:461
Choi YH,Love CC,Chung YG et al 2002 Biol Reprod 67:561
Brinster RL 1967 Exp Cell Res 47:634
Choi YHl,Love CC,Varner DD et al 2003 Theriogenology 59:
Broadbent PI,DolmanDF Wa RG el al 1997
1219
Theriogenology 47: 1027
Choi YH, Roasa LM,Love CCel al 2004 Biol Reprod70:1231
Bruck 1, GreveT 1996 Fertilitat 12:224
Choi YH, Love CC, Varner DD et al 2006 Theriogenology 65:
Brick 1, Hyland JH 1991 I Reprod Fertil Suppl 44:419
808
Brick 1,Raun K,Synnestvedt Betal1992EquineVetJ24:58
Christensen LG 1991 Theriogenology 35: 141
Bruck I,Larsen SB,GreveT 1995Pferdeheilkunde11:387
Cibelli JB,Stice SL,Golueke PI 1998 Science28:1256
Bruck 1,Anderson G,Hyland JH 1997a Theriogenology
ClarkSG,WaltersM,BeebeDeal2003Theriogenology59:
47:441
441
Bruck I, Lehn-Iensen H,Yde G 1997b Equine Vet J Suppl
Cochran R,Meintjes M,Reggic B et al 1998 I Equine Vet Sci
25:63
18:736
Bruck I Synnestvedt B,GreveT 1997c Theriogenolngy 47:
Cochran RMeintjesM,RegioB200  Reprod Fertil l
1157
56:503
Brick I.Bezard1,Baltsen M 2000a I Reprod Feril 118:351
Cognie Y 1999 Theriogenology 51: 105
Brick IB,Heier R,Synnestvedt Bet al 2000b
Cognie Y,Baril C,Poulin N et al 2003Theriogenology 59: 171
Theriogenology 54: 877
Cook NL, Squires EL,Ray BS 1992IEquine Vet Sci 12:204
Bruyas JEMarcliand P,Fieni Fetal 1997 Theriogenology 47:387
Cook NL,SquiresELRay BSetal 1993 EquineVet Supl
Butier JE,Anderson GB,Bon Durant RH et al 1987JAnim
15:71
Sti 65:317
Cran DG, Johnson LA,Miller NGAet al 1993 Vet Rec 132: 40
Callesen H1995Doctoral dissertation.Royal Veterinary and
Czlonkowska M,BoyleMS,AllenWR 1985 I Reprod Fertil
Agricultural University, Copenhagen,Denmark
75:485
Callesen H, Greve T 2002 Management of reproduction in
DayFT 1940j Agric Sci Camb30:244
cattle and buffaloes - emhryo transfer and associated tech-
Day RN 1979 Theriogenology 11: 27
niques. CAB International, Wallingford. Oxon
Dellenbach P,Nisand I, Moreau Letal 1984 Lancet 1: 1467
Callesen H,GreveT, Hyttel P 1986 Theriogenology 25:71
De Sousa PA, King T, Harkness L 2001 Biol Reprod 65: 23
Callesen H,GreveT,Christensen F1987Theriogenology
Dieleman SI,BeversMM1987J ReprodFeril S1:533
27:217
Dinnyes A, De Sousa P, KingT et al 2002 Cloning Stem
Callesen HGreveT,Bak A 1992 Theriogenology38:959
Cells 4:81
Callesen H,Liboriussen T, Creve T 1996 Anim Reprod Sci
Dobrinsky IR,Pursel VG,Long CRel al 1998
42:215
Theriogenology 49: 166
Cameron RDA,Beebe LFS,Blackshaw AW ct al 2004
Donnay I 2002 In:Van Soom A,Boerjan M (ed) Assessment
Theriogenology 61:1533
of mammalian embryo quality Invasive and non-invasive
CamphellK7-IS,MWhirJ,RitchieWAetal 1996Nature380:64
techniques.Kluwer Academic,Dordrecht,p57
888
Chapter
351
Assistedreproductivetechnologies
Donnay l,Auquier Ph,Kaidi S et al 1998Anim Reprod Sci
Goto K,KinoshitaA.Takuma Yet al1990Vet Rec127:517
52:93
GotoY,Kaneyama K,Kobayashi S etal 1999Anim Sci70:
DouglasRH,Nuti 1,Ginther O]1974 Theriogenology2:133
243
Drost M,BrandA,AaartsH1976Theriogenology6:503
Goudet G,Bezard J,Duchamp Get al 1997 Biol Reprod57:
Du Y,Li I,Kragh PM et al 2007a Cloning Stem Cells 9:469
212
DuY,ZhangY,li Jet al 2007b Cryobiology 54:181
Goudet G,Leclercq L,Bezard 1998Biol Reprod 58:760
Du Y,Kragh PM,ZhangYet al 2007cTheriogenology 68:
GreveT19sl Doctoral Dissertation,Royal Veterinary and
1104
Agricultural LIniversity, Copenhagen
DuchampG,Bezard I,PalmerE1995Biol ReprodMonogr
GreveT198GBrVetI142:228
1:233
GreveT,Del CampoM 1986In:Sreenan JM,Diskin MG (ed)
Dzuik PJ.PolgeC,Rowson LEA 1964 IAnim Sci 23:37
Embryonicmortality in farm animals.Martinus Nijhoff,
Eldridge-Panuska V,Caracciolo di Brienza G,Seidel GE Jr
Dordrechu,p 179-194
el al 2005Theriogenology 63:1308
GreveT,Lehn-Jensen H 1979Acta Vet Scand20:135
ElsdenRP,Hasler l;Seidel GEJr1976Theriogenology 6:523
GreveT.Lehn-ensen H,Rasbech NO 1977Theriogenology
EyestoneWH,First NL 1989J Reprod Fertil 85:715
7:239
FairT,Hytel P,GreveT 1995Mol ReprodDev42:437
GreveT,LoskutoffNM,Buckrell BCet al1992In:5eme
FarinPW,Farin CE1995BiolReprod52:676
ColloqueFranco-Tthecoslovaquesur laReproductiondes
Farin PW,CrosierAE,FarinCE2001Theriogenology55:151
Animaux Donestiques,Jouy-en-Jusas,Franice,p 25
FarinPWPiedrahitAFainCE2006Thiogenlgy
Hamner RE,Pursel G,Rexroad Jr CE1985Nature 315:680
65:178
Hanada A.Enya Y,Suzuki T1986IpnIAnim Reprod32:208
Fehilly CB,Willadsen SM,TuckerEM1984a Nature307:634
HareWCD,Mitchell D,BetteridgeKI etal 1976
Fehilly CB,WilladsenSM,TuckerEM 1984b J ReprodFertil
Theriogenology5:243
70:347
HaslerJF1998IAnimSci Suppl 76:52
Fitzgerald BP,PetersonKD,SilviaPJ1993AmJVerRes54:
Hasler JF2006In:Proceedingsof the22ndScientificMeeting
1746
of theEuropean EmbryoTransfer Association,Zug
Fortune IE,KimmichTL 1993 EquineVet 」 Suppl 15:95
Switzerland,8-9 September,2006.p95
FreemanDAWeberJA,Geary RTetal1991Theriogenology
HaslerJEMcCaulyAD,LatthropWFetal 1987
36:823
Theriogenology27:139
Fry RC,NiallEM,SimpsonTLetal1997Theriogenology47:
HaslerJEHenderson WB,Hurtgen P} et al 1995
977
Theriogenology 43:141
Galli C,Croti G,Turini Pet al2002Theriogenology58:705
Hasler JECardeyE,Stokes JEetal2002Theriogenology58:
Galli C,VassilievI,Crotti G elal2003Nature424:635
1457
Garcia A.Salaheddine M 1998Theriogenology 50:575
Hasler JBibyCRCollierRetl 2003Theriogenology59:
Garry JE,AdamsRMCann JPetl 1996Theriogenology5:
1919
141
HayashiS,Kobayashi K,Mizunoet al1989VeRec125:43
Gastal EL,Gastal MO,BergfeltDRetal 1997Biol Reprod57:
HazelegerW1999Dissertation,University of Wageningen
1320
HazelegerW,Kemp B 1999 Theriogenology 51: 81
GeorgesM2001Theriogenology55:15
HazelegerW，vanderMeulenl,van der LendeT1989
GibbonsIR,Beal WE,Krishner RLetal 1994Theriogenology
Theriogenology 32:727
42:405
HeapeW1890 ProcR Soc(Lond)48:457
HerrCM,ReedCM1991Theriogenology35:45
767
Heyman Y, Chavatte-Palmer P,LeBourhis Det al 2002a Biol
Gilrichst RB,Ritter Ll,ArmstrongDT 2004AnimReprod Scj
Reprod66:6
431:82-83
Hill JR,CibelliJB,Roussel Aet al 1999Theriogenology 51:
Ginther OJ,BergfeltDR1990ReprodFertil88:119
1451
Ginther Oj,WilbankMC,FrickePMetal1996Biol Reprod
Hlill JR,WingerQA,LongCRetal2000Biol Reprod 62:1135
55:1187
Hlinrichs K,Kenney RM1987Theriogenology27:237
GivensMD,Gard IA,StringfellowDA2007Theriogenology
Hinrichs K,Riera FL 1990Am J Vet Res51:451
68:298
HinrichsK,SertichPL,Palmer Eetal 19871 ReprodFertil 80
Gjorret JO,Knijn HM,DielemanSetal2003BiolReprod69:
395
1193
HinrichsK,ProvostPITorello EM2000 Theriogenology
Gleicher N,Friberg1,FullanN et al 1983 Lancet 2:508
54:1285
GomezMC,Catt IW,Evans C1998Theriogenology 49:1143
HinrichsK,Choi YH,1oveLBetal2005Biol Reprod72:
Gong JG,BraemmliTA.Wilmutletal 1993Biol Reprod48:1141
1142
Gordon11994 Laboratory production of cattle embryos.
Hinrichs K,Choi YH,Love CCetal 2006Reproduction131:
CAB International,Wallingford,Oxon
1063
GotfredsenP199i PhD thesis,RoyalVeterinary and
HinrichsK,Choi YH.Walckenaer BEetal 2007
Agricultural University,Copenhagen
Theriogenology 68:521
889
Part
18
Assisted reproduction
Hiruma K,Uleda H,Saito Hetal2006Reprod Fertil Dev18:
Kuwayama M,HolmP,Jacobsen Hetal 1997VerRec14l:
157
595
Hochi S2003 J Reprod Dev 49:13
LacazeS,PonsartC,Humblot P20071n:Proceedings of the
Hochi S,FujimotoT,Braun Jet al 1994 Theriogenology 42:
23rdScientificMeeting of theEuropeanEmbryo‘Transfer
483
Association,Alghero,Sardinia,7-8September1997,p188
HochiS,FujimotoT,Oguri N 1995ReprodFertil Dev7:113
Lai L,Kolber-Simonds D,Park KWet al 2002 Science295:
Hochi S,Maruyama K,Oguri N1996Theriogenology46:1217
1089
Holm P,ShukriNN,Vajta Getal 1998Theriogenology50:
LambertRD,SirardMA,BernardC1986Theriogenology
1285
25:117
Holm P.Vajta G,Machaty Zet al 1999a Cryo-Lelers 20:307
Landim-Alvarenga FC.Alvarenga MA.Meira C1993Equine
Holm P,Booth Pl,Schmidi MH etal i999b Theriogenology
VetI Suppl15:67
52:683
LaneM,Forest KT,Lyons EA etal 1999Theriogenology51:
HolmP,Booth Pi,Callesen 1I2002 Reproduction 123:553
167
HongQ-1I,TianS-1,Zhu S-Eetal 2007ReprodDomestAnim
LapinDR,Ginther OI1977JAnimSci44:834
42:34
Lascombes FA,Pashen RL 2000 In:Proceedings of the5th
HoriuchiT,EmutaC,Yamauchi Yetal 2002 Theriogenology
International Symposiumon Equine EmbryoTransfer,
57:1013
SaariFirlandHavemeyerFoundationMonographSeries
Huru AE,Landim-Alvarenga F Seidel GE Ir et al 2000
3,p95
Theriogenology 54:119
LavitranoM,Camaioni A,FazioVetal1989Cell57:717
Hyttel P,XuKP,Smith Set al 1987 Anat Embryol (Berl) 176:
Ledda S,Bogliolo L,Succu S etal 2007ReprodFertil Dev 19:
35
13
Hyttel P,FairT, CallesenHet al 1997Theriogenology 47:23
Lee BC,Kim MK,ang Gelal2005Nature436:641
Imel KJ,Squires EL,ElsdenRPetal 1981 AmVetMedAssoc
Legrand E,KrawieckiJM,Tinlurier D et al 2000 In
179:987
Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium on
Irvine CHG1981Theriogenology15:85
EquineEmbryoTransfer,SaariFinland,Havemeyer
IsachenkoV,Alabari IL,DattenaMetal2003Theriogenology
Foundation Monograph Series 3, p 62
59:1209
LegrandEBencharifD,Barrier-Batutetal002
IulianoMl;SquiresEL,CookVM1985JAnimSci 60:258
Theriogenology 58:721
IwamatsuT, Chang MC 1969 Nature 224: 919
Lehn-JensenH 1986Docloral Dissertation,RoyalVeterinary
JacobsenH2001PhDdissertation,RoyalVeterinary and
and Agricultural University,Copenhagen
Agricultural University,Copenhagen
Lehn-fensenH,RallWF1983Theriogenology 19:263
JacobsenH,5chmidt M,HolmP20001heriogenology53:
Leibo SP1977 In:Elliot K,Whelan I(ed) The freezing of
1761
mammalianembryos.Ciba Foundation Symposium52.
Jacobsen H,HolmP.SchmidtMetal2003ActaVet5cand
Elsevier,Amsterdam,p69
44:87
Leibo SP1984 Theriogenology 21:767
JohnsonAL1987Biol Reprod36:1199
LeiboSP,Loskutoff NM1993Theriogenology59:81
KanitzW,BeckerF,Alm H etal 1995Biol ReprodMonogr 1:
Li LY, Meintjes M,GraffKI etal 1995 Biol Reprod
225-231
Monograph1:309-318
KanitzW,Alm H,BeckerF20001ReprodFertil Suppl56:463
LiX,Morris LHA,Allen WR2001 Reproduction121:925
Keefer C,Younis Al,Brackette BG1990 Moi Reprod Dev 25:
Li R,Lai L,Wax Det al 2006Biol Reprod75:226
281
Lindner GM,Anderson GB,BonDurant RHetal 1983
Theriogenology 20:311
KikuchiK,OnishiA,Kashiwazaki Net al 2002 Biol Reprod
LohuisMM1995Theriogenology 43:51
66:1033
LonerganPKhatir H,Piumi F et al 1999 ] Reprod Fertil 117:
Kim H,SonDS,YeonSH et al2001Theriogenology55:937
159
King WA,Bezard IBousquetD1987Genome29:679
Lonergan P,Rizos D,Gutierre2-Adan A et al 2003a Reprod
Kobayashi S,GotoM,KanoM et al 1998 Cryobiology36:20
Domest Anim38:259
KolbeT, HolzW 2000Anim Reprod Sci 64:97
Lonergan P,Rizos D, Guiterrez-Adan A et al 2003b」 Reprod
KruipTA, Den Daas JH 1997 Theriogenology 47:43
Fertil 126:337
KruipThAMBoniRWurthYAtal1994Theriogenlogy
Long CR,Dobrinsky JRJohnsonA1999Theriogenology
42:675
51:1375
KihholzerB,MllerSTreueretl997Theriogenology
Looney CR.lindsey BR,Gonseth CL 1994Theriogenology
48:545
41:67
Kurykin),Majas 1.1996ActaVetBaltEstonVetRevSuppl:
LopesA5,deSousa2006PhDThesis,Royal Veterinary and
30-33
Agriculural University,Copenhagen
Kurykin,IMajas,L2000 ActaVetBaltEston VetRevSuppl:
Lopes AS,LarsenLH,RamsingNetal 2005Reproduction
31-35
130:669
Kuwayama M2007Theriogenology 67:73
LopesAS,MadsenSE.RamsingN etal200GaHum Reprod
22:558
890
Chapter
351
Assisted reproductive technologies
LopesAS,Wrenzycki C,RamsingNetal200b
MontovanSM,DaelsPF,Rivieretal 1990Theriogenology
Theriogenology 68:223
33:1305
Lopes AS,GreveT,Callesen H2007Theriogenology67:21
Moore NW 1982 ln: Adams CE(ed) Mammalian egg irans-
Loy RC,PemsteinR,O'Canna Det al 1998Theriogenology
fer.CRCPress,Boca Raton,FL,p 119
15:191
MutterLR,GordonAP,OldsD1964AI Digest12:3
Lu KH,PolgeC1992 In:Proceedings of the12
NagaiT 1996AnimReprodSci42:153
International Congress on Animal Reproduction,The
Nagashima H,Kashiwasaki N,Ashman Retal 1995Nature
Haguevol3,p1315
394:416
LuKH,Gordon I,GallagherM etal 1987VetRec12l:259
NewcombR,ChristieWB.RowsonLEA 1978VetRec102:414
LuKH,GordonI,ChenHBetal19BBVetRec122:539
Niemann H,KuesWA 2000 AnimReprod Sci 277:60-61
Lu KH,CranDG,Seidel GE Jr 1999Theriogenology52:1393
NiemannH,PryorJH,Bondioloi K 1987Theriogenology
McCaulyTC,Mazza MR,Didion BA etal 2003
28:675
Theriogenology 60:1569
Niemann H,Wrenzycki C,LucasHahn A et al 2002 Cloning
McCuePM1996Vet ClinicsNorthAm12:1
Stem Cells 4:29
McCue PM,Camey N],Hughes IPet al 1992Theriogenology
NiswenderKD,Alvarenga MA,McCuePMetal2003|Equine
38:823
Vet Sci23:497
McCuePM,Hughes P,Lasley BL1993EquineVetISupp
Oback B,Wiersema AT,GayorPetal 2003 Cloning Stem
15:103
Cells5:3
McCuePMLeBlancMMSquires EL2007Theriogenology
OECDreport2003In:ProceedingsofaWorkshopheld at
68:429
INRA,louy en Josas,France,1
McEvoyTG,ThompsonH,DolmanDFetal2002VetRec151:
Oguri N,Tsutsumi Y1974↓ReprodIertil 41:313
653
OkadoA,Yoshii K,Mizuochi Yetal2002a」ReprodDev48:
MckinnonAO,WheelerMB,CarmevaleEMet al 1986}
189
EquineVet Sci6:3069
OkadoA,Wachi S,lidaKet al2002bI Reprod Dev48:309
OverstromEW1996Theriogenology 45:3
24:144
Overstrom EW,DubyRT,Dobrinsly JRetal 1993
McKinnonAO,Lacham-Kaplan O.TrounsonAO2000
Theriogenology39:276
JReprodFertil Suppl56:513
Ozil JP 1983] Reprod Fertil 69:463
Maclellan LI. Carnevale EM,Coutinho da Silva MA et al
Ozil JP,Heyman Y,Renard I-P 1982Vet Rec110:126
2002aTheriogenology58:717
PaceMP,AugesteinMl,Betthauser JM etal 2002Biol Reprod
MaclellanLi,Carnecale EM,Coutinhoda Silva CFet al
67:334
2002b Theriogenology58:911
PalmerE,DuchampG,Bezardetal 1987]Reprod Fertil
Maddox-Hyttel P,Gjorret [O,Vajta Getal 2003Reproduction
Suppl35:689
125:607
Palmer E,Bezard J,Magistrini Metal 1991] Reprod Fertil
Malcuit C,Maserati M,Takahashi Yetal2006Reprod Fertil
Suppl44:375
Dev18:39
Parrish1/FooleRH19871Androl8:259
MapletoftR2006In:IVISReviewsinVeterinary Medicine.
Parrish 1l,Susko-ParrishI.WinerMA etal 1988BiolReprod
IVIS, Ithaca,NY,p21
38:1171
MartinezMF;Adams GPBergfelt Det al 1999AnimReprod
Parrish II,Susko-ParrishJLFirst NI.1989 Biol Reprod
Sci57:23
41:683
Martinez EA.Caamano IN,Gil MA et al 2004Theriogenology
Pashen Rl,WilladsenSM,Anderson GB1987 ReprodFertil
61:137
Suppl35:693
MassipA,VanDerZwalmen P,ScheffenBetal1986Cryo-
Pedersen HG,Berrocal B,ThomsonSRMetal 2002
Letters7:270
Tleriogenology58:465
MattioliMBacciML,GaleatiGetal 1989Theriogenology
Pedersen HG,SchmidtM,Sangild PTet al 2004 Mol Cell
31:1201
Endocrinol 234:137
Meinecle-Tilmann S,MeineckeB 1984Nature 307:637
PeippoJ,Kurkilahti M,BredbackaP2001Zygote9: 105
Meintjes M,BellowMS,Paul JB 1y95a Biol Reprod
Peters JK,Milliken G,Davis DL.2001 ] Anim Sci79:1578
Monograph 1:281
Petersen MM, Hansen M,Avery B etal 2008 A method for
MeintjesM,Graff K),Paul IBet al 1995b Biol Reprod
chronological intravital imaging of bovine oocytes during
Monograph1:309
in vitromaturation.MicroscopyMicroanalysis:in press
MeintjesM,Graff K),Paccamonti D et al 1996
Petyim S,BageR,ForsbergMetal2000」VetMed47:627
Theriogenology45:304
Pelyim S,BageR,ForsbergMetal2001VetMed48:449
MerionS20071n:23rdScientificMeetingoftheEuropean
PetyimS,Bage R,Madej Aetal 2002 PhD thesisSwedish
EmbryoTransferAssociation,Alghero,Sardinia7-8
University of Agriculural Sciences
September2007,p31
Peura TT 2003 Cloning Stem Cells5:13
MertonIS,deRoosAPW,MullaartEetal 2003
Peura TT,Lewis IM,TrounsonAO1998Mol Reprod Dev
Theriogenology59:651
50:185
891
Part
8
Assisted reproduction
Pfaff RSeidel GE,Squires ELetal 1993Theriogenology39:
Singh 1,DominguezM,aisval Retal 2004Theriogenology
284
62:227
Picard L,KingWA,BetteridgeKJ 1985VetRec117:603
Slade NP,TakedaT,Squires ELet al 1985Theriogenology 24:
Picard L,Creve',KingWA etal 1986Acta VetScand27:33
45
Pieterse MC,Kappen KA.Kruip TAM etal 1988
Slimane-Bureau WC,King WA 2002 Cloning Stem Cells 4:
Theriogenology30:751
319
PieterseMC,Vos PLAM,KruipTAM etal 1991
Squires ELMcCuePM 2007 Anim Reprod Sci 99:1
Theriogenology 35:19
Squires EL.Iuliano ME Shideler RK 1982 Theriogenology 17:
Polejaeva IA, Chen SH,VaughtTD et al 2000Nature407:B6
35
Polge C1977 In:Betteridge K] (ed)Transfer in farm animals.
Squires El,Garcia RH,GintherOI1985a EquineVetSuppl
Agriculture Canada,Monograph 16,p 45
3:92
Polge C1982In:ColeDjA,Foxcrofi GR(ed） Controlof pig
SquiresEL,CookVM,Voss L 1985bCollection and trans
reproduction.butterworth,London,p277
ferofequineembryos.Animal ReproductionLaboratory
Polge C,Day BN 1968 Vet Rec 82:712
Bulletin No.01.Animal Reproduction Laboratory,
PolzinVi,Anderson DL,AndersonGBet al 1987] Anim Sci
ColoradoState University Fort Collins,CO
65:325
Squires EL,Garcia RH,Ginther OIetal1986Theriogenology
Prather RS,Day BN 1998 Theriogenology 49:21
26:661
Probst S,Rath D 2003 Theriogenology59:961
SquiresEL.Seidel GEMcKinnon AO 1989 Equine Vet
Pursel VG,Rexroad CE]r 1993MolReprod Dev36:251
J Suppl 8:89
Pursel VG,Bolt D),Miller KFetal 1990ReprodFeril Suppl
Squires El,Wilson JMKatoHetal 1996Theniogenology 45:306
40:235
Squires EL,MCuePM,Vandervall D 1999 Theriogenology
Purwantara B,SchmidtM,GreveTetal 1993Theriogenology
51:91
40:913
Squires EL,CarnevaleEM,McCue PMetal 2003
RainoV1992Doctoral Dissertation,Llniversity of Kuopio,
Theriogenology 59:151
Finland
Squirrel JM,WokosinDL,WhiteIGetal1999NatureBiol17:
Rall WF,Fahy GM1985Theriogenology 23:320
763
Rangel Santos R 2007In:Proccedingsof the23rd Scientific
SreenanIM,BeehanD19761Reprod Fertil 48:223
Meetingofthe European EmbryoTransferAssociation,
Steptoe PC,Edwards RG 1978 Lancet2:366
Alghero,Sardinia,7-8September2007,p218
Stewart F,Allen WR 1979Reprod Feril Suppl 27:431
RathjeTA,Rohrer GA,JohnsonRK 19971Anim Sci75:1486
StringfellowDA 1998 In:StringfellowDA,Seidel S (ed)
Reggio BC,JamesAN,Green HI.etal 2001 Biol Reprod 65:
Manualof theInternational EmbryoTransferSociety
1528
(IETS).IETS,Savoy,IL,p79-84
Rieger D,GuayP 1988]Reprod Fertil 83:585
SuringfellowDA,Givens M,WaldropJG2004 Reprod Feril
RiegerD,PalerELageauxDeta989Theriogenology
Dev 16:93
31:249
Stroud B,Hasler|2006Theriogenology 65:65
RiegerD,Bruyas IE Lagneaux D etal 1991J Reprod Fertil
SugieT 19651Reprod Feril10:197
SuzuliMMisumiK,OsawaMetal2006Thriogenology5:
Rizos D,Ward F Duffy Pet al 2002Mol Reprod Dev 61:234
376
Robl IM,WangP,KasinathanPetal 2007Theriogenology
Tamassia M,HeymanY LavergneYetal 2003Reproduction
67:127
126:629
Saacke RG,Nadir S,Nebel RL1994Theriogenology41:45
Tanghe S.VanSoomA,Nauwynck Hetal 2002Mol Reprod
Sangild PT,Schmidt M.Jacobsen Hetal2000 Biol Reprod
Dev 61:414
62:1495
TangheSVanSomAMelrzadal003Triogenology
Schams DC,Menzer C.Schallenberger E1978 In:IM [ed)
60:135
Sreenan Control of reproductionin the cow.Martinus
Tervit HIR1996Anim Reprod Sci 42:227
Nijhoff,Dordrecht,p122
Tervit HIR,Goold PG1984Theriogenology 21:269
Schmidt M,GreveTAvery Betal 1996Theriogenology 46:
Tervit HR,BakerRL,Hoff-lorgensenRetal 1986In:ProcNZ
527
s
SchniekeAE,Kind Al,RitchieWAetal 1997 Science278:
TharasanitT,Colleoni 5,La7zari Get al 2006Anim Reprod
2130
Sci94:291
SchroderA,Miller]R,ThonsenPDetal 1990Anim
ThibierM 2006Data Retrieval Comuittee Anmual Report.
Biotechnol1:1221
EmbryoTransfer Newsl 24(4):12-18
ScogginsCH;Meira C,McCuePMetal 2002Theriogenology
ThibierM,Nibart M1995Theriogenology 43:71
58:151
Thompson JG,Pariridge Rl. Houghton FD et al 1996]
Seidel GESquiresEL,McKinnonAO 1989EquineVet
ReprodFertil106:299
Suppl7:87
Thouas GA,lones GM,Trounson AO 2003 Reproduction
ShawDw.Good2000Theriogenology53:1521
126:161
Shiku H,ShiraishiT,Ohya Het al 2001 Anal Chem73:3751
Lshijima H,Yoskioka H,EsaliRetal 2004Reprod Dev50:
ShinT,KraemerD,Pryor]et al2002Nature 415:859
892
Chapter
351
Assisted reproductive technologies
Vajta G 1997 Doctoral Dissertation, Royal Veterinary and
Willadsen SM 1979 Nature 277: 298
Agricultural University, Copenhagen
Willadsen SM 1981 I Embryol Exp Morphol 65: 165
Vajta G,Holn P, Greve T 1997a Cryo-Letters 18:191
Willadsen SM1986Nature320:63
Vajta G,Holm P. Greve Tet al 1997b Acta Vet Scand 38:349
Willadsen SM.Godke RA 1984 Vet Rec 114:240
Vajta G,Holn P, Kuwayama Met al 1998a Mol Reprod Dev
Willadsen SM,Polge C1981VetRec 108:211
51:53
Willadsen SM,Polge C,Rowson LEA 1978 IReprod Feril
Vajta G,Lewis IM,Kuwayama M el al 199sb Cryo-Leiters 19:
52:391
389
Willadsen SM,Lehn-ensen H,Fehilly CBet al 1981
Vajta G,Murphy CN,MachatyZ et al 1999 Vet Rec144:180
Thcriogenology 15:23
Vajta G, Peura TT, Holm P ei al 2000 Mol Reprod Dey 49: 1
Willadsen SM,Janzen RE,Mcallister RJ et al 1991
Vajta G, Lewis IM.Hyttel P et al 2001 Cloning 3:89
Theriogenology35:161
Vajta G,1ewis IM,Trounson AO et al 2003 Biol Reprod 68:
Wille EL,Buckner P),Larson GL1953 JDairy Sci36:520
571
Williams T1ElsdenRP Seidel GE I 1984 Theriogenology
Van Soom A 1996 Doctoral Thesis,University of Chenl
22:521
Belgium
Wilmut l,Rowson LEA 1973Vet Rec92:686
Van Soom A,Ysebaen M'T,DeRruif A 1997Mol Reprod Dev
Wilmui I, Sales DI 1981 I Reptod Fertil 61: 107
47:47
Wilmut l, SchniekeAE,McWhirJet al 1997Nature
Van Wagtendonk-deLeeuwAM2006Theriogenology 65:914
385:810
VanWagtendonk-deLeeuwAM,denDaas IH,Rall WF1997
Wilsher S.Allen WR2003 EquineVet ]35:476
Theriogenology 48:1071
WilsherS,AllenWR2004In:Proceedings of the 6th
Van Wagtendonk-de leeuw AM,Aeris Bl,den Daas JH 1998
International Symposiumon EquineEmbryoTransfer,
Theriogenology 49: 883
4-6 August 2004, Rio de Janeiro,Brazil. Havemeyer
Van Wagtendonk-de Leeuw AM,Mullaart E,De Roos AP et al
Foundation Monograph series14,p 110
2000 Theriogenology 53: 575
Wilson JM,Williams JD,Bondioli KRet al 1995Anim
Viuff D,Avery B, Creve Tet al 1998 Mol Reprod Dev 43: 171
Reprod Sci 38: 73
Viuff D,Rickords L,Ofenberg Hetal 1999 Biol Reprod 60:
Woods GL,Ginther O1 1984 Theriogenology 21:461
1273
Wrathall AE,Sutmoller P1998 In: Suringfellow DA,Seidel S
Viuff D,Palsgaard A,Rickords L etal 2002Mol ReprcdDev 62:
(ed)et al Manual of the International Embryo Transfer
483
Society. IETS,Savoy IL,p 17
Voelkel SA. Hu YLI 1992 Theriogenology 37: 23
Wrenzycki C,Niemann H 2002 In: Van Soom A.Boerjan M
Vogelsang SG,Sorensen AM,Potter GD et al 1979 J Reprod
(ed)et al Assessment of mammalian embryo quality.
Fertil Suppl 27:383
Kluwer, Dordrecht, p 341
Vogelsang SG,Bondioli KR,Massey 1M 1985 Equine Vet
Wrenzycki C,Wells D, Herrmann D et al 2001 Biol Reprod
1 Suppl 3:89
65:309
Wachrel SS 1984 Theriogenology 21: 18
Wrenzycki C,Lucas-Hahn A,Hermann D et al 2002Biol
Wakayama T,Perry AC,Zucotti M et al 1998Nature394:369
Reprod66:127
Walker SK,HartwichKM,SeanarkRF1996Theriogenology
Wrenzycki C,HerinannD,Lucas-Hahn Aetal2004Anim
45:111
Reprod Sci 593:82-83
Wall Rl 1996 Theriogenology 15: 57
Wright JM 1981 Theriogenology 15:43
Walters EM,Clark SG,Roseman HM 2003 Theriogenology
WurthYAReinders IMCRall WF eal 1994Theriogenology
59:353
42:1275
Warfield SJ,5eidel GE Jr,Elsden RP 1087J Anim Sci 65:756
Xu KP, Greve T, Callesen H et al 1987 1 Reprod Fertil
Warwick BL,Berry RO 1949 I Hered 40:297
81:501
Watson ED,Sertich PL,Hunt PR 1992 Theriogenology 37:
Xu KP, GreveT, Callesen H, 1lyttel P 1988 1 Reprod Fertil
1075
Abstr Ser 1, abstr 18
Watson AJ,Westhusin ME,De Sousa PAetal 1999
Yamamoto Y,Oguri N,Tsuisumi Y et al 1982
Theriogenology 51: 117
J Reprod Fertil Supple 32: 399
Weber JA,Freeman DA,VanderwallDKetal 1991 Biol
Yanagimachi R, Chang MC 1963 Nature 200: 281
Reprod45:540
Yang BS, Leibo SP 1999 Theriogenology 51: 178
Welch S, Denniston D, Hudson I etal 2006 J EquineVet Sci
Young CA, Squires EL,Seidel GE et al 1997 Equine Vet 1
26:262
Suppl 25: 98
Wells DN,Misica PM,Tervit HIR 1999 Biol Reprod G0:996
Zalharichenko V, Durcova-Hills G, Stojkovic M 1999 
Whitingham DG,Leiho SP, Mazur P 1972 Science NewYork
Reprod Fertil 115: 325
178:411
Zhang L,Jiang S,Wozniak PI et al 1995 Mol Reprod Dev
WillkiePJ,Paszek AA,Beattie CWet al 1999Mamm Genome
40:338
10:573
Zhang M,Lu KH,Seidel GE Jr 2003 Theriogeology
Willadsen SM1977In:Thefreezingofmammalian embryos,
60:1657
Ciba Foundation Symposium 52. Elseviet, Amsterdam,
Zhou Q,Renard JP, Le Friec G et al 2003 Science 302: 1179
p175
68
Appendix
 David Noakes
Hormones, related substances and vaccines
used in reproduction
The preparations listed in this appendix are those
Peptech Animal Health Pty Ltd, Dee Why, NSW,
that are available in the UK at ihe time of publica-
Australia). Not licensed for use in the UK.
tion.The recommendations are not necessarily those
of the manufactuirers,since some have been modi-
Pharmacological action
fied by the authors in the light of their experience.
Readers are warned of the importance of checking
Stimulates a short surge of FSH and LH following a
the current recommendations in case changes have
single bolus injection.
been made since the publication of this book. In
addition, they should be aware of the regulations
Indications
and consequences of using unlicensed preparations.
and using preparations in species where the licence
Cattle:
for use does not apply.
-follicular cysts
delayed ovulation or anovulation
Gonadotrophin (luteinizing
acyclicity (doubtful if a single bolus is very effective)
hormone)-releasing hormone
 improved pregnancy rates, in cows with poor preg-
and analogues (GnRH or LHRH)
nancy rates, when used as ‘holding injection' as a
single bolus 12 days after insemination
Naturally occurring horimone, produced by the hypo
as part of oestrus-synchronization regimens
thalamus and transferred to the anterior pituitary
(Ov-synch programme).
gland in thehypophyseal portal circulation.Itis a pep-
tide and stimulates the release of follicle-stimulating
Horse:
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).
·induce ovulation (preovulatory gonadotrophin
surge lasts several days in mare); single bolus may
not be effective,requires frequent repeated doses,
Commerciallyavailableproducts
or the use ofa slow-release implant.
Gonadorelin, synthetic GnRH peptide (Feriagyl,
Janssen UK, High Wycombe, Bucks).
Buserelin, synthetic GnRH peptide analogue [Recep-
Dose rates
tal, Intervet UK Ltd, Milton Keynes, Beds).
·Buserelin: cow, 10-20μg;horse 40μg preferably
Deslorelin, a synthetic GnRH peptide analogue that
i.m. but can be given i.v, or s.c.
Gonadorelin: cow, 0.5mg i.m., s.c. or i.v.
895
Appendix
Pig:
Gonadotrophins
·inassociatiqpwithhumanchorionicgonadotro
phin (hCG) to stimulate onset of cyclical activity
1.FSH and LH
after farrowing.
Both FSH and LH can be obtained in a semi-
Dog:
purified form but are expensive.PorcineFSHI and
to induce oestrus duringphysiological anoestrus.
recombinant-derived FSH areused to induce super-
ovulationindonorcowsforembryotransfer
Doserate
Cattle:1500-3000lu s.c.or i.m.
Commerciallyavailableproduct
·Sheep and goats: 500-800luI s.c. or i.m. (depend
Porcine FSH (Super-Ov,Global Genetics UIK,
ing on thebreed and time interval to the onset of
Leominster,Herefordshire).
normal breeding season)
2.Equine chorionicgonadotrophin
·Pig:1000lU s.c.ori.m.
·Dog:50-2001U1.
(eCG)
Originally called pregnant mare's serum gonadotro-
phin(PmSG)but,inorder touseconsistentnomen-
3.Humanmenopausal
clature,itis now called eCG.A protein hormone
gonadotrophin (hMG)
producedby theendometrialcupsofthemarefrom
Extracted from theurine ofmenopausalwomen
about40-120 days of pregnancy.ltmainly hasFSH-
this has primarily an FSH-like action.Used to a lim
likeactivitybutwithamuchlongerbiologicalhalf-
itedextentinsuperovulatingdonorcowsforembryo
life thanFSH.
transfer. It has a shorter biological half-life than eCG.
Commerciallyavailableproducts
4.Human chorionic gonadotrophin
eCG or serum gonadotrophin, PMSG-Intervel
(hCG)
（lntervetUIKLtd,Milton Keynes);Fostim 600（Pfizer
Aproteinhormone extracted from theurineofpreg-
UK, Sandwich, Kent).
nant women,this hormone has primarily an LH-like
effectand henceisused asa substituteforthemore
Pharmacological action
expensive LH; it also has a longer half-life than LH.
Mainly FSH-like in its action but has some LH
activity.
Commercially availableproducts
Chorulon injection （Intervet UK Ltd, Milton
Indications
Keynes),
Cattle:
·superovulation of donor cows for embryo urans
Pharmacologicalaction
fer;rarelyused because overstimulation canbe a
Stimulates androgen production by the thecal cells
problem
of the ovary and Leydig cells of the testis;stimulates
impaired spermatogenesis in bulls (doubtful
follicularmaturation andovulation,corpusluteum
value)
formation and maintenance.
at the time of withdrawal of intravaginal proges
terone preparations when used to treat acyclicity.
Indications
Sheep and goats:
Cattle:
·in association with intravaginal progestogen
sponges to advance the onset of he breeding
delayedovulationoranovulation
season.
·ovarian cysts (especially follicular)
896
Hormones, related substances and vaccines used in reproduction
·luteal deficiency
5 ml dose). Indicated for the induction of oestrus in
·improve chances of pregnancy in cyclic non-
sows and gilts after weaning. There is evidence that
breeders (repeat breeder cows): rationale is not
this can be a useful method of overcoming postpar-
always apparent
tum anoestrus,
● improve libido in bull (doubtful value and may
make temperament more aggressive).
Oxytocin and analogues
H-lorse:
●induce or hasten ovulation
·'rig test', stimulate rise in testosterone in periph-
Oxytocin is a peptide hornone produced by the
eral blood of suspected cryptorchid.
neurones of the supraoptic nucleus and is trans-
Pig:
ported to, and stored in, the posterior pituitary
gland. Synthetic oxytocin and an analogue with a
with eCG to stimulate onset of cyclical activity
longer half life(carbetocin) are available.
after farrowing
·improve libido in boar (doubtful value)
Commercially available products
Sheep and goat:
·improve libido in ram and male goat (doubtfiul
Oxytocin-S (Intervet UK Ltd, Milton Keynes).
value)
Carbetocin(Reprocine,Vetoquinol UIK,Buckingham)
* cystic ovaries in female goat.
Dog:
Pharmacological action
·curtailprolonged or persistentpro-oestrus/oestrus
Causes milk let-down,myometrial contractions to
in bitches
facilitate gamete transport, myometrial contractions
determination of abdominal cryptorchidism as in
during parturition and postpartum.
the'rig' test in horses
 improve libido in male dog (doubtful value).
Indications
Cat:
·induce ovulation.
· induce,milk let-down
·hasten uterine involution following dystocia, cae-
Dose rate
sarean operation, after replacement of uterine pro
Cattle: 1500-30001u i.v.ori.m.
lapse, uterine rauma or haemorrhage.
·Horse:1500-30001U1 i.v.ori.m
Horse:
·induce foaling
·Pig:500-1000IU1i.m.0r s.c.
· Sheep and goat: 100-500 Iul i.v. or i.m.
cause expulsion ofretained fetal membranes
· Dog: 100-5001 i.m.
induce milk letdown.
Cat:100-2001Ui.m.
Sheep: As for cow.
Pig:
induce milkIet-down
 Gonadotrophins with other
·hasten second stage of parturition
hormones
·treatment of uterine inertia
·cause expulsion ofretained fetalmembranes
Commercially available products and
·hasten uterine involution.
manufacturers'indications for usage
Dog:
eCGand hCG(PG 600 (Intervet LIK Ltd,Milton
· treat uterine inertia
Keynes).Contains 4001U eCGand200IU hCGin a
expulsion ofretained fetalmembranies
897
Appendix
hastenuterineinvolution after dystocia orcaesar-
caesarean operations and duringembryo transfer,
ean operation (perhaps treat subinvolution of pla-
and enabling easjer repulsion of thefetus in obstet-
cental sites)
ricalmanipulations.Clenbuterol HClcan be used
induce milllet-down.
specificallytopostponeparturitionincattleasa
management aid, or to delay calving thereby allow-
Dose rate(oxytocin)
ingadequatesofteningandrelaxationofthebirth
canal to occur.
Manyrecommended dose rates are toohigh.The
myometriumisvery sensitive totheeffectsofoxyto
Indications
cin and high doserates can cause spasm rather than
synchronized contractions.The myometrium will
Cattle:
alsobecomerefractoryoitseffect,henceincreasing
relaxationofmyometrium tofacilitate obstetrical
incremental doserates shouldbeused.Mosteffec-
manipulationto treatdystocia and duringcaesar-
tivewhen used in an intravenous drip in saline.
ean operations
Cattle: 10Iul i.m.or i.v.
to aid relaxation and softening of the birth
Horse:10iu i.m.ori.v.
canal
Pig:5IUi.m.ori.v
·in embryo transfer to facilitate manipulation of
·Sheep and goar: 2-5iu i.m. or i.v.
the uterus
·Dog and cat: 0.5-5IU i.m. or i.v.
topostpone parturition(clenbuterol HCl only).
Horse,shepiganddogAsorcatteexct ha
Doserate(carbetocin)
cannot be used topostpone parturition.
Cat:Some spasmolytics arecontraindicated in this
Cattle: 0.21-0.35mg per animal
species and should be checked beforeuse.
Pig: 0.105-0.21 mg per animal.
Doserate
Spasmolytics (smooth muscle
Theseshouldbecheckedforeachproductandspe
relaxants)
ciesbefore use.
Clenbuterol HCl,when used to posipone calv-
ingduringthenight,should begiven atadose
These substances have awiderangeof effecis;some
rate of 0.3mg (10 ml) i.m.at about 18.00 hours
are specific for themyometrium,while others exert
followed by a second injection of 0.21 mg (7ml)
their action upon all smooth muscle.Assessment of
4hours later.This should postpone calving for S
their efficacy is frequently rather subjective during
hours after the second injection.lt must not be
their clinical application.
used if the cervixis fully dilated and second stage
has commenced.
Commercially available products
Hlyoscine N-butylbromide and dipyrone (Buscopan
Oestrogens
Compositum,BoehringerIngelheimLid,Bracknell,
Berks).
Vetrabutine hydrochloride(Monzaldon,Boehringer
Oestrogens,which are steroidsplay awiderolein
Ingelheim Ltd,Bracknell)
the reproductive process.Howeverthere arerela-
Clenbuterol hydrochloride (Planipart,Boehringer
tivelyfewrationalindicationsforoestrogenther
Ingelheim Ltd, Bracknell). Clenbuterol HCI is a
apy in thetreatment ofreproductive disorders in
B-adrenergic stinulant.
domestic species.Recently, all oestrogens have been
withdrawn from use in food-producing animals
in European Union countries because of concern
Pharmacologicalaction
aboutresidues inhuman foodproducis;thisban is
Abolishes or reduces myometrialcontractions
likelytobeintroduced inothercountriesthrough
andtone,thuscausingrelaxation of theuterus at
out the world.
868
Hormones, related substances and vaccines used in reproduction
Commercially available products
Progestogens
Estradiol benzoate(Mesalin,Intervet UkLtd,Milton
Keynes). This contains 200 μg/ml estradiol benzo-
These include the naturally occurring steroid pro-
ate in oil.
gesterone and a number of synthetic progestogens,
Diethylstilbestrol (non-proprietary).Tablets 1 mg
which are much more potent and have a longer
and 5 mg.
half-life. Progestogens are used widely in all domes-
Ethinylestradiol (non-proprietary).Tablets 10,50μg
tic species, mainly to control cyclical activity;this is
 and 1 mg.
because, as a group, they exert a powerful negative
feedback effect upon the hypothalamus and ante-
rior pituitary gland, thus inhibiting gonadotrophin
Pharmacological action
release. The consequence of this effect is to sup-
press cyclical activity so that, following cessation of
Oestrogens are primarily responsible for oestrous
treatment in polyoestrous species,there is ovarian
behaviourin thefemale;they stimulatechanges in
rebound within a few days.
thetubulargenital tract that controlgamete trans
port and,with progestogens,cause development of
the mammary gland and increase the resistance
1. Progesterone
of the genital tract to infection. They potentiate
the ecbolic action of oxyiocin and prostaglandins
Commercially available products
on the yometrium. They stimulate the preovula
Progesterone-releasing intravaginal device (PRID,
tory surge of gonadotrophins. They also reverse the
Ceva, Chesham,Bucks). Each device contains
effects of androgens on androgen-dependent tissue
1.55g of progesterone. One device should be
changes.
inserted into thevagina and left in situ for upto
12 days,PGFshould be administered 24 hours
Indications
before removal if used for oestrus synchroniza-
tion. Oestrus occurs 2-5 days after withdrawal.
Dog:
lntravaginal progesterone release device (Easi-Breed,
· prevention of unplanned pregnancy
CIDR,Animal Reproductive Technologies {ART
UIK) Ltd,Leominster).Each device contains 1.38g
·urinary incontinence in the spayed bitch
of progesterone and should be left in place for
·prostatichyperplasia and analadenoma inithe
7-12 days with PGFtreatment at lie time of
male dog
removal ifusedforoestrus synchronization.
 to depress hypersexuality in the male dog.
Indications
Dose rate
synchronization of cestrus/ovulation in cows and
heifers, in conjunction with prostaglandin (PG)F
Dog:
●treatment of acyclicity (irue anoestrus) in cows
·Estradiol benzoate: following unplanned mating
and heifers
7 days after mating s.c. or i.m.
·treatment ofnon-observed oestrus in cows
●Diethylstilbestrol: for urinary incontinence 1 mg
·treatment of thin walled follicular cysts.
daily for 3 days then 1 mg every third day, for pro-
static hyperplasia 1 mg/day
2. Synthetic progestogens
·Ethinylestradiol: 50-100 μg/day orally. Oestrogens
are not withoui risk in the bitch, predisposing to
Commercially available products
cystic endometrial hyperplasia, and should not be
Altrenogest or allyltrenbolone (Regunate Equine,
used without warning.
Intervet UK Ltd, Milton Keynes). A liquid in-feed
Oestrogens should not be used in cats.
substance containing 2.2 mg of allyltrenbolone
899
Appendix
Proligestoneinjection(Delvosterone,IntervetUK
this may cause managemental or behavioural
Ltd, Milton Keynes). Used to interrupt and post-
problems,tocontrol timingof oestrus iomeet the
pone oestrus in the bitch and queen cat. Dose
availabilityofthestallion,toinducecyclical activ-
rate:bitch（interruptionofoestrus),100-600mg
ity in the breeding season. Dose rate of 27.5 or
by s.c.injection at the first signs of pro-oestrus.
33mgin thefeed as a single doseperdayfor10 or
The same dose rate can be given when the bitch
15consecutive days.Oestrus occurswithin S days
is anoestrus to postpone oestrus temporarily,
oflastdoseandovulation after7-13days.
or at 3,4and then5-monthly intervals topost-
Altrenogest or allyltrenbolone (Regumate Porcine,
pone oestrus fora longerperiodoftime.Queen
JanssenUK,HighWycombe).A liquid in-feed sus
cat,100mg by s.c. injection au the first signs of
pension that is placed on the food as a top dress
pro-oestrus or oestrus;postponement involves a
ingwhengiltsare eatingsothatit isimmediately
similarinjectionregimento that describedfor the
bitch.
consumed.It is used to synchronize oestrus in
sexually mature and therefore cyclicalgilts,by
Progestogens in bitches and queen cats are not with-
administeringthe suspension forI8 consecutive
out dangers, since they predispose to cystic endo-
days.Oestrus occurs 2-3 days after cessation of
metrial hyperplasia (pyometra) and should be used
treatment.Doserate of 20 mg (5ml) per day.
with theutmostcautionin thoseindividualsthatare
Fluorogestone
subsequently intended for breeding.
acetate
intravaginal
sponges
(Chronogest,Intervet UK Lid,Milton Keynes).
Medroxyprogesterone acetateintravaginal sponges
Antiprogestogens
(Veramix and Veramix Plus,Pfizet,Sandwich)
Used to synchronize ewes and female goats or,
inconjunction with eCG injections,to advance
Prolactin inhibitors such ascabergoline(seebelow)
thetimeofonset of thebreedingseasonbyupto
inhibit endogenous progesterone production and
6weels.Dose rate:each ewe receives a single
secretion by the corpora lutea inthe bitch,because
spongeinserted into theanteriorvaginawhere it
prolactinis themainluteotrophichormone in
shouldremainfor12-14 days beforewithdrawal;
this species, and thus can terminate pregnancy.
oestrus occurs48-72hourslater.Whenthebreed-
Similarly, substances such as epostane prevent
ing season is being advanced, eCG is normally
the conversion of pregnenolone to progesterone
given at the time of sponge removal or just before.
and have a similar effect.However,aglepristone,
Atleastoneramper10ewesshouldbeavailable.
which is a progesterone receptor antagonist,exerts
is effecibyblockingthe action ofprogesterone at
Medroxyprogesterone acetate injection (Promone-E,
Pfizer, Sandwich). Used for prevention of oestrus
cellular andtissuelevelwhile theconcentrations
of the hormone in the peripheral blood are
in bitches and prostatic hyperplasia in dogs. Dose
unaffected.Thus if thebitch is pregnant,pregnancy
rate:bitches（preventionofoestrus),50-150mg
s.c.in anoestrus;dog （prostatic hyperplasia),
isterminated.ltshouldonlybeusedupto45days
of gestation.
50-100mg s.c.every 3-6 months.
Megestrol acetate tablets(Ovarid,Schering-Plough
Animal Health,Harefield,Middlesex).Used for
Commerciallyavailableproducts
the interruption of oestrus in bitches and queen
AglepristoneAlizan,VirbacUKLtdBuryStEdmunds,
cats when given at the first signs of pro-oestrus
Suffollk).
or the postponement ofoestrus when given dur-
ing anoestrus. Dose rales: bitch (interruption of
oestrus),2mg/kg daily for 8 days:postponement
Indications
ofoestrus,0.5mg/kg dailyfor up1o40 daysand
Ternination of unwanted pregnancy in thebitch up
then,ifrequired,ata dose of0.1-0.2mg/kgtwice
10 45 days of gestation.
weellyfornotmorethan4months;queencats
(interruption of oestrus),5mgper day for3 days
Doserate
commencing at the first signs of pro-oestrus/
Dogs: 10mg/kg s.c.repeated after 24 hours.
900
Hormones,related substancesandvaccines usedinreproduction
Androgens
Indications
Dog:
Testosterone is the principal circulating androgen in
·hypersexuality in the male dog
themale,being produced by the interstitial cells of
·prostatic hyperplasia and prostatitis.
the testis. As well as being responsible for the sec-
ondarysexcharacteristicsitisalsoinvolvedinr-
Dose rate
matogenesis.Androgens,either naturally occurring
or synthetic analogues,have limited application in
1.0-2.0 mg/kg body weight, s.c. or i.m.
animal reproduction or disease.
Prostaglandins and prostaglandin
Commerciallyavailableproducts
analogues
Testosterone esters injection (Durateston,Intervet
Uk Ltd,Milton Keynes).Contains testosterone
OnlyPGFand syntheticanaloguesareavailable
decanoate20mg/ml,
testosteroneisocaproate
commerciallyforusein domesticspecies.
12mg,testosterone propionate 6mg/ml and phe-
nylpropionate12mg/ml.
Commerciallyavailableproducts
Cloprostenol (Estrumate and Planate, Schering-
Pharmacologicalaction
Plough Animal Health,Harefield;Cyclix and
Sincetestosteroneisinvolvedincontrollinglibido
Cyclix porcine,Intervet UKLtd,Milton Keynes).
For use in cattle, sheep,pigs,horses and goats.
inthemaleitisusedto improveanydeficiency
thatmightbepresent,althoughitmustbestressed
Dinoprost (Lutalyse,Pfizer,Sandwich, Kent);Enzaprost,
thatlibido andsexual behaviour arecomplexand
CEVA Chesham). For use in cattle, sheep, pigs,
not just a reflection of endogenous androgens;
horses, goats and dogs.
therefore,theresultsofsuchtherapywillusually
Luprostiol （Prosolvin,Intervet UK Ltd,Milton
be disappointing.Androgens have anabolic effects
Keynes).For use in cattle,sheep,pigs,horses and
and can be used to treat debilitated animals. They
goats,
have been used to postpone oestrus in bitches
and overcome some of thebehavioural problems
Pharmacological action
associated with pseudopregnancy in bitches, and
reverse feminization associated with Sertoli cell
PGF and analogues are potent luteolytic agents,
tumours.
exceptinthebichandcat.Theyplayaroleinovulation,
parturition andgametetransport,inthelatter two
byvirtueoftheireffectonthesmoothmuscleofthe
Doserate
genital tract. They have a short biological half-life
0.05-0.1ml/kg s.c.ori.m.in the dog and cat.
because9o%ofprostaglandins aremetabolizedat
onepassagethrough thepulmonarycirculation.
 Anti-androgens
Indications
Cattle:
These substances are progestogens and are used to
·synchronization of oestrus in cows and heifers
counteractthebehaviouralactionsofendogenous
treatment of non-observed oestrus
androgens.
·induction of calving
·inducing abortion and expulsion of mummified
Commercially availableproducts
calves
Delmadinone acetate（Tardak,Pfizer,Sandwich)
·treatment of pyometra
901
Appendix
treatment ofendometritis
Commercially available products
treatmentofluteal(luteinized)cysts
Melatonin implit(Regulin,Ceva,Chesham)
Horse:
·inducing abortion before 35 days
Indications
·treatment of a persistent luteal phase
Advancing the onsei of normal cyclical ovarian activ-
·induction of foaling
ity in pure and cross-bred lowland breeds of sheep
hasten return to oestrus if serviceismissed
so that early lambing occurs.
·hastenreturn to oestrus after thefoal heat
Doserateand treatmentregimen
planningthetimeofoestrusfor efficientuse of
stallion or AI.
One implant（18mg of melatonin) per ewe
Sheep and goat:
inserted subcutaneously on theouter aspectof
synchronization of oestrus
thebaseofthe ear.The earliest time ofuseof
·inducing early abortion in sheep
implantsisdeterminedbythebreedofthieewe;
details shiould bechecked against themanufactur-
·treating pseudopregnancy in goats.
er's instructions.It can also be used in goats.It is
Pig:
critical to ensure that ewes(and does)areout of
·induction of farrowing.
sight,soundand smell oframs(and bucks) forat
Dog:
least7daysbeforeand atleast30days after the
implant is inserted.
·treatment of open pyometra in the bitch (dino-
prost and cloprostenol,usewith care)
Prolactin antagonists
Dose rate
Cabergoline (Galastop, Ceva UK, Chesham).A
viscous,non-aqueous solution coniaining 50mg/
·Cloprostenol:Cattle, 500g:horse, 12.5-500g;
ml cabergoline. It is a long-acting prolactin inhib-
sheep and goats,125-250g:pig,350g.All i.m.
itor that,becauseoftherole ofthis hormonein
Luprostiol:Cattle,15mg:horse,7.5mg;sheep and
initiating the signs of pregnancy and overt signs of
goats, 7.5 mg; pigs, 7.5mg
pseudopregnancy,can cause their reversal in the
·Dinoprost: Cattle, 25-35mg; horse, 5mg; pig
bitch.
10mg: sheep, 6-8mg; dog, 0.25-0.5mg/kg.All
i.m.
Indications
Treatmentofovertpseudopregnancyinthebitch
Other hormones and related
orally at a dose rate of 0.1 ml/kg daily for 4-6 con-
substances
secutive days.ltissometimessuccessfulin suppress-
ing lactation in goats.
Melatonin
Melatonin,an indoleamine, is produced by the
Vaccines
pineal gland. Its level of secretion is influenced by
thephotoperiod,with reducing day length stim-
Equine herpesvirus (EHV)
ulating,and increasing day length inhibiting,its
infections
secretion.Melatonin modulates,either directly or
indirectly,the frequency of GnRH secretion from
Duvaxyn EHV1,4 （Fort Dodge Animal Hlealth)
thehypothalamus,thus influencingthesecretionof
Southampton,Hampshire).Aninactivated aqueous
gonadotrophins and cyclical ovarian activity.
suspension of EHV-1 and EHV-4 for the vaccination
902
Hormones, related substances and vaccines used in reproduction
of healthy pregnant mares to prevent infection that
virus, preferably given intranasally but can also be
might result in abortion, or in contact mares. As
given by intraimuscular injection.
an aid in the prevention of aborion due to EHV-1,
BayovacIBR-Marker Inactivatum,inactivatedvirus type
pregnant mares should be vaccinated during the
1, and Bayovac IBR-Marker Vivum, live virus type 1
5th, 7th and 9th month of gestation with a sin-
(Bayer plc,Newbury, Berkshire).
gle injection together with in-contact maiden and
barren mares
Bovineviraldiarrhoeavirus(BVDV)
Bovidec (Novartis, Litlington, Royston, Herts). An
Equine viral arteritis infection
inactivated non-cytopathogenic strain of BVDV,
Artervac(Fort DodgeAnimal Health, Southampton).
administered s.c.
An inactivated SPoil-adjuvantedvaccineofequuine
Bovilis (Intervet LiK Ltd, Milton Keynes). An inacti-
arteritis virus (EAV) Bucyrus strain.For the active
vated cytopathogenic strain C86 administeredi.m
immunizationofhorseandponiesfrom9monthsof
age to reduce the clinical signs and shedding of virus
Ovine enzootic abortion
after infection. Immunity develops 3 weeks after the
(chlamydophiliosis)
second injection and lasts for 6months.Musi not be
used in pregnant mares and ailing animals.
Enzovax (lntervet UK Ltd, Milton Keynes).A live
attenuated 1B strain of Chilanydophila abortus.Ewe
lambs intended for breeding should be vaccinated
Leptospira hardjo
from 5 months of age. Shearlings and older ewes
Leptavoid-H
I(Schering-Plough Animal Health,
should bevaccinated during the 4 months before
Hlarefield).Formol-lilled cultures of Leptospira
tupping. May nor prevent abortion in infected
ewes.
this organism. The primary course of immuniza
Cevac (Ceva UK, Chesham).A live attenuated 1B
tion involves two subcutaneous injections,with
strain of Chlamydopiila aborius. Administered as
aninterval of at least 4 weeks before and not more
for Enzovax above.
than 6 weeks after the main season of theyear for
Mydiavac (Novartis, Litlington, Royston). An inacti
transmission of the disease. Thereafter, an annual
vated strain.of Clilanydophilaabortus,administered
booster can be given at aboui the same time of
the year.
by i.m.injection in the neck 10-12cm in front of
the shoulder.Ewes and shearlings should receivc
Spirovac (Pfizer, Sandwich). Inactivated Leptospira
the primary vaccination 1 month before tup-
borgpetersenii serovar hardjo type hardjobovis.Two
ping or 4 weelks after the ram has been removed.
subcutaneous injections witha 4-6 week inter-
Booster 771 days after primary.
val from 4 weeks of age with a repeat single dose
annual booster.
Ovinetoxoplasmosis
Toxovax (Interveu UK Ltd, Milton Keynes).Live, con-
Bovine para-influenza virus (PI3)
centrated aqueous vaccine containing tachyzoites of
and infectious bovine rhinotracheitis
ihe S48 strain ofToxoplasma gondi.
(IBR)1
Imuresp (Pfizer, Sandwich, Kent).Freeze-dried live
Porcine parvovirus
strain of Pi3 virus administered intranasally.
Suvaxyn Parvo (Fort Dodge,Southampton).An
Tracherine(Pfizer,Sandwicli,Kent).Freeze-dried live
inactivated adjuvanted liquid vaccine prepared from
strain of IBR virus for intranasal administration.
porcine parvovirus grown on porcine tissue. Gilts
Bovilis IBR and Bovilis IBR Marker (Intervet UI Ltd,
shouldreceiveprimaryvaccine from 6monihsof
Milton Keynes). A living, avirulent strain of 1BR
age and 2-8weeks beforefirst servicewitha booster
903
Appendix
afterfarrowingandatleast 2weeksbeforeservice.
Porcillis PRRS (Intervet UK Ltd, Milton Keynes).
Sows shouldbevaccinated atleast2weelsbefore
Prepared fromJive freeze-dried PRRSvirus strain
service.Boars should receive theirfirst dose at 6-7
DV.
months of age, followed by a booster 6 months
Progressis (Merial,Harlow,Essex).Prepared from
laterandthen annually.Acombinedvaccinewith
inactivatedPRRSvirus.
Erysipelothrie rhusiopathiaeis alsoavailableasSuvaxyn
Parvo/E (Fort Dodge, Southampton).
Porcine reproductive and respiratory
syndrome (PRRS)
Ingelvac PRRS KV （Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd,
Bracknell).Prepared from inactivated PRRSvirus
strain P120.
904
Index
Notes: subheadings ai the top of
Abdominal palpation
pyrexia-induced,490
each list apply generally, with refer-
pregnancy, 111-12, 117
retained fetal membranes,
ences applicable to individual species
pyometra in bitch, 659-61
421
underneath. Page numbers in italics
Abdominal wall, ventral hernia.
retained fetus.233
refer to tables or figures.
241-2
storms,490, 494,500
Aberdeen Angus, induction of
viral agents,503-10
calving,164
buffalo,828-9,833
A
Aboried material
camelids,814,816
Aanes technique, perineal
bovine herpesvirus-1, 508
canine
reconstruction,3l1-12
bovineviral diarrhoea,504-5
habitual,654-5
Abdominal ballottement see
brucellosis,484
infectious, 655-7
Ballottement,abdominal
rampylobacteriosis, 48l,568,569
caprine
Abdominal contractions (straining),
Chiamydophila abortus,565
habitual,577
173,174
foothill abortion,512
infectious,577-80
as cause of uterine prolapse.
neosporosis, 501-2
stress-induced,577
319-20
samples for examination,524,
equine,593-608
coordinating traction with,
525,593
infectious,595-608
270,282
Abortion, 141
investigation，593,594
dystocia,223,224
induced seeTermination of
non-infectious,594-5
cpicdural anaesthesia abolishing.
pregnancy
feline
271
bovine
habitual, 671
calving, 181
bacterial agents, 477-92
infectious, 671-2
farrowing,183
caesarean operation for late,
ovine
foaling, 178
352
enzootic,494,562-6
kiltening, 186
chlamydial agents, 494-5
infectious,562-75
whelping,185,186,383-4,385
definition, 524
non-infectious,561
Abdominal distension
foothill (epiz0otic),494,
porcine,infectious,639,640-1
hydrops of fetal sacs, 1412
511-12
see also Embryonic/fetal loss
pregnant bitch,110
fungal agents (mycotic
Abscesses
Abdominal incisions
abortion).510-11
ovarian,mare,623
caesarean operation
infectious causes, 476-512
peripenile, bull, 722
bitch,386
investigation of cause, 524-5
Absidin spp.,510
COw,355,361-2,363,364
mycoplasmas and
Acardiac monster, 133
horse,369
ureaplasmas,492-3
Accessory glands, male, 685, 6956
sow,373
outbreaks,525
examination,711
closure,361,362,364,370-1
pratozoal agenis, 495-502
lesions affecting fertility,748-50
905
Index
Accessory limbs,134,135
Adrenaline(epinephrine)
Allylurenbolone sce Altrenogest
Accessory tails,sperm,755,756
epidural anaesthesia,272
Alpaca,809
Acepromazine,271,605
fetal secretion,163
see alsoCamelidae
s
Adrenocorticourophichormone(ACTH)
Altrenogest (allyltrenbolone)
Achondroplastic calves (bulldog calf
inductionofparturition,164-5
preparations,899-900
deformity).134,136
initiationofparturition,155
gilt or sow,47-8
caesarean operation,350
Aeromons spp.492
infertility/subfertility,643,644
dropsy,141,143
Aflatoxicosis,850
oocyte/embryo transfer,863
dystocia,217
African swine fever,794
mare,45
inheritance,767
Afterbirth
infertility/subfertility,584-5,
Achondroplastic dog breeds
delivery,175,176,178,181
592,598,616
dystocia,220,221
ingestion,175, 181
oocyte/embryo 1ransfer,862
fetomaternal disproportion,262
see alsoFetal membranes;Placenta
Amino acids,sulphur-containing461
pelvic consiriction,232
Agalactia
Aminoglycosides,416
Acidosis,neonatal,188-9
leptospirosis,488,573
Ammoniametabolism,455-6
Acrosome,685,686,695
sows,317,637
Amnion,62-3,71-2
defects,753,754
Age
covering newborn,1745
development, 694
cystic ovarian disease and,442
second stage of labour,173
Acrosomereaction,685
epo
Amniotic Huid,70,71
invitroassessment,760
dystocia and,213,232
excessive quantity,141
ACTH sceAdrenocorticotrophic
effects on fertility,646-7
Amniotic plaques,72
hormone
embryonicloss and,138,591
Amnioticvesicle,transrectal
Actinobacillusactinoides,748
fetomaternaldisproportion
palpation,98
Actinobacillus seninis-Histophilus
and,349
Amorphus globosus,133
somi group.746-7
uterineinvolution and,200
Ampullae, G85,695-6
Actinobacillus suis,644
fetal,calculation,75
examination,711
Aciinomyces pyogenes sce
at first breeding,449,641
lesions affecting fertility,750
Arcanobacteriun pyogenes
at puberty in females,4
massage in bull,713
Actinomycosisofprepuce,730
of sire,708-9
Amputate(otter)calf,134,136
Activin
Ageing
Anaemiafraesareanpratn,
femalereproduction,8
perineal and vulvar changes in
370
male reproduction,691,692
mare,608-9
Anaerobes
Activity monitors,oestrus detection
testicular degeneration,741
endometritisin mare,599
in cows,437
Aggressivebehaviour
postpartum uterus,199,201
Acute-phase proteins,serum
dam,protecting newbon,190,388
vagina ofnormal bitch,655
postpartum tise,196,202
males,700,709
Anaesthesia
pregnancy in bitch,115
small mammals,844,846,847
caesarean operation
Adenocarcinoma
Aglepristone,900
bitch,385-6
cervix,405
induction of parturition,167
farmamals5347
ovarian,668
pyometra,662
mare,369
uterus,404-5
termination of pregnancy,118,119
manipulativevaginal delivery,
Adhesions
Al seeArtificialinsemination
266,271-4
after caesarean operation,365-6
Akabane virus,124,350,782
seealso Epidural anaesthesia
387,620
Albumin,plasma,462
Anaplsmaphagocytopilum574
cervical,613
Allantoamnion,63
Anasarca,fetal,136,143,341,350
ovariobursal,402-4
Allantochorion(chorioallantois),63
Androgen-binding protein (ABP),
penile,730
cow,transrectal palpation,98
690, 691
peripenile,722,723
mare,66,67
Androgenized steers/cows,oestrus
preputial,731-2
pig.72
detection,437-8
uerine,405,616
ruminants,65,71-2
Androgens, 690
Adrenal glands,fetal
Allantochorionicsac,64
behavioural functions,700
initiation ofparturition,
rupture in labour,173
developing male.688
155,160
separation and delivery,175
therapy, 901
maturation beforebirth,163
Allantoic fluid,70,71
bitch.54
see also Hypothalamic-
excessive quantity,141-3
tumours secreting.397
pituitary-adrenal axis
Allanicis,63,64
see also Testoslerone
906
Index
Androhep diluent, 790,791
Antibiotics
semen preparation for,767-9
Androstenedione, immunization
brucellosis,656
sexed semen,774
against,55
caesarean operation,354,359-61,
sire selection,705-6,765-6
Anencephaly,141,350
362-3,371
technician-based services,
Anruploidy.126-7
campylohacteriosis,482
781,794
Angiosis,uterine,G19
chlamydial infections, 495
buffalo,831-2
Angora goats
Chlaniydophila aborus,565
camelids.S20-1
abortion,577
endometritis,416-17, 602
cats, 802
cryptorchidism,739
fetotomy,343
cattle see umder Catle
Akylosedcalves,303,305,341,350
I-listopilus somni,491
dogs, 799-802
Anoestrus, 6
mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas,
goats see umder Goats
anovulatory seeAnovulatory
493
horses see umder Horses
anoestrus
placentifis in mare,598
pigs see umder Pigs
seasonal see Seasonal infertility/
puerperal meuritis,410-11
sheep see under Sheep
anoestrus
pyomrira,38l,418
small mammals,839
bitch, 35,36,37
retained fetal membranes,425,628
Artificial vagina (AV)
prolonged, 650-2
semen diluents.768-9
boat,716
buffalo,832
seminal vesiculitis,749
buffalo,831
cow,425-49
trichomoniasis,499
bull, 713,714-15
anovulatory 425-31
uterine infections in pigs, 644
camelids, 821
causes,425
Anti-mallerian hormone (AMH),
dog,717
confirming postpartum, 541
688
ram,716
cystic ovarian disease, 446
Antioxidants,460,46!
stallion, 715
diagnosis of cause,522
senien cryopreservation,771.792
Artiodactyla,penis,699-700
failure to observe oestrs,
separalion of fetal membranes
Ascites,fetal,143,341,350
431-9
and, 420
Aspergillus fmigatus,510,511
pastoral dairy herd,544-555
Antiprogestogens, 900
Aspergillus spp. equine placentitis.598
ewe.560
seealso Aglepristonc
Assisted reproductive technologies
Arabian camel, 809
(AR1], 855-87
mare,586
see aiso Camelidae
biosecurity precautions, 886-7
lactational,587-8
Arcanobacterium pyogenes
definition,855
winter see Seasonal infertility/
cow
embryo micromanipulation.
anoestrus, mare
cervicitis,405
881-4
queen cat,40-41
infertility and,492,524,748
embryo recovery/transfer, S63-70
prolonged, 668-9, 671
postparumterus,198-9,
historical milestones,855-6
sow,G37
409-10
in vitro embryo production,
see also Oestrus induction
pyometra,417
872-6
Anogenital distance,rodents,
retained fetal membranes,421
in-vivo versns in-vitro-produced
836,837
tusnbai ui spuan
embryos, 876-8
Anovulatory an10estrus, cow, 425-31
uterine tube infections, 402
large offspring syndrome, 885-6
clinical findings,426
goat,578
oocyte/embryo cryopreservation,
diagnosis, 523
sheep fetopathies,563
878-81
incidence, 427
Areolae, 72
ovum pickup/oocyte transfer,
pathogenesis, 427-8
Arginine vasopressin (AVP),initia-
870-2
predisposing factors,426-7
tion of parturition,155
practical uses,857-8
treatment,428-31
ART'seeAssisted reproductive
superovulation regimens,858-63
Anterior (longitudinal) presentation,
technologies
see also Artificial insemination;
263
Artervac, 596-7, 903
Embryo transfer;individual
caesarean operation,356-8
Arthrogryposis,134,136
species
positional defecis,297-8
caesarean operation,350,351
Atropine,386
postural defects of.286-93
Artificial inscmination(Al),765-802
Aujeszky's disease, 639,794
fetotomy,336-7
advantages, 765-G
Autumnal transition, mare oestrous
subcutaneous fetotomy, 329-31
disadvantages, 766-7
cycle,584
total fetotomy,332-6
extending sperm life-span,
AV sce Artificial vagina
Anthelminthics,embryonic loss,138
769-74
Ayrshire calfoedematous,134,136
Anti-androgens, 901
infectious disease transmission,775
Azaperone,245,372
907
Index
Beef cattle
insemination,800-2
B
age of first calving,449
ovariesseenderOvaries
Bacillus licheniformis
anovulatory anoestrus,428
ovulationseeunder Ovulation
COW,199,477
campylobacteriosis,477,482
parturition see Whelping
abortion,491,524
dystocia,209-10
placenta,68,69
ovine abortion,563
fertilit/inility93394452
pregnancy,109-15
Back lesions,inpaired mounting
economics.517
pseudopregnancy,40
719,720
suckler herdmanagement,
pubery,4,650-1
Bacterialcontamination
555-6
puerperium,204
postpartum uterus,194
oestrus synchronization,50-1
relaxin,109,115,161
effecton folliculogenesis,198
postparturient prolapse of
superfecundation,143-4
factors affecting.201
literus,319
uterine torsion,241
mechanisms ofelimination,
prevention of dystocia,258
vagina see uner Vagina
199-200
puerperium,197,200,201
vaginalhyperplasia/prolapse,146
buffalo,830-1
servicetesting ofbulls712
152,649
cow,198-200,407,409-10
side of pregnancy, 93
Blackleg,complicating caesarean
eweanddoegoat,03,562
time of parturition,177
operation,366
mare,201-2
iwinning rates, 93
Bladder
third-degree perineal defects.
vaginal prolapse,148-9
eversion,perineal injuries,310-11
308-10
Behavioural problemsmare,24
pelvicobstructionby distended
mare uterus,599
Belgian Blue cattle
235
Bacterial infections
calf birth weight,249
prolapse,234,235,315,316
[ransmissiblein semen,782,
dystocia,213-14,217,232
protrusion,234,235,315
787-8,794,799
pelvimetry.283
Blanchard’scanehook,267,268
canine infertility,655-6
Benesch head snare,269
Blastocyst,61,62
coW
Benzatropine mesylate,734
ani-luteolytic signal,76.77
fetal emphysema,351
Beta-adrenergic agents, delay of
hatching,G1
inferility/subfertility,477-92
parturition,168
in-vivo-recovered,865,867
postpartum.406,407-18
Beta-blockers,acceleration of farrow-
rapid elongation,62,68
repeatbreeder syndrome,465
ing,168
Blocd sampling subfertile gilts and
retained fetal membranes,421
Betamethasone,induction of parturi
s0ws,635
feline abortion,671,672
tion,167
Blood-testis barrier,692
goat abortion,577-9,580
Bicornual gestation,mare,72,264
Blood transfusion,postpartum
mare
Bicornual type of transverse presen-
haemorrhage307,366,388
abortion,597-8
tation,300-1
Bluetongue
endometritis,599-602
Bile acids,462
camelids,S16
ovineabortion,562-6,568-72,
Billy goat seeBuck goat
cattle,508-9
573-4
Birth canal sceFemalegenital tract
5
porcine infertility/subfertility.
Birth intervals
sheep.574-5
640-1
puppies,186,384
Blue tonguevirus（BTV),124,350,
Bacteroidespostparlum uterus,
pigleis,183
574-5
409-10
Birth weight
transmission in semen,782
Bacteroidesfragilisequine
calf see Calf,birth weight
Boar
endometritis,599
lamb.259-60
accessory glands, 685, 696
Bacteroidesmelaninogenicus,
puppy,262
breeding soundness examination,
postpartum uterus,409
piglet,261
709,711,716-17
Bactrian camel,809
Bitch
brucellosis, 641
see also Camelidae
corpus luleum,10,11,39,109
chrommosomal abnormalities,131
Balanoposthitis.729-31
cyclicalovarian activity,35-40
effectfemalepuberty，5,643
Ballottement,abdominal
dystocia seeuncler Dystocia
immunocastration,54-55
cow,94-5
embryonic/fetal loss,138,139
infertility
ewe,106
fetal membranes,62
erecile failure,723
mare,84
genital surgery37689
festicular disorders,739
Barbiturates,386
infertility/subfertility.646,
unwillingness to copulate,719
BayovacIBR-Marker vaccines,903
G47-67
mating behaviour,701-2
Beacon heat mount detector,435-6
inguinal hernia,242-3
odour,33
908
Index
Boar(continmted)
Bovine placental lactogen.88
Breeding soundness examination,
penis,699-700
Bovine pregnancy-associated glyco-
males,706-17
reproductive organs681-2
proteins(bPAGs),95-6
generalexamination,708-9
role in sowmanagement,642-3
Bovine pregnancy-specificproteins B
genital tract examination,709-11
selection forAl,790,792
(bPSP-Bs),95-6
history-taking,707-8
semen
Bovine seminalplasma proteins
identification,706-7
collection,716-17,790
(BSP).770
observation of matingbehaviour/
disease testing for Al,782
coius,711-13
normal characteristics,750
(BSE),782
outcomes,706
spermmicroencapsulation.774
Bovine viral diarrhoea(BVD),477,
semen collection.713-17
slorage forAl,768,770,771,
503-6
semen examination,717,759
790-2
aetiology and pathogenesis,503
Broad ligament haematoma,307
testicular descent.689
clinical signs,503-4
Bromocriptine,35,40.54
Boar guinea pig 842-3
control,505-6,903
see also Prolactin antagonists
Boar:sow ratio,707
diagnosis,504-5
Brucellaabortus,477,483,577,748
Body condition score(BCS）
transmission by embryos,887
Brcella canis,138,656
sire,709
transmission in semen,782
Brucellamelitensis,483,573,577
cow
Bovine viral diarrhoea virus(BVDV),
Brucellaovs,573,746
beef suckler herds,556
124,503,524
Brcella suis,640
calf birth weight and,255
Border diseasein sheep and,572
Brucellosis
dystocia risk and,256
Brachycephalic dogs
orchitis,742
fertility and,451-2
dystocia,220,232
catle,483-6,748,749
pastoral dairying,544
electivecaesarean operation385
aetiology and pathogenesis.
Body conformation
Breast-head posture,277,289
483-4
sire,709
Breech presentation
clinical signs,484
calf,ease ofcalving,248,255-
uterinerupture,314
control,476,485-6
Body weight
calf,295-6
diagn0sis,484-5,524
loss,mares,608
foal,296
dogs,656
pregnant bitch,110,111
lamb/lkid,296
goats,577
puberty in heifers,449
puppy,275,278
pigs,640-1
sires,709
Breed
sheep,573,746,787
Bone morphogenetic proteins
differencesseeunderindividual
BTS diluent,790,791,792
(BMP),687,692
species
Bubaius bubalis sce Buffalo
Border disease
rapid dissemination of new765-6
Buck goat
goats,580
Breeding
penis,699-700
sheep,124,572
age at firsi,449,641
semen
Bos ndicusfolliculogenesis23
assisted reproductive technolo-
collection and storage, 788-9
Bovidec,903
gies,857
disease testing for Al,782
Bovilis,903
mare,genital ract rauma,
see also Goats
Bovilis IBR(Marker),903
612,613
Buckrabbit
Bovine enteroviruses(BEV)
small mammals839,840
anatomy,840-1
bull,741,742,748
see also Mating
miating behaviour,841-2
cow,509-10
Breeding season,3
sexing.837,838
Bovine epizooticabortion(foothill
hormonal manipulation,54-5
see also Rabbits
abortion),494,511-12
non-hormonal manipulation,42-3
Buffalo.S24-34
Bovine herpesvirus-1 (IBR-IPV),
regulation of onset,7
artificial insemination,831-2
477,506-8,524
beef suckler herds,556
assistedreproductivetechnologies,
bull,507,729-30.741,748
buffalo,825
834
cow,506,507,524
camelids,810
chromosomenumber,129,824
transmissionin semen,782
goat,32
female,824-31
vaccination,508,903
horse,12,582
infertility.832-3
Bovineimmunodeficiency virus,782
pastoral dairy herds,546-8
oestrous cycle,825-7
Bovine para-influenza virus(PI3)
pig,32
parturition,828-30
and infectious bovine
sheep,30
pregnancy,827-8
rhinotracheitis(IBR)1
seealsoSeasonalinfertility/
puberty,825
vaccine,903
anoestrus
puerperium,830-1
606
Index
Buffalo(continued)
impaired mounting ability.
C
fertility,832,33-4
719-720
male
inexperience/inmaturity,719
Cabergoline,902
infertility,833
penile/preputial lesions,
oestrous cyclemanipulation,35,54
reproduction,831-2
724-6,727-30,731-2
pseudopregnancy,40
semen,831,832
testicular conditions,740,
pyometra,662
Buffering,semen,768,769
741-3,744-5,758
termination of pregnancy118-19
Buffy coat samples,bovineviral
mating behaviour,700,701
see also Prolactin antagonists
diarrhoeavirus,505
natural service using,438
Cache valley virus,124
Bahne’s method,vaginal prolapse,
penis,699-700
Caesarean operation,347-73
148,150-1
deviations,724-6,727
schistosomareflexus,305,350
Bulbocavernosus muscle,682
examination,709
us fetotomy,326-7,347
Bulbospangiosus muscle,698-9
fibropapillomas,735-6
bitch,382-9
Bulbourethralglands,682,685,695-6
rupture,721-3
anaesthesia,385-6
examination,711
vascular anatomy.697
indications,230-1,384-5
camelids,810
preputial scrapings,481,498
outcomes,389
Bull
puberty.708
ovariohysterectomy with,
accessoryglands685,G95-6
reproductive system anatomy
376,387
beefsuckler herds,556
681,682,684
postoperative management,
breeding soundness examination,
selection,765-6
388-9
708,709,711-15,759
ease ofcalving,216,258
surgical technique,386-8
ejaculation,698
low calf birth weight,248-50,
camelids,817
female co-twins,131,401
283
cow,347-67
infections,746-7
semen
anaesthesia,353-4
balanoposthitis,729-30
collection,713-15,775
choice of approach/
blue tongue virus,509
disease testing for Al.782
positioning 352
bovine herpesvirus-l infec-
examinalion,750,751
complications,365-6
tion,507,729-30,741,748
handlingfor insemination,
emphysematous fetu5,351,
bovineviraldiarrhoea,504,505
777,778
363-5
brucellosis,483
quality standards,759
fertility after,367
campylobacteriosis,478,480,
sperm abnormaliies,754,756
indications,226-7,347-52
481-2,483
sperm microencapsulation,
lateralobliqueapproach,2
catarrhal bovine vaginitis,510
774
left paralumbar fossa
Chlanydophila aborus,494
storage,770,771,775-7
approach,355-61
epivag,509
seealso Cattleartificial
operativeechnique,354-62
Histophis somm,491,747
insemination
postoperative care,362-3
Mycoplasn infections,492
service testing,712-13
postoperative ferility,367
orchitis,742-3
spermatogenesis,692,693
preoperative preparation,354
seminalvesiculitis,748-9
spermatozoa,691-695
restraint and sedation.353
testicular degeneration,741-2
sperm granuloma,747
right paralumbarapproach,362
transmissible genital fibropap-
sweeper,pastoral dairy herd,
success rates,365
illomas,510
546,548
uterine torsion.239,349,355
trichomoniasis,495,496,
teaser
horse,368-73
498,499
oestrus deteclion,437-8
anaesthesia,369
Ureaplasma,493
surgicalpreparation,373-4,
indications,369
vesicular glands748
374
postoperative fertility,372
infertility,523
testicular descent,689
postoperative management,371
accessory gland lesions,748
testicularneoplasia,745
retainedfetal membranes,626
ageing effects,708
Bull:cow ratio,707
successrates,371-2
aplasia ofmesonephric ducts,
Bulldogcalf deformityseeAchondro-
surgical technique,369-71
748
plastic calves
pig,372-3
chromosomal abnormaliies,
Buserelin,446,895
queen cat,389
130-1
BUSgp60,788
sheep/goat,367-8
diagnosis scheme,718
Butorphanol,caesarean operation,
Calcium
erectile failure,721-3,724,725
372
deficiency see Hypocalcaemia
hacmospermia,738
Bultpresentation seeVertexposture
measurements,462
910
Index
Calcium borogluconate
nutrition altime of,452,543-5
Camels,809
after caesarean operation.362
oxytocin release,170
see also Camelidae
fetotomy,331,343
pastoral dairy cows,545-7
Cammerer's torsion fork,267,268
incomplete cervical dilatation, 233
pattern
Campylobocter coii, 478
puerperal meuritis,411
beef suckler herds,556
Campylobacter fetns,477-8
uterine inertia,244,245,246
oestrus detection and,432-3
culture,481
uterine prolapse321,322
pastoral dairy herds, 545-5
polymcrase chain reaction,482
Calf
predicting ease of, 216
serological tests,481-2
birth,181,182
puerperium,194-201
Campylobacter feus fetus (CFF), 478,
birth weight. 247-55
second stage oflabour, 173, 174,
483,568,579
dystocia risk,213,214,248
181,182
Campylobacter fetus venerealis (CFV).
factors affecting, 248-55
third stage oflabour,175,181
478,481-2
induction of calvingto
timing, 177
Campylobacter lryointestinalis.478
reduce,164
traction,269-70
Campylobacteriosis
maternal weight and, 257
Calving aids, 267, 268
bovine gastrointestinal, 483
pelvic area ratio. 216,248,257
traction using,282-3
bovine venereal,477-83,524
uterine torsion and,236
tractive forces,269,270
actiology, 477-8
conformation, ease of calving
Calving-conception interval (CCI),
bull,478,480, 481-2,483
and,248,255-6
198,527
clinical signs, 480
congenitalabnormalities,133-6
after caesarean operation,367
control,476,482.782-3
congenital neosporosis, 500,502
cost ofincreased,394-5
cow, 478-80
disposition during parturition, 173
endometritis and,413-14
diagnosis,481-2
fetal age calculation. 75
retained fetal membranes and,423
trends in frequency, 477
freemartin, 401
Calving index (Cl), 526-7
goats,578,579
giant see Large offspring syndrome
Calving interval, 526-7
ovine abortion,563,568-9
mortaliry
Calving jack, 267, 268
Campylobacter jejui,478,579
caesarean operation, 365
Calving-to-first-service interval,
Campylobacter sputorum,478
dystocia-related,209-10
526,527
Candida spp.
newborn,187-90
Camelidae, 809-23
abortion,510,598
acidosis,188-9
artificialinsemination.820-1
cquine endometritis,602
after caesarean delivery 362
breeding season, 810
Canine adenovirus, G57
injuries,189
chromosomenumbet,129,809
Canine distemper virus,657,743
nutritional deficiencies,189-90
dystocia,817,819
Canine herpes virus(CHV),138,
onset of respiration, 1878
female,811-18
139,656-7
resuscitation,188
genital tact, 811
Canine parvovirus, 657
thermoregulation,189
infertility, 818-19
Cannibalism ofyoung,845,847,850
nutrition during rearing. 449-50
oestrous cycle,812
Carazolol, arreleration of farrowing.
ovulation,813-14
168
birth weight and,249,250,251
parurition,817-18
Carbetocin,604,897-8
dystocia risk and, 213, 214
posipariurient brceding,818
β-Carotcne,459-60
prenatal determination, 101-2
pregnancy,814-16
antioxidant activity, 460, 4G1
siillbirths,209-10,216
puerperium,817-18
cystic ovarian disease and,442
sce also Heifer
synchronizing follicular
effect on fertility,43,460
Calmodulin,169,244
activity,812-13
emhryonic loss and,137
Calving. 178-81
fertility,814
Carpal flexion posture
beef sucller herds, 556
hybridization, 809
feiotomy technique,336
care during,176
infertility, 818-20
calf.28G,287
complications, 306-18, 319-22
male
foal, 290
dystocia see Dystocia, cow
infertility,819-20
lamb/kid,292-3
pastoral dairying,545-7
reproductive system, 810-11
Caruncles see Uterine caruncles
delaying onset, 168
mating behaviour/copulation, 813
Caslick index, 609
first, optimum age, 449
newborn care, 817
Caslick's vulvoplasty operation, 60910
frst stnge oflabour,171,172,181
puberty and sexual maturity, 810
perineal injuries after,308-9
induction,164-5
restraint for examination, 810
procedure, 610
pastoral dairying,546
superovulation and embryo
repair after parturition,307
initiation,156-7,159
transfer,821-3
Roberis's modification,152
911
Index
Catarrhal bovine vaginitis, 509-10
'sai nenaadns
Cervical dilatation
Catgut, caesarean operation,365-6
859-61
incomplete intrapartum,219,232-4
Cation-anion balance,dietary
breed differences
caesarean operation,349
(DCAD),544
anovulatory anoestrus,426
see also Ringwomb
Cats
cystic 0varian disease, 442
intrapartum, 171
artificial insemination,802
dystocia,213-14,217,248-50
oestrous mare.613
breed diffrences, dystocia, 221
gestation length, 253
Cervical folds,prolapse,405
chromosomal abnormalities,131-2
postpartum ovarian rebound,
Cervical mucus
chromosome number, 129
200
cyclical changes, 22. 667
embryonic development, Gl.
twinning rates, 93
sperm penetration test,760
62,68
chromosomal abnormalities, 128,
Cervical plug,canelids, 814
inherited defecis, 128
130-1,519
Cervical polyps, 613
karyotype, 129
chromosome number, 129
Cervical section,uterine torsion,239
mating behaviour,41-2,702
cloning,882-3
Cervical star, equine allantochorion,
teratogens,133
einbryonic development,61,62,
67.593
toxoplasmosis,566,568,672
Cervical swabs, endometritis,
sce also Kittens; Queen cat;
herd fertility, 517-57
412-13,414
Tom cat
beef suckler herds,556
Cervical tumours, 405,406
Cautle
fertilization failure/embryonic
Cervicitis
artificial insemination (Al).765,
loss, 519-20
puerperal,405
775-83
investigating individual subfer-
mare,613
alternative methods,781
tilecow,520-5
porcine.640
cnbryonic loss and, 137
normal expectations,518
Cervicotubular contractions,172
incorrect timing, 523, 524
see also Dairy herd fertility;
Cervicovaginal secretion,bitch,667
infectious disease control,395,
Pastoral dairy herd
Cervix
482,493,498,781-3
herdrecord sheet,532,535
adhesions, 613
infectious disease transmis-
herd size,oestrus detection and,
congenital abnormalities, 235,
sion,776,782
432-3
398-9
insemination,777-81
inherited defects,125
cysts,614
management.781
mating behaviour, 22, 701
fhrosis, 405, 613
oestruscontrol,45,50-2,53-4
sce nso Beef cattle; Bull; Calf
first stage of labour, 171
oestrus delection,21,438-9
Cow; Dairy cows;Heifer;
injuries, 307, 613
optimum timing439,777-8
specifie breeds
lesions causing infertility,405,
pastoral dairying,546, 548
Cattle Information Service (CIS), 535
G12-14
poor technique/semen qualiy.
Caudal epidural anaesthesia
oestrous cycle-related changes, 6
523
cervical/vaginal prolapse,148,150
partial duplication,235,399,399
retreat from, 438
manipulative delivery,22),272-3
postpartum involution,195,818
semen collection and storage.
perineal reconstruction,311
relaxin actions162
775-7
puerperal metritis,411
buffalo.827
standard (rectovaginal)
uterine prolapse,321, 322,324
camelids, 812
method,778-81
see also Epidural anaesthesia
cow,22,99
assistedreproductive teclinologies,
Cavy see Guinea pig
mare,15-18,82,612-13
855-6
Ceffiofur, puerperal metritis, 411
soW,102-3
embryo micromanipulation,
CEM see Contagious equine metritis
Cevac Chlamydophila,565,903
882
Centric fusion ranslocation, 130,
Chains,calving,267,268,329
embryo/oocyte cryopreservation,
131,132
Charolais
878-9.880
Cephapirin,uterine infections
arthrogryposis, 350
embryo recovery and transfer,
416-17,418
induction of calving164,165
863-6
Cervical and vaginal prolapse(CVP),
Chimerism, embryo, 882
embryo sexing and genotyping.
146-52
Chinchilla,837,843-4
886
bitch,146,152.649
postpartum septicaemia,850
in vitro embryo production.
buffalo,828-9
reproduction,840.844
872-3,874
camelids,816
sexing,836-7
in-vivo versus in-vitro-pro-
ewe,146-8,234,561
vaginal smears,839,844
duced embryos, 876,877
caesarean operation,367
Chlamydial infections
ovum pick up, 870-2
treatment,148,149
cattle,494-5.748
practical uses,857,858
gilt/sow,152,153,372
sheep,562-6
912
Index
Chlanydia psittaci494,562
Clitoris
Conception rates see Pregnancy rates
Chilanydophilaabortus
bitch,intersex states648
Conceptus
bovine abortion,494-5
mare,610-11
abnormal development,
enzootic ovine abortion,494,
cxposurc in oestrus,18-19,20
123-44
562-6
infections involving, 599-600,
development, 61-75
goat abortion,578,579
119
rectal palpation. 83
Chlanydophila felis, 672
swabs,599
ultrasonography, 84, 85
Chlauydophila pecorun,494
Cloning, 856, 882-4
see also Blasiocyst: Embryo; Fetus;
Chlorhexidine in dimethyl sulphoxide
large offspring syndrome, 254-5,
Pregnancy
(DMSO),374
885-6
Condition score see Bodycondition
Chorioallantois sce Allantochorion
Cloprostenol, 901-2
score
Chorion,63
endometritis,417. 607
Congenital abnormalities
Chorionic gonadotrophin see Equine
induction ofparturition,165,166
female genital tract,235,
chorionic gonadotrophin;
oestrus synchronization,50
397-401,647-9,667-8
Human chorionic gonado-
pyometra,G62
fetal, 132-9
trophin
termination of pregnancy, 119
pvaries,395-6
Chorioptes bovis,740-1
Closed-circuit television.oestrus
penis,727
Chromosomal abnormalitics,
delection,438
bovineviral diarrhoea virus
126-32
Cloirimazole, 602
infections,504
centric fusion translocations,130,
Cloudburst,576
equine abortion, 595
131,132
Clover pastures
seealso Monsters
deletions, 127-8
cattle grazed on.460
Conjoined fetuses,134,302
incidence, 128
sheep grazed on,149,234,320,
caesarean operation, 351
numerical,126-7
560-1
Connexins, 156,169
reciprocal translocations, 131
see also Oestrogens. high dietary
Conservation, endangered species,
structural, 127-8
intake
857
cats,131-2
Cobalt.456-7,461
Contagious equine metritis (CEM),
cattle,128.130-1,519
Coccidiosis,rabbits,850
592,599-600,611,799
dogs, 132, 648-9,651
Coiled-tail defect, sperm, 755, 756
Contraction-associated proteins
goats,131
Coitus
(CAPs),156,169
horses,128-30,588,591
abnormalities,717-38
Controlled internal drug release
pigs, 128,131
observation, 711-13
(CIDR) device,46,899
sheep,128,131
sce adso Copulation;Mating Servite
canmelids, 812
Chromosomes
Coitus-induced ovulation,7
cOW，45-6,53,54,429
analysis methods,126,129
camelids, 813-14
doe goat, 47
numbers in domestic
cats,41-2,670,674
see also Progesterone-releasing
species,129
rabbits, 841, 842
intravaginal device
CIDR sce Controlled internal drug
Cold shock, spermatozoa,76970
Contusions.birth canal,307-12
release (CIDR) device
Collagen
Cooling.semen,769-70
Cimetidine, 610
postpartum degradation,195,202
Copper
Circo virus (PCV-2),639
detachment of fetal mem-
antioxidant activity,460,461
Clausen's medium, 498
branes,419-20
assessment of status,457,458,
Clenbuterol,898
eodellingfrst stageflabou171
462-3
caesarean operation.354
Collagenase infusion, retained fetal
deficiency, 137, 307,457
delaying parturition,168
membranes,425,628
Copulation, 701-2
dystocia,226,228,234
Comorbid disease see Disease, inter-
failure, sires,720-38
fetotomy,331-2
curreni
camelids, 813, 819
uterine1orsion,238,240
Complement fixation test (CrT)
chinchilla,844
Climate/weaiher
brucellosis,485
guinea pigs, 843
birth weight effects, 250-1,
Chlamydoplilaabortus.565
hamsters.846
253,260
Computerized systems
rabbits,841-2
effects on puerperium,200,201
managing herd fertility,536-541
rats and mice,845
pastoral dairy herd fertility analysis,
sec aso Coirus; Mating
oestrous behaviour and. 434
550-2,552,549-553,554
Copulatory tie, dogs, 36,
onset of puberty and, 5
recording herd fertility,535-6,
700,702
ringwomb and,234
537,538,539
Corkscrewdefect,sperm,756
see also Heat stress;Season ofyear
semen analysis,760
Corkscrew penis,724-6
913
Index
Corpora cavernosa penis(CCP)
Corticotrophin-releasinghormone
pregnancy diagnosis,93-102
abnormal venous drainage,
(CRH).initiation of
puberty,4,5,20
723,724
parturition,155
puerperium,194-201
function inerection,696,697,
Cortisol,fetal
relaxin-like hormone,161-2
698,699,720-1
initiationofparturition,155,156,
repeatbreeder syndrome see
rupture,721-3
159,160,161
Repeat-breedercow
species differences,699,700
role in maturation,156,162-3
superfecundation,144
Corpropamide,188
Corynebacterimrenale,730,748
superovulation,859-G1
Corpus albicans,cow,27,28,29
Cost-effectiveness
teratogenic agents,124
Corpus haemorrhagicum,14,17
milk progesterone assays,5401
uterine torsion,217-18,235-9
Corpus luteum (CL),6,10-12
ovsynch programme,53-54
vagina see underVagina
first,at puberty,5
Costs
venereal campylobacteriosis,
formation,10
cervical and vaginal prolapse in
478-83
ofpregnancy,76
ewes,146
ventral hermia,241-2
initiationofparturition
dystocia,209-12
scealso Cattle;Dairy cows:Heifer
156-7,158,159
endometritis incows,414-15
Cowper'sglands seeBulbourethral
postpartum degeneration,
infertility incows,394-5,517,
glands
203,204
531.532
Cowrecord sheet,532,533-4
prostaglandin sensitivity,50
retained fetal membranes in
Coxiella burneti (Qfever)
regression seeLuteolysis
cows,423
goats,578,580
relaxin secretion,161
Cow
sheep,563,573-4
bitch,10,11,39
abortion seeAbortion,bovine
C-reaclive protein(CRP), serum,
pregnancy,109
'atrisksubfertility due to
pregnant bitch,115
buffalo,826-7
endometritis,413,414
Cremastermuscle,681,683,684
camelids,81l,814
caesarean operation,347-67
Crossiella equi,598
cow,11,24-6,27-8,29
cervical and vaginal prolapse,
Crotethamide,188
anoestrus,426
148-52
Crown-anus length,fetal age
cystic ovarian disease and,
corpus luteum see under Corpus
calculation,75
443,445
luteum
Crown-rump length (CRL),fetal,74,
ovariobursal adhesions,403
cyclical ovarian activity,20-30
75,89
persisten93,198,448,5
dropsy of fetal sacs1413
Crude protein（CP),dietary,effect on
pregnancy,87,88,93
dystocia seeunder Dystocia
fertility,455-6
doe goat,11
embryo collection,863-5
Crus penis,682
ewe,10,11-12,31
embryonic/fetal lossseeunder
Cryopreservation
pregnancy,104,105
Embryonic/fetal loss
embryo,856,878-81
mare,11,13,14-15,18,79,585
embryo transfer, S66
cattle,880
accessory,80-1,586,622
epidural anaesthesia,228,271-2
horse,880-1
persisient,587
fetal fluids,70
pig,881
pregnancy,80-1,82,586
fetal membranes,72-3
sheep and goat,881
secondary,586,622
fetotoy,228-9,280,283,326-43
oocyle,878-80
soW,10,11,34,632
identification,434,532
semen,770-2
Corpus luteum verum (CLV)
infectiousdiseasessee under
new methods,772
cow,88,89
Infectious diseases
thawing.772
mare,81,82
infertility/subfertility see
boar,791-2
Corpus spongiosum penis(CSP),
Infertility/subfertility,cow
buffalo,832
696,697,698-9
insemination seeInsemination,
bull,775-6
Corticosteroids
cow
dog,800
anovulatory anoestrus and,428
milkyieldseeMillkyield,cow
goat,789
hydrallantois,143
oestrusdetection seeunder
ram,783-5
induction of parturition,164,
Oestrus detection
stallion,796-7
165,166,167
oocyterelrieval,870-2
Cryoprotective agents (CPAs)
at onset ofparturition,158,159,160
ovaries see unrlerOvaries
embryo,879,881
retained fetal membranes and,
ovulation seeumder Ovulation
semen,771
165,420,421
parturition see Calving
Cryptorchidism,688,739-40
placenta,G8
testicular tumours,745-6
seeniso Cortisol
pregiancy,87-102
camelids.820,s21
914
Index
Culicoides midges,508-9,574-5
endocrine changes,20
dystocia,209-10
Culling rate, 393, 531. 549
failure of normal,583-8
fertility/infertility,393-4,395,518
Culture, microbiological see
folliculogenesis,13-18
economics,394-5,517,531,
Microbiological culture
liorinonal manipulation,
532
Cumulative sum (Cu-Sum), 536,
44-5.52,584-5
nutritional factors,450-60
538,539
non-harmonal manipulation,
trends over time,393,394,
Cumulus oophorus, 871
42-3.584
450,451,518
Cumulus oophorus complex(COC).
periodicity,12-13
see also Dairy herd fertility
871,872-3,875
postpartum return,201
induction of calving,164
Cushing's syndrome, mare, 586
signs ofoestrus,18-19,20
oestrus detection,431-2
Cushing uterine suture patiern,359
queen cat,40-2
oestrus synchronization, 45-6,
Cyclical ovarian activity, 3-55
hormonal manipulation, 44,49
50-2,53-4
artificial control,42-55
sow,32-5
postparturient prolapse of
hormonalmetods,43-55
endocrine changes, 34-5
uterus,319
non-hormonal methods,42-3
folliculogenesis, 9, 33-4
pregnancy diagnosis,93,96-8
natural regulation, 6-12
hormonal manipulation,44,
prevention of dystocia,258
onset a1 puberty, 3-6
47-9
puerperium,197,200,201
posipartum return (ovarian
non-hormonal conurol,43
side of pregnaicy, 92-3
rebound), 194
postpartum return,203-4
twinning rates.93
factors influencing,200-1
signs of oestrus,33
seealso Cattle; Milk yield, cow
puerperal infections and489
Dairy herd fertility, 517, 525-55
bitch,6,35-40
Cyclicnon-breeder cow sec Repeat-
economics,531,532
endocrine changes, 3y-40
breeder cow
evaluation,525-31
hormonal manipulation, 44,
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia
management/routine visits,
49,54
bitch,49,657-62
536-40
signs of oestrus.36
aetiology, 657-9
normal expectations, 518
buffalo,825-7
clinical signs, 659
pasioral dairying see Pastoral
postpariumreturn,830-1
diagnosis, 659-61
dairy herd
camelids, 812
treatment, 661-2
recording systems, 532-6, 537,
artificial control,812-13
queencat,672-4
538,539
cow, 20-30
Cystic ovarian disease (COD)
target and interference
endocrine changes, 29-30
buffalo,833
levels,526,539-540
endocrine regulation,9,10
cow,396, 439-48
DairyWIN program, 550
folliculogenesis, 23-4
aetiology and pathogenesis,
analysis of fertility, 551, 552
genital tract changes,22-3
439-41
diagnosis of cause of infertility,
hormonal manipulation,44,
clinical signs, 445-6
553-5,553,554,555,556
45-6,50-2,52-4
diagnosis, 442-5, 522
Dam
infectious diseases impairing.
distribution,442,443
age of see Age, of dam
476-512
incidence,442
genetic selection for pelvic capac-
periodicity, 20-1
predisposing factors,441-2
ity, 216, 257,261
postpartum return,197-8
preventicn,448
mortality sceMaternal mortality
signs of oestrus,21-2
sequelae 448
parity sce Parity of dam
doe goat, 32
treatment,446-7,522
protecting newborn from
artificial tontrol,42, 47,54
doe goat,576-7
aggressive, 190,388
postpartum return,2023
mare,585-6,620-1, 624
rotation,uterine torsion,238,
ewe,30-2
snall mammals,849
239-40
endocrine changes,31-2
sow,637-8
Days open, 527
hormonal manipulation,44,
seealso Ovarian cysts
Decapitated syndrome, defective
46-7,48,54-5
Cystocele,vaginal,234-5
sperm,756
natural regulation,7,9
Decoquinate, 567
non-hornonal manipulation,
Delayeduterine clearance see
D
42,43
Persistent mating-induced
postpartum return,202-3
Dag defect, sperm, 756
endometritis
signs ofoestrus,30-1
Dairy cows
Delivery
mare,7,12-20
age of first calving, 449
afterbinh,175
anti-GnRH immunization,55
cystic ovarian disease, 442
fes,173-5
915
Index
Delmadinone acetate,901
Doe goat
testicular descent.689
Deoxynivanol(DON),636-7
caesareanoperation,367-8
lesticular neoplasia,745
Deslorelin implants,43,585,
caudal epidural anaesthesia,
Dogs (in general)
798,895
272-3
artificial insemination,799-802
Detomidine
corpus luteum,11
breed differencesoestrous
caesarean operation,372
cyclical ovarian activity,32
cycles,35
manipulativevaginal delivery,
dystocia seeumder Dystocia
chromosomal abnormalities,132,
271,273
embryonic/fetalloss,138
648-9.651
persistent mating-induced
emhryo recovery,869
chromosome number,129
endometritis,605
embryo transfer,869
embryonic development,6l,62,
Dexamethasone
fetotomy,326
68
hydrallantois,143
infertility,575-80
fetal fluids,71
induction of parturition,164
insemination,789-90,861-2
fetal membranes,68
165,167,828
oestrus detection,788
inherited defects,127
Dexter calves
ovaries,32
mating behaviour,36,702
achondroplasia,134,136
parturition see Kidding
neosporosis499,500,501
bulldog,141,217
placenta,69
teratogens,133
Diabetes mellitus.49,377
pregnancy,104-9
worryingof sheep,561
Diadem defeci,sperm,753,754
puberty,4
seealso Biich;Dog:Puppy
Diamond’smedium,498
puerperium,202-3
Dog-sitting position (foal), 176,
Diarrhoea
superovulation,861
218,299
cOW
leratogenicagents,124
Dolly（the sheep),856,S82
salmonella,490
uterine torsion,240
Domperidone,non-cyclingmare,
loxaenia,410
see also Goats
584,587-8
viral sceBovineviral diarrhoea
Doerabbit
Donkey
mare,afercaesarean operation,
anatomy,840-1
chromosome number,129
371-2
artificial insemination,839
penile tumours,737
rodent,neonate,850
laciation,842
Dopamine,7,12,35
Dietary cation-anion balance
neoplasia,849
Dopamine agonists see Prolactin
(DCAD),544
oestrous cycle,841-2
antagonists
Diethylstilbestrol,119,899
pregnancy andparturition,842
Dopamine antagonists,non-cycling
see also Stilboestrol
sexing,837,838,839
mare,584,588
Digital manipulations
see also Rabbits
Dopplerfetal pulse detector see
dystocia incat/bitch,275,276
Dog (male)
Ullurasonicfetal pulse
semen collection from dog,717
accessory glands,685,695-6
detector
Digital rectal examination,bitch,112
balanoposthitis,729
Dorsal nerve of penis,698
Digitalvaginal simulation,uterine
breeding soundness examination,
damage,723,733
inertia,244
710,711,717
Dorsal position(of feus),264
Dihydrostreptomycin,573
infertility
Dorsotransversepresentation,
Dihydrotestosterone(DHT),690,695
management factors707,719
299,300
Dimetridazole,499
penile/preputial lesions,
Dorsovertical presentation,
Dinoprost,901-2
732-3
oblique, 299
induction ofparturition,166
prostatic disease,749
Doublemonsters.134,302,341
qestrussynchronization,50
testicularconditions,739,741,
Doublemuscling see Muscular
pyometra,673
742,743
hyperrophy
Dioestrus,6
mating behaviour,702
Double parturition of sows,144
cOw,24-5,26,27,28
orchitis,743
Dourine,607-8,731,799
ewe.31
os penis fracture,738
Downward displacement ofhead
mare,13,15,16-18,19
penis,699,700
fetotomy technique,337
prolonged,587
erection,698
calf,289
Diphallus,738
tumours.737.738
foal,291-2
Disease,intercurrent
priapism,734
cysticovariandiseaseand,442
semen
fetal sacs,141-3
onset of puberty and,6
collection,717,799
fetus,136,143,341,350
sires,709
examination,750
Dryingffpastoral dairy herd,43,
Distal midpiece reflex, sperm with,757
storage for Al,767,799-800
544-5
916
Index
Dutctus arteriosus, closure at
ovariohysterectomy, 376
monsters.303
birth,187
traction delivery, 270, 278-9
twins,302-3
Duvaxyn EHV1,4,902-3
use of instrunents,275-7
mare
Dye infusion test, tubal patency,404
bufalo,828,829-30
case approach,224-6,227-8
Dysgerminomas,ovarian,626
camelids,817,819
causes, 218
Dystocia,209-21
cOw
costs,211-12
caesarean operation,347-52
case app1oach,224-7,228-9
faulty fetal position,297-8
case approach, 223-31
causes,217-18
faulty fetal presentations,
detailed examination,224-6
costs, 209-11
299-301
general examination,224
faulty fetal position,2978
fetal factors,262-3,264
history,223-4
faulty fetal presentations.
fetal postural defecis,289-92,
treatment,226-31
299-301
295,296
causes and types, 212
fetal factors,247-58,262-3.
fetomaternal disproportion,
in different species,217-21
264
218,284
consequences and cost,209-12,
fetal postural deferts,286-9,
incidence,214-15
408
294,295-6
maternal factors,234-5,
faulty fetal disposition see Fetal
fetomatenal disproportion
239-40,241-2
disposition, faulty
seeFetomaternal dispropor
monsters, 303
faulty fetal position,22l,264,
tion,cattle
retained fetal membranes,626
297-8
fetotomy see Fetotomy
queen cat
fetal,212,247-64
incidence,212-14
caesarean operation,389
fetal dropsy causing,143
maternal fartors,232-3,
case approach,224,226
fetomatermal disproportion see
234-9,241-2,244
causes,220,221
Fetomaternal disproportion
monsters,303,304-5
digital mauipulations,
fetotomy, 327
prevention,215-16,258
275,276
incidence,212-15
twins,301,302,303
fetal factors,262
induction of parturition and,
see aiso under Heifer
incidence,215
163-4,165,167
management,230-1
manipulative delivery per
case approach,224-6
maternal factors,244-5
vaginumseeManipulative
causes,218-20
ovariohysterectomy, 376
vaginal delivery
faulty fetal position.298
traction delivery,270,278-9
maternal,212,232-46
faulty fetal presentations,301
use ofinsirumenis,275-7
expulsivedeficiency,243-6
fetal factors,259-61
small mammals, 849-50
inadequacies of birth canal.
fetal postural defects,292-
sow
232-43
296
case approach,224-6,229-30
monstrosities,133,303-5
fetomaternal disproportion,
causes, 220
neonatal acidosis,188
285
costs, 211
obstetric terminology.216-17
incidence214
fetal factors,261,262,
postural defects see Fetal posture
management, 229
263, 264
prevention,164,215-16
aternal factors,233-4,240
fetonaternal disproportion,
prolonged gestation,141
ewe
261,285
protracted, 266
case apprach,224-6,229
incidence,215
retained fetal membranes and, 422
causes, 218-20
maternal factors,235,240-1
twins as cause, 301-3
cO5ts,211
242.244,245
bitch, 383-5
faulty fetal disposition,
monsters, 303
caesarean operation,382-9
214,215
case approach.224,226,
faulty fetal position,298
E
230-1
faulty fetal presentations,301
causes,220-1,245,384-5
fetal factors,259-61, 262-3
Ear implants,progesterone,429
clinical decision-making
fetal postural efects,292-3,
Farly conception factor (ECF). 95
384-5
296
Early embryonic death (EED),
digital manipulations,275,276
fetomaternal disproportion,
123-4
fetal factors,262,263,264
285
Early pregnancy facior (EPF), 95
incidence,215
incidence,214
Ear notch biopsy, bovine viral diar-
maternal factors,24l,242-3,
maternal factors,233-4,240,
rlueavirus,505
244-6
241-2
Eastern Tent caterpillars,592
917
Index
Ecbolicagents
dog and cat,68
pigs,870
retained fetal membranes.424
horse,66-7
superovulation regimens,863
seealso Oxytocin:Prostaglandin
pig.67-8
sheep and goats,869
F,a
ruminants,63-5.66
superovulationregimens,
eCGseeEquine chorionicgonado-
Embryonic diapause,144
861-2
trophin
Embryonic/fetal loss,123-6
Emphysema,subcutaneous,after
Eclampsia,guinea pig 849
causes,124-6
caesarean operation,365
Economiccosts see Costs
chromosomal abnormalities,
Emphyseatousfetus,226
Egg-yolk coagulating enzyme
126-32
caesarean operation,351,363-5.
(EYCE). goat semen.788
detection,123,519-20
373
Egg-yolk semen diluent,768,769,773
different species, 136-9
dystocia in cows,280,326-7
Ejaculation,698-9,700
early embryonicdeath(EED),
feto1omy,327
failure,738
123-4
postural defects,292-3
Elbows,incomplete extension,
environmental factors,124
Endangeredspecies,conservation,57
286-7,290,293
geneticcauses,124-6
Endometrial biopsy
Electroejaculation
late embryonic death (LED）124
bovine endometritis,465
bull,713,715
sequelae,139-41
mare,617-18
ram,715-16
time,123-4
see also Uterinebiopsy/cytology
Eleciromyography (EMG), onset of
bitch,138,139
Endometrial cups,equine,66-7,
whelping 185
coW,124,137,139-41
83,586
ELISAtests
rectal palpation causing,
win pregnancies,588,590
bovineviral diarrhoeavirus,505
99-100
Endometrial cysts,614-16
IgA,campylobacteriosis,481
repeatbreeders,464,520
Endometrialhyperplasia,cystic see
indirect,brucellosis,484
veterinary control,519-20,523
Cystic endometrial hyper-
neosporosis,502
doe goat,138
plasia
time of mating in dogs,664
ewe,124,138,139,560
Endomeuriosis,618-9
toxoplasmosis,567
mare,124,137-8,139,590-4
Endometritis
Embryo
queen cal,138-9
definition,407
chimerisn,882
sOw,124,136-7,139
buffalo, 833
cloning see Cloning
seealso Abortion:Fetal death;
cow,411-17
cryopreservation,856,878-81
Stillbirths
‘atrisk’cow,413,414
genotyping.886
Embryo quality, assessment
bovine herpesvirus-1,507
in vitroproductionsee invitro
advanced methods,876-8
campylobacteriosis,478-9
embryoproduction
cattle,865,878
clinical signs,412
in-vivo versus in-vitro produced,
Embryo recovery（collection),863-70
diagnosis.412-13,414,523
876-8
non-surgical flushing 822,863
effects on fertility.413-15
metabolic studies,878
camelids,822
factors affecting,199,409-10
micromanipulation and bisection,
caltle,863-5
incidence,411-12
881-2
horses,866-8
retained fetal membranes,424-5
resorption,139
pigs,869-70
subclinical,412-13
sex determination.886
sheep and goats, 869
treatment,415-17
spacing within uterus,62,78
Embryotomy seeFetotomy
trichomoniasis,496
transgenesis,884
EmbryoIransfer,863-70
Lreaplasma,493
horse
biosecurity precautions,886-7
mare,599-607
intrauterine mobility,62.
historicalmilestones.855-6
chronic degenerative,619
78-9,82,591,614
large offspring syndrome after.
chronicinfectious,600-3
reduction,589-90
885-6
classification,599
pig survival rate,642,644
superovulationregimens,858-9
embryonicloss.138,592
see aso Blastotyst; Conceptus;
buffalo,834
mycotic,602-3
Fetus
camelids,821-3
persistent mating-induced,
Embryonic development,61-8
cattle,866
603-7
abnormal,123-44
IVPembryos,874
venereal infection,599-600
impaired,repeat-breedercow,464
superovulationregimens859-G1
queencal,49
malereproductive system,687-9
horse, 868-9
sOW,640
stages, 62
IVP embryos,874-5
postmating.644
camelids,814
superovulationreginens,861-2
see alsoMetritiscomplex
918
Index
Endometriun
Epidural anaesthesia
Escherichia coli
cyclical changes, 6, 37
caesarean operation,354,373
endometritis/metritis,599,628
damage, repeat-breeder cow,
embryo collection,864
infertility and,492,655,748
464-5
embryo transfer, 866
postpartum uterus,198-9,409
degenerative changes, mare,
indicationsin dystocia,224,225
pyometra,659
618-19
manipulative vaginal delivery,
Estimated breeding value(EBV),283
periglandular fibrosis,618,619
266,271-4
low hirth weight,248,258
postparum restoration,194
cow,228,271-2
Estradiol therapy, 899
bitch,204
mare,273
anoesirous cows,429,430
cow,195-6
sow,273-4
corpus luteum regression, 12
ewe and doe goal, 202
see also Caudal epidural anaesthesia
dose rate, 899
factors influencing,200
Epinephrine see Adrenaline
endometritis, 415-16, 417
mare, 201
Episiotomy
fetal mummification,140
sow,203
after Caslicl’s vulvoplasty,610
induction of parturition,1G6
β-Endorphin, 12
cows,281-2
oestrous cycle manipulation, 45,
Endoscopy
Epivag. 509,741,748
53.54
subfertile/infertile mare,
Epostane,167,900
silent heat in mare,587
616,620
Equilenin, 81, 161
termination of pregnancy,
scealsoVaginoscopy
Equilin, 81,161
118,119
Endotoxaemic shock
Equine chorionic gonadatrophin
see also Oestradiol;Oestrogen
fetal emphysema, 351
(eCG)
therapy
puerperalmetritis,410
endogenous secretion,66,80,81
Estrogens see Oestrogen(s)
Energy balance, lactating cows,
after pregnancy loss, 586
Ethinylcstradiol,899
450-1
pregnancy, 86
Ethylene glycol, 879,881
Energy intake
therapy.896
Etiproston, oestrus
gilts,642
oestrous cycle manipulaticn,
synchronization,50
lactating sows, 642
43,44
Futherian mammals,836
Energy metabolism, lactating cows,
products,896,897
Eutocia,209
453-5
superovulation,S58-9
Ewe
Energy substrates
bitch,651-2
abortion seeAbortion,ovine
embryos, 878
buffalo, 822
barren,559
semen diluents,768
cow,429-30,860
caesarean operation,78
Enteric cytopathic bovine orphan
doe rabbit,839
caudal epidural anaesihesia,229,
(ECBO)viruses,509-10
ewe,46-7,48,562
272-3
see also Bovine enteroviruses
queen cat,669
cervical and vaginal prolapse.
Environmeni, pet small mammals,
SOw,52,863
146-8,149,234,561
848
Equine coital exanthema (ECE).
corpus luteum,10,11-12, 31
Enzootic abortion of ewes (EAE),
607,731
cyclical ovarian activity,30-2
494,562-6
Equine herpesvirus (ElV),595-6,
dead,559
diagnosis, 564-5
799
dropsy of fetal sacs, 141
epidemiology, 562-4
type 3,607,731
dystocia see under Dystocia
treatment and control,565
vaccine,902-3
embryonic/fetal loss,124,138,
vaccination,565,903
Equine infectious anaemia,799
139,560
z0onotic risks,565-6
Equine metabolic syndrome, 586
embryo recovery, 869
Enzootic abortion of goats,579
Equine viral arteritis (EVA), 596-7,
embryo transfer, 869
Enzooticbovine leukosis
799
empty.559
(EBL).782
vaccination, 596-7,903
fetal fluids,70
Enzovax,565,903
Equipment see Instruments/equip-
fetal membranies,72-3
Eosin, 751, 754
ment
infectious diseases sce under
Ephemeral fever virus, 782
Erection, penile sce Penis, erection
Infectious diseases
Epididymis,682,683,811
Lrgometrine maleate, porcine dysto-
infertility/subfertility,131,
aplasia, 745
cia,230
559-75
examination,710
Ergot alkaloids, 637
insemination,785-7,861-2
lesions,746-8
Ergothioneine,695
ovaries,31,560
physiology, 694-5
Ergotism, 435
ovulation,31
Epididymitis,746-7
Erysipelotrixrhusiopatiae,641,794
parturition sce Lambing
919
Index
Ewe (contimel)
Fastback programme, 45-6
Female:male ratios,707
placenta,G9
Fa1
Feminization,male animals,745
pregnancy,104-9
body stores,laclating cows,452
Ferguson's reflex,156, 170,173
puberty, 4, 5
infiltration ofliver,452
Fertex Score, 394,531
puerperium,202-3
prolapse of perivaginal,315
Fertileperiod
relaxin-like hormone,162
Fatty liver, 454
detection, 766
superovulation,861
Feathering,uterine inertia,244
bitch,663-4,801-2
teratogenic agenis, 124
Fecundity, sheep,559
seeaiso Oestrus
twin/triplet pregnancy,72-3,
increasing,562
Fertility
219-20
Feeding
male,705-60
uterine torsion, 240
cow
bitch,646-7
vaginal ruprure, 315
anoestris,428
after cacsarean operation, 389
ventral hernia, 241-2
lactation,450-2
management factors affecting
see also Sheep
pastoral dairying.543-5
662-7
Exercise,vigorousuterine
gilts,641-2
buffalo,832,833-4
inertia,244
sow,lactation,642,644-5
camelids, 814
Expected progeny difference
seealso Nutritional factors
cow,393-4,518
(EPD),256
Felineherpesvirus,672
after caesarean
Export see International trade
Feline infectious peritonitis virus,
operation,367
Expulsive deficiency. 243-5
672,743
artificial insemination,781
Expulsive force oflabour,168,243
Feline leukaemia virus FeLV), 139,
definition,520-1
Extended forelirnb posture,264
671-2
measurements,393.526-8
Extcnsion manoeuvre, 269
Feline panleukopenia virus,133,
see aiso Cattle,herd fertility
Extension of elbows,incomplete,
138-9,672
doe goat,affer caesarean opera-
286-7,290,293
Felineviral rhinotracheitis(FVR),
tion, 368
External iliac arteries, obstetric
138-9
ewe, 559-60
injuries, 307
Female genital tract
after caesarean
Extrauterine pregnancy see
changes in pregnancy, 82-3,
operation,368
Pseudoectopic pregnancy
88-93
gilt/sow
EZ Mixin diluent, 795
congenital abnormalities, 235,
ensuring optimum, 641-5
397-401
targets, 632, 633
host defence mechanisms, 408-9
mare,582-3
F
infertility-related abnormalities
after caesarean
Fading puppy syndrome, 655
bitch, G47-50
operation,372
Farral samples, pregnancy diagnosis.
camelids, 818
queen cat,646-7
97,104
cow,397-407
see also Inferility/subfertility;
Fall transition,mareoestrous cyce
ewe,560
Pregnancy rates
584
mare,608-26
Fertility associated antigen
Farmers/farm staff, insemination by.
queen cat,667-8
(FAA).760
781,793-4
obstructive dystocia and,235
Fertility factor (FF), 530-1
Farquharson's technique,vaginal
postpartum involution seeUterine
Fertility index,531
prolapse, 152
involution
Fertilization,61,685
Farrowing, 181-5
huffalo, 824-5
see also In vitro fertilization
acceleration,167-8
camelids,811-12
Fertilization failure, 123-6
care during, 176-7
rabbit,840-1
male factors,738-50
complications,317,324
sow,post-slaughter examination,
camelids,816
delaying onset, 168
635
cattle herd, 519-20
dystocia see Dystocia,sow
see aiso Ovaries;Uterus;Vagina;
Fertilization period,bitch,663-4
first stage of labour,17l,172
Vulva
Fertilization rates,123
indications of completion,230
Female genital tract injuries
bitch,646
initiation,157,159,160
breeding-related,mare, 612,613
cow,520
oxytocin release,170
obstetric,306,307-12
sow,644
premature induction,165-7
complicating trartion,227
Fescue toxicity,435,595,627
second stage of labour, 174, 175
dystocia,224,229
Fetal body length (FBL)
third stage of labour 175
inferiliry,406,408,613
calf 73, 89, 90-2
Farrowing rate, 633
postpartum haemorrhage,307
foal,67
920
Index
Fetal death
form and disposition,712
definition,217
caesarean operation,387-8
formation,62-3,64
see alsoTetal disposition
dystocia,226,227,230-1
dog and cat, 68
Fetal presentation
cattle,283,284
horse,66-7,68
assessment in dystocia,225,226
fetotomy,326-7
pig,62,63,64,67-8
definition,216-17
uterinetorsion,237,240
ruminants,64-5
faulty,causing dystocia,2623,
seealso Abortion;Embryonic/fetal
retention seeRetained fetal
298-301
loss;Emphysematous fetus
membranes
cattle,214,215,263,299-301
Fetal disposition
second stage of labour. 173
dogs, 221
faulty,262-4
separation/expulsion,175,178,
horses,218,263.299-301
caesarean operation,351
181,183-5
sheep/goats, 301
case approach,226,227,
factors involved,418-19
fetal mobility and,73,74,263
228,229
twins and multiple fetuses,72-3
normal births,175,183
as cause of dystocia,217,218.
camelids,814
seealsoFetal disposition
219,221
Fetal mole,133
Fetal pulse detector,ultrasonicsee
fetotomy,327
Fetalmovements
Ultrasonicfetal pulse
prevention,216
first stage of labour, 173
delector
treatment,286-96,297-301
during pregnancy, 73
Fetal sacs,71-2
twin births,301,302-3
presentation and,263
dropsy,141-3
normal,168,173
Fetal mummification,139-41
Fetal viability,assessment in dystocia
terminology,216-17
haematic,139-40
226
see also Fetal position;Fetal
papyraceous,139
Fetomaternal disproportion,
posture;Fetal presentation
treatment,352
247-62
Fetal dropsy,136,143
camelids,816
fetotomy for,327
dystocia,350
dog,138,139
nanagement,226-7
fetotomy,341
pig.139,230
prevention,215-16
Fetalemphysema see
sheep,139,566
Ireatment,280-5
Emphysematous fetus
Fetal oversize,247
cats,262
Fetal fluids,70-1
absolute,217,247,348
cattle,217,247-58
excessive quantities,141-3
caesarean operation,348
caesarean operation,348-9
replacement,prolonged dystocia,
congenital anomalies,134,141
calf birth weight,247-55
266
relative,217,247,348
calf conformation,255-6
see also Hydrallantois
cattle,217
maternal factors,256-7
Fetal growth,74-5
seealsoFetomaternaldisproportion
posterior presentation,284
calf,74,90-2,164,247-8
Fetal palpation
prevention,257-8,283
lamb,74-5
bitch,111-12
traction delivery,281-4
piglet,74
cow,92,98,99
treatment,228,229,280-4
Fetal head
ewe,106
dogs,220-1,262
amputation
mare,84
horses,218,284
monsters,341
sow,103
pigs,261,285
postural defects,287,291,
Fetalposition
sheep(and goats),218-19,
336,337
definition,217
259-61
total fetotomy,332-3
faulty,causingdystocia,221,264,
treatment,229,285
downward displacement see
297-8
Fetotome,328
Downward displacement
sce alsoFetal disposition
principles ofuse,332
ofhead
Fetal posture
threader,328-9
lateral deviation seeLateral
abnormalities in twins,302
Fetotomy,227,326-43
deviationofhead
defects causing dystocia,264
correctionoffetalmalpostures,
Fetal losssceEmbryonic/fetal loss
anteriorpresentation,286-93
336-7,340,341
Fetal maceration,140-1
fetotomy techniques,336-7,
indications,327-8
Fetalmaturation,162-3
340,341
instrumentation,328-9
role ofcortisol,156
posteriorpresentation,
monsters,341-3
Fetal membranes
293-6
percutane0us,327,331-43
caesareanoperation,356,357-8,
cattle,286-9,294,295-6
postoperative management and
368
horses,289-92,295,296
care,343
-itisdop
sheep and goats,292-3.296
retainedfetalmembranes and,422
921
Index
Fetotony (continmed)
Flow tytometry
dominant,9,23-24
schistosoma reflexus,228-9,305,
sperm function tests,760
postpartum,197,198
341-3
sperm sexing,774,775
haemorrhagic, 34
subcutaneous,327,329-31
Fluid therapy,intravenous
luteinization of anovulatoiy, 14,
total,327,332-6,337-40
caesarean operation,362,385-6
17,25
scaesareanoperation,326-7,347
fetotomy,343
peptide hormones, 8
cow,228-9,280,283,326-43
ovariohysterertomy for pyometra,
prepubertal development, 4
ewe,229,326
381,661
pubertal development, 4, 5
mare,227-8,326
puerperal metritis,410
recruitment. 9
Fetotomy wire,328,329
Flumetasone
selection, 9
breakage,331
hydrallantois,143
transvaginal uluasound-guided
hand-grips or handles, 328,329
induciion of parturition, 167
aspiration.870-2
introducer, 328-9
Flunixin meglumine, puerperal
see also Folliculogenesis
principles of use,332
metritis,410
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Fetus
Fluorescence in situhybridization
male reproduction,689-91, 692
age calculation,75
(FISH), embryos, 876, 877
oestrous cycle regulation.9,
delivery. 173-5
Fluorogestone acetate (FGA), 46, 900
10,24
first stage of labour, 173
Fluprostenol, induction of parturi-
prepubertal activity. 4
initiation of parturition,155-6,
tion,164
puerperium,197
159,160
Flushing, sheep,43, 561
regulatin of scretin,7,812
preparation or readiness for
Flying squirrel see Sugar glider
therapy, 44, 896
birth,162
Foal
ancestrous queen cat, 669
see lso Conceptus; Embryo
delivery. 178, 179-80
ovum pick up, 871
Fibrinogen, serum, pregnant
disposition during parturition, 173
superovulation induction, 822,
bitch,115
fetotomy,326
859,860,861-2
Fibroids sce Leiomyomata
mortality
bitch,39,40
Fibroleiomyomata,terine,650
after caesarean operation, 371
buffalo, 827
Fibromas
dystocia,211-12
cow,30,88,427
cervix,405,406
prenatal sex determination,86
ewe,31,32
ovary,396-7
resuscitation at birth, 188, 267
mare, 20
uterus,405
stillbirths,211
50W,34,35
Fibromyomata,uterus404,405
thermoregulation, 189
Follicular ovarian cysts
Fibropapillomas
umbilical cord rupture.174
bitch,652,653-4
penis,735-6,737,738
Foal heat (postpartum oestrus),
camelids,818
transmissible genital, 510
13,201
cow,443,444
vagina and vulva,407
abnormal.587-8
dingnosis,522,524
First-service pregnancy rate, 526, 528
after severe dysiocia,212
pathogenesis, 439-41
see also Pregnancy rates
enbryonic loss after breeding at,
treatment,446,447
First-service submission rate,526,
593
ewe,560
529-30
Foaling, 177-8
queen cat,671
First stage of labour, 171-3
care during.176
sce also Cystic ovarian disease
buffalo,828
complications,306-18,323-4
Follicular phase, oestrous cycle, 6
camelids,817
dystocia see Dystocia, mare
abnormal, repeat-breeder cow, 464
Habby bag, leptospirosis,488
first stage oflabour, 173,17
Follicular waves,9-10,13,23-4,25
Flankincisions
initiation,159-61
postparlum resumption,197,439
caesarean operation, 355, 361-2,
manipulative vaginal delivery,
during pregnancy, 197
270,271
camelids,812
closure,361,362
physiology, 170
Folliculogenesis, 9-10
Flehmen reaction,700,813
premature induction,163-4
postpartum resumption.197.198
Flexor tendon contraction,
second siage of labour,174,175,
role ofIGF system,10,24
congenital, 136, 137
178, 179-80
terminology.9
Floor surface
third stage of labou175,178
camelids,812
caesarean operation,353
Follicle regulatory protein,34
cow,23-4
obstetric examination,224
Follicles, ovarian
ewe,31
oestrous behaviour and, 433
anovulatory, mare, 621-3
mare,13-18
postparturient disorders,314,318
cyclical changes,6, 9-10
s0w,9,33-4
922
Index
Follistatin,8
cow,253
G
Foot-and-mouth-disease virus, 775,
calfbirth weight and,253-4
777,794
Gait abnomalities, sire,720
queen cat,116
Foothill abortion,494, 511-12
Ganete intrafallopian transfer
GHseeGrowih hormone
Foot lesions,impaired mounting,719
(GIFT),872
Gilt
Foot-nape posture, foal, 218, 290-1
Gap junctions, myometrial, 156,
accelerating parturition, 1G7-8
Foramen ovale,closure at birth,187
169,170
age at first breeding. 641
Forceps traction
Cariner's canal cysts,405
dystocia,245,285
canine/feline dystocia,230.270,
Gattli's spiral tubes,328
cmbryo transfer. 870
276-7,278-9
Geldings. penile tumours, 736,737
farrowing.183
ovine dystocia, 229
Gender determination sce Sex
infertility/subfertility,632-45
Ford interlocking suture pattern,
determination
management and fecding, 641-2
361,362
General anaesthesia
manipulation of ovarian cyclicity,
Foreign bodies, uterine, 6167
caesarean operation,372,386
43,44,47-49,543-4
Forelimb(s)
manipulative vaginal delivery. 271
optimizing fertility,641-5
amputation
perineal reconstruction,311
pregnancy diagnosis,102,103
fetal malpostures, 336-7
uterine prolapse,324
puberty,3-4,32,634
total fetotomy,333-4,339-40
Genetic defects
superovulation,863
complete retentionse Shoulder
domestic animals,125,126,
vaginal prolapse, 152
flexion posture
127.128
see also Pigs: Sow
subcutaneous fetotomy, 329-31
infertile mares, 588, 591
Gilt disease, 638-9
Fossa, ovulation see Ovulation fossa
transmission by Al, 766-7
Globulin, plasma, 462
Fractures,after caesarean operation,
Genetic factors
Glucose
366
embryonic/fetal loss,124-6,519
antioxidant activity,461
Freemartinism
posterior presentation, 264
homeostasis, newborn animals,
camelids,816
bovine cystic ovarian disease, 441
162-3
rattle,73,400-1,522
bovineinfertility,395,453,519
metabolism, lactating cow,453-4
diagnosis, 131
porcine ferility,644-5
plasma concentrations,462
goats,575
Genetic selection
Glutathione peroxidase (GPX),
horses, 73
cysticovarian disease and,441.448
458-9,463
pig,72
easy-calving sires,216,248-50,
Gluteal paralysis,313
sheep,131,560
283
Glycerol
Fremitus,83,92,99,103
fertility of dairy cows and, 395,
embryo cryopreservation,
Friesians, 765-6
450,453,518
879.881
congenital abnomalities,
pelvic capacity of dam, 216,
semen cryopreservation,771,785
134,136
257,261
Glycogen, fetal stores in liver, 162-3
induction of calving,164,165
sires forAl,705-6,765-6
GnRHI see Gonadotrophin-teleasing
nutrition during lactation, 451
Genistein,560-1
hormone
Frohlich's syndrome, 649
Genital tract see Female genital tract;
Goats
Frostbite, scrotal,741
Male genital tract
artificial insemination,577,788-90
Frosted strawberry appearance, 567
Genital ubercle,etal foal
infectious disease control,
Frosty 2 (calf), 878
Genotyping embryo,886
776,782
FSH seeFollicle-stimulatinghormone
Gentamicin, 600
insemination techniques,
Fungal infections
Gerbils, 837,847
789-90
catile,477,510-11
reproduction,840,847
semen collection and storage.
goais,578
sexing, 836-7
788-9
horses,598,602-3
vaginal smiears,839
assisted reproductive teclnolo-
sheep,563
German Shepherd dog. habitual
gies,856
Fusariu oxinspig feed,6367
abortion, 654, 655
embryo cryopreservation, 881
Fusobacieriumnecrophorum
Gestation, prolonged see Prolonged
embryo recovery and transfer,
infertility and,492
gestation
869
postpartum necrotic vaginitis,
Gestation length
in vitro embryo production, 875
307,406
bitch, 109-10,382,383
superovulation and
postpartum uterus. 199, 201,
estimation methods,383
insemination,862-3
409-10
buffalo, 827
chimeras, 882
vaginal prolapse, 149
camelids, 814
chromosomal abnormalities,131
923
Index
Goats(contimued)
GPG regimens,430-1,447
Halothane,386,387
chromosome number,129
Graafian follicles, 4,10
Hamsters,837,846-7
inherited defecis,126
Graham'smethod,fetal pelvic
neonatal mortality,850
mating.577
collapse,282
reproduction,840,846-7
see also Buckgoat;Doe goat
Granuloma
sexing,836-7
Goitre,congenital,561
penis,730,731
vaginal smears,839,846
Goitrogens,457
sperm,747
Hand-made cloning (HMC), S83-4
Gonadalhypoplasia syndrome,
uterine stump.379,380
Harms's hooks,267,268
Swedish Highland cattle,
Granulosa cell tumours (granulosa
Hatching.embryo,61
396,744
thecal cell tumours)
hCG sceHuman chorionic
Gonadorelin,895
bitch,377,649
gonadotrophin
Gonadostat theory, 4
cow,396-7
Head,fetal seeFetal head
Gonadotrophin-releasinghormone
mare,623,624-6
Heat see Oestrus
(GnRH)
queen cat,668
Heat-mount detectors,cows,435-7
energy metabolism and，454
Griseofulvin,teratogenicity,133
Heat stress
immunization against,55
Growth hormone(GH),10
effectsnfertility,463,81
malereproduction,689,691
fetal,initiationofparturition，155
retained fetalmembranes,421
onset ofpuberly.4-5
lactatingcow,453,454,455
seealsn Climate/weather
regulation of gonadotrophins,7,8
malereproduction,690
Heatsynch programme,54
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
transgenic pigs.884
Heavy metals,testicular damage741
(GnRH) therapy, 43, 895
Growth hormone receplors(GHR),
Heifer
immature/inexperienced sire,718-19
453,454,455
age of first calving, 449
superovulation,859
Guanaco,809
calfbirth weight,248,249-50,
bitch,oestrusinduction,65
see also Camelidae
251
camelids,818,822
Gubernaculum,689
cyclicovarian activity,20-1,23-4,
coW
Guelph diluent,790,791
27-8
anoestrus,429-31
Guernsey bull, sperm defects,756
dystocia,210,213,228
cystic 0varian disease,446-7,
Guinea pig, 836, 837
caesarean operation,348
artificial insemination,839
351-2
endometritis,416
reproduction,840,842-3
fetomaternal disproportion,
oestrus synchronization,53-4
sexing,836-7
280,281
repeatbreeder,465-6
stillbirths andneonatal deaths,
maternal causes,232-3,
mare
850
234,256
oestrus induction,52
vitamin Cdeficiency,849
prevention,216,257-8
ovulationinduction,798,861
see also Boar guineapig:Sow
traction delivery,281-2,283
problem breeder,585,588
guinea pig
with maleco-twin,131,401
rabbits,841
oestrus synchronization,50-2,53
Gonadotrophins
optimumrearing/growthrates,
H
episodic/tonic system,7-8
449-50,451
malereproduction,689-91
Hlabronema muscae,731
parturition,181
Oestrous cycleregulation,9
Haematology pyometra, 661
pelvic capacity,232,257
regulation of secretion,7-8,12
Haematoma
pregnancy
surge system,7,8
broad ligament,307
diagnosis,94-5,100
seealso Equine chorionic gonado-
ovarian,mare,6234
genital organ changes,89,
trophin;Follicle-stimulating
peripenile,bulls,721-3
90-2
hormone;Human
vulva,307-8
puberty, 4,5,20,449-50
chorionic gonadotrophin:
Haemolytic disease of foals,70
replacement,management.53940
Luteinizing hormone
Haenoplilussonmus seeH-Histoplilus
se also Calf; Cov
Gonadotrophin therapy,44,896-7
sonni
Heparinbinding,sperm,760
combination products,897
Haemorrhage
Herd Companion,535
superovulation,822,858-9
complicating ovariohysterectomy.
HerdftilityatteseeCattle
bitch,651-2
fertility
379
cow,429-30,446-7
postpartum seePostpartum haem-
Hereford catle
gilt orsow,643-4
orrhage
incduction of calving,164
G99e uanh
Haemospermia,738
sperm defects,756
rabbit,841
Hairy shaker lambs,572
Hermaphroditism,true,560,648
924
Index
Herniorrhaphy,ovariohysterectomy
l-lorses
Hydromeura
for pyometra with,382
artificialinsemination,45,794-9
camelids,816
Herpesviruses seeSpecies-specific
infectious disease control,596,
doe goat, 576
Jerpesviruses
776,799
Hlydrosalpinx, 402
Hind,fetotomy 326
insemination methods,797-S
β-Hydroxybutyrate(βOHB).452.
Hindlimb
semen collection and storage.
454,462
amputation
795-7
17α-Hydroxylase,placental,158
fetal malpostures.340
assistedreproductive technologies
Hymen
total fetotomy,337-8
embryo cloning.884
persistent,399-400,611
lesions,impaired mounting,719
embryo cryopreservation,880-1
young mare,611
paralysis,postparturient cow.
embryo recovery anc transfer,
Hyoscine N-butylbromide and
312-14,545
866-9
dipyrone, 898
subcutaneous fetotomy,331
history,856
Hyperthermia,embryonic/fetal loss,
-lindquarters,sectioningtotal feto-
in vitro embryo production,
124
tomy,335-6
874-5
Hyperventilation,after caesarean
Hinny,132
ovum pickup and oocyte
operation,388
Hip flexion posture,295-6
transfer,870-2
Hypocalcaemia
fetotomytechnique,340,341
practical uses,857
parturientrecumbency,316-17
seealso Breech presentation
superovulationregimens,861-2
uterine inertia,244,245
lip-lock,282,330,336
breed differences
bitci,245,385,388
Hippomanes,67.68.72
dystocia,215
cOW
istophilus somi490,746-7
twin ovulation,13
fetotomy and,331
HK calf puller,267,268
chromosomal abnormalities,
incompletecervical dilatation,
Hobday's forceps,278
128-30,588,591
233,349
Hobday'svectis,270,275,276
chromosome number,129
pastoral dairy herd,545
Hlock flexion posture,294-5,296
embryonic development, 61, 62,
puerperal metritis,408,411
fetotomy technique,340
66-7.68
recumbency,316-17
Hockmalconformation,impaired
inherited defects,128
retained fetal membranes,422
mounting 719
secalso Foal;Mare; Stallion
uterine inertia,244
Hog cholera virus,132-3,794
HT-2toxins,pig feed,G36,637
uerineolapse,20
Holstein cate,766
Human chorionic gonadotrophin
mare,retained fetal membranes.
duration of oestrus,21
(hCG),44,896-7
627
dystocia,216
cryptorchidism,739-40
sow,220,317
fertility,394,451,518
immature/inexperiencedsire,
Hypocuprosis see Copper, deficiency
folliculogenesis,23
718-19
Hypoglycaemia
inbreeding.767
products,896,897
Angora doe goat,577
nutrition duringlactation,451
superovulation induction,859
bitch,381,385
oestrussynchronization,53-4
bitch,44,652
Hypophosphataemia,458
Honey glider see Sugar glider
camelids,818,822
Hypospadias,727
Honeymoon back,720
cOW,429-30,446,465-6,523
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
Hooks,obstetrical,267,268
gilt andsow,44,52,643-4,863
cystic ovarian disease and, 440
hip-lock,282
mare,52,606,797,862
fetal,initiationofparturition,
postural defecis,287,296
queen cat,669,670,802
155,158,160
Hormone therapy,895-902
Human menopausal gonadotrophin
Hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian
immature/inexperienced sire,
(hMG),44,896
6-2's1xe
718-19
Hybridization
cystic ovarian disease,440-1
oestrous cyclecontrol,43-55
buffalo,824
energy metabolisim in lactating
superovulation,858-9
camel,809
coWs,454
cow
Hydrallaniois,141-3
Hlypothalamic-pituitary-testicular
anovulatory anoestrus,
caesarean operation,352
axis,689-90,691
429-31
induction of calving164
Hypothalamus
cystic ovarian disease,446-7
treatment,142-3
episodic/tonic system,7-8
gilts and sows,643-4
uterine inertia,142,244
neural GnRHpulse generator 4-5
seealsospecificormones
Hydramnios,141
oestrous cycleregulation,7-8
Horse pox(equine coital exan-
Hlydrocephalus,134,135,143
surge system,7,8
thema),607,731
fetotomy techniques,341
Hypothermianewborn animals.189
925
Index
Hypothyroidism,bitch,651
dog and cat, 167
causes,395-466
Hlysterectomy
ewe,167
chromosomal abnormalities,
equine pyometra,620
goat, 167
130,131
sce also Ovariohysterectomy
horse,163-4
economic costs,394-5
Hysteria, porcine dystocia, 245
small mammals, 840
genital tract abnormalities,
sow,165-7
397-407
Inexperienced sires.718-19
】
heat stress, 463
Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis-
infectious factors,476-512
IBR-ipV(infectiousbovine rhinotra-
infectious pustular vul-
investigation,520-5
cheitis-infectious pustular
vovaginitis (IBR-IPV)see
meuritis complex of diseases,
vulvovaginitis) steBovine
Bovine herpesvirus-1
407-25
herpesvirus-1
Infectious diseases
nutritional factors,449-63
ICSI see Intracytoplasmic sperm
control in AI programmes,781-3,
Dvarianlesions,395-7,522
injection
787-8.794,799
prevalence,393-4
Identification
male infertility,741,742-3
repeat breeder syndrome see
individual cows, 434,532
transmitted by embryos, 8S6-7
Repeat-breeder cow
male animals, 706-7
transmitted in semen,775.776
trends over time,393,394,
IGF system see Insulin-like growth
bitch infertility/abortion, 655-7
450,451,518
factor system
buffalo abortion, 833
see also Cattle,herd fertility;
Illinois VariableTemperature(IVI)
camelid subfertiliry, 819
Subfertile cow
diluent,773,790
cow infertility/abortion,476-512
doe goat, 575-80
Immaturity
bacterial agents, 477-92
functional factors,576-7
of dam, physical, 349
changing prevalenice,476-7
infectious agents,577-0
ofsire,718-19
chlamydial agents,494-5
management factors, 577
Immune system
fungal agents, 510-11
structural defects,575
detachment of fetal membranes
investigation,524-5
ewe,559-75
and, 420
mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas.
chromosomal abnormalities,
disruption of uterine, 408-9
492-3
131
Immunization
pastoral dairying 554
functional factors,560-1
anti-androstenedjane,55
protozoal agents,495-502
infectious agents, 56275
anti-GnRH,55
unknown aeliology, 51l-12
management factors,561-2
anti-inhibin,55
viral agents, 503-10
structural defects,560
see also Varcination
ewe
gilt/sow,632-45
Immunofluorescent antibody (IFAT)
infertility/abortion,562-75
causes,636-41
test, neosporosis, 502
lamb birth weight and, 260
evaluation of herd fertility
lmmunoglobulin A (IgA)
goat infertility, 577-80
indices, 636
bovinevenereal
mare infertility/abortion,592,
reproductive system
calmpylobacteriosis,479-80
595-608
examination,632-5
Campylobacter tests, 481
queen cat infertility, 671-4
mare.582-628
Immunoglobulins,colostral, after
small mammals. 850
abnormal cyclicity,583-8
induced calving, 165
sow infertility/subferility,
breedinghistory,583
Immunomodulator therapy,equine
638-41
causes, 583-608
endometritis,602
lnfertility/subfertility
cervical lesions, 612-14
Import see International trade
chromosomal abnormalities,
chromosomal abnormalities,
Impotentia coeundi, 717
176-32
128-9,588,591
Impotentia generandi, 717
male animals,705-60
classified by anatomical
lmuresp, 903
bitch,646,647-67
location,608-26
Inbreeding,767
finctional factors,650-5
rlitoral lesions, 611
Indirect haemagglutination test
infectious factors,655-62
investigation,583
(1lA),toxoplasmosis,567
management factors,662-7
multiple ovulation/twinning,
Induction of parturition,163-7
structural factors,647-50
588-90
caesarean operation for failed,
buffalo, 832-4
Ovarian abnormalities, 621-6
352
camelids,818-20
pregnancy failure,590-608
buffalo, 828
retained fetal membranes,
camelids,817
anoestrus/fuinctional caises,
G26-8
coW,164-5,546
425-49
uterine lesions,614-20
926
Index
Infertility/subfertility(continuei)
lactalingcow,453,454
chronicinfectious endometritis,
uterine lube lesions,620-1
malereproduction,690
601-2
vaginal lesions, 610-11
Insulin3,testicular descent,688
older maiden mares, 606
vulvar/perineal lesions,G0810
Insulin-like growth factor(ICF)
persistent mating-induced endo-
queencat,646-7,667-74
system
metritis,603,604,605
functional factors,668-71
anovulatory anoestrus,427
pyometra in bitch,661
infectiousfactors,671-4
control ofpostpartum
lntravaginal progesteronerelease
management factors,674
ovulation,197
device see Controlled inter-
structural faciors,667-8
initiationof parturition,155
nal drug release (CIDR)
small mammals,848-51
lactatingcow,453,454-5
device
sce also Abortion;Embryonic/fetal
malereproduction,690,692
Intravaginal sponges/tampons,46-7,
loss:Fertility
role in folliculogenesis,10,24
48,900
Ingelvac PRRS KV,904
Intravenous fluid therapy see Fluid
Inguinal canals,683
161-2
therapy,intravenous
Inguinal hemia pregnant bitch,2423
Insulinreceptorss
Intromissionfailure,sires,720-38
Inguinalmetrocele,incarcerationof
development,687
Inverted-Lblockofflank,354
uterine horn,382
Intercurrentillness seeDisease,
In vitro culture of presumpuive
Inheritedpredisposition seeGenetic
intercurrent
zygotes (IvC),872, 873
factors
lnterferon-[IFN-y),porcine,78
culture systes,878
Inhibin
Interferon-tau(IFN-t),76-7
effects onembryo quality,876
fenalereproduction,8,827
bovine (biFN-t),76
cattle,874
granulosa cell tumours,625
caprine(cIFNt),77
In vitro embryo production (IVP),
immunization against55,861
ovine(olFN-t),76-7
872-6
malereproduction,691,692
InterlHerdsoftwaresystem,
biosecurity precautions,887
lnjuries
535,536,537,538,539
generalprinciples/purpose,872-3
female genital tractseeFemale
International trade
history,856,872
genital tract injuries
embryos,858
large offspring syndrome after.
newborn animals,189
semen for Al,766,775
254-5,885-6
obsteuic,306-15
Internet-based herd management
ovum pick up, 870-2
penis,733-4,738,820
systems,535
practical uses,857
InPouchTF system,498
Interoestrus,6
quality of embryos produced,
INRA-96,796
Interoestrus intervals
876-8
Insemination,766
bitch,651
buffalo,834
artificial seeArtificial insemination
cowherd,523,524,529
cattle,872-3,874
bitch,800-2
Interserviceintervals
horse,874-5
cow,777-81
distribution,529,537
pigs.875-6
after superovulation,860
pastoral dairy herd,550,553
sheep and goats,875
beef sucllerherd,556
Intersex gene,goats,131
In vitro fertilization(IVF),872,873
non-retumratetofirst,526,781
Intersexuality
listory,856
pastoral dairy herd,5479
cats,668
buffalo,834
progesterone assaysfor timing,
horse,874
540-1
goats.131,575
Invito maturation ofoocytes(IVM),
doe goat,789-90
horses,129,611
872,873
after superovulation,863
sheep,560
history, 856
ewe,785-7
seealso Freemartinism
buffalo, 834
after superovulation,862-3
Interstitial cell tumours,
horse.875
mare.797-8
testicular,745
pigs,875-6
after superovulation,862
Intestines,prolapse into
sheepand goats,875
queen cat,802
uterus,314
Involution see Ulterineinvolution
sow,792-4,863
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection
Iodinedeficiency,124,457,55
see also Mating:Service
(ICS1).856
Iodothyronine5-deiodinase,459
Instruments/equipment
cattle,874
Ipronidazole,499
fetotomy,328-9
horse,874-5
Iron,460,461
manipulativedelivery,267,268,
pigs,876
Ischiocavernosus muscles,682,698,
275-7
Intraovarian abscesses,402
720-1
Insulin
Intrauterine fluid
lsoflurane,386
927
Index
[soxsuprine
Laminitis,puerperal,316
L
caesareanoperation,354
caesarean operation,372
fetotony,331-2
Laboratory pregnancy tests
retained fetal membranes,628
uterinetorsion,240
bitch,115
Laparohysterotomy,uterine torsion,
IVC see Invitro culture of
238-9,240
presumptive zygotes
ewe,108
Laparoscopic procedures
IVFseeinvitrofertilization
mare,86
artifcial insemination,786-7,
IVM sceinvitromaturationofoocytes
queen cat.117
789-90,793
IVPseeinvitroembryoproduction
sow,104
embryo recovery,869
Ixodes ricis,574
Labour
embry0 transfer,869,870
estimating duration,223-4
bitch and queen cat,379.381
first stage, 171-3
Laparotomy
J
nervous voluntary inhibition,245
embryo collection,869
phases,170-1
embryo transfet,869,870
Japanese encephalitis.794
second stage,173-5
uterineprolapse,324
Jersey cattle
stages,170-G,828
uterine torsion,239-40
duration of oestrs,21
third stage,175-6
Large offspring(calf) syndrome,255,
rectovaginal constriction,134
seealso Parturition
280,885-G
sperm defecis.756
Lacerations,birth canal,307-12
Late embryonic death (LED).124
Johne's disease,782
Lactation
Lateral deviationof head,264
cOW
fetotomy technique,337
K
nutrition during,450-60,544-5
traction,269
sce also Dairy cows
calf,288-9
Kale,138
guinea pig, 843
foal,291
Ka-MaR heat mount detector,435-6
hamsters,847
lamb/kid,293
Karyotype,126,129
rabbit,842
puppy/kitten,221,277
Kebbing seeEnzootic abortionofewes
rats and mice,845
Lateralposition
Kenney's diluent,795
sow,management,641,642
anterior presentation,297-8
Ketamine,caesarean operation,372,
see also Mill;Suckling
posterior presentation,298
386
Lagomorpha,836
Lawsonia intracellularis850
Ketosispregnant guinea pig, 849
lamb
Leiomyomata(fbroids)
Kidding.170,177
birth,181
cervix,405
complications,322-3
birth weight,259-60
uterus,404-5.620
dystocia see Dystocia, doe goat
fetal age calculation,75
vagina,612
initiation,157
feto1omy,32G
Lembert uterine suture
premature induction,167
fostering.565
pattern,359
Kittening,186-7
maturation of lungs,156
Leptavoid-11,903
complications,324
onsetofrespiration atbirth,187
Leptin
dystocia sec Dystocia,queen cat
perinatal mortality,211
onset of puberty and,5
initiation,161
sex,birth weight and,260
regulation of oestrous cycle,8-9
predictionoftime,389
thermoregulation,189
Leptospiragippotposa579,597
premature induction167
Lambing,177,181
Leptospirahardjo,487,488,489,573
third stage oflabour,175
care during,176
vaccine,903
Kittens
complications,315,322-3
Leptospirakennewicli597
birth,186-7
delayingonset,1G8
Leptospirapomona,487,489,640
thermoregulation,189
dystociaseeDystociawe
Leptospira spP.,487
Klebsiellapneumoniae,equine
first stage of labour, 171, 172
Leptospirosis
endometritis,599,600
initiation,155-6,157.158
control inAl programmes,
Klinefelter syndrome,126,13l,132
oxytocin release,156,170
782,794
744-5
prematureinduction,167
cattle,477,487-9,524
Knife,urved inger,328,9
second stage oflabour,173,174
goats,579
Knobbed acrosome defect,753,754
Lamhing percentage,true,559
horses,597
Krey-Schottler double-jointed hook,
Lambing rates,59,560
human,487
267,268,329
afterAI,786,787
pigs,640
Krey's hooks,287
Lameness,anovulatory anoestrus
sheep,573
Kuhnsobstetrical cruch,267,268
and,427
Leukorrhoea,412
928
Index
Leydig cells,681-2
Lubricants
Luteolysis(corpus luteum regression),
development, 687-8
fetotomy, 332
10-12
endocrine control,689-90, 691
manipulative delivery266
hormonal induction,49-53
Ll sceLuteinizing hormone
Lufeneron,602
prevention during pregnancy, 76
Libido,male,700-2
Lumbar area division,total fetotomy,
cow,25-6,27
assessment,711-13
335
ewe,31
camelids,813,820
Lumbosacralplexus,obsteuric
s0W,34
Libido test,bulls,712
damage.312-13
Lymplocytes,peripheral blood,126
Licking. newborn offspring.176
Lungs
Lymphosarcoma
Lidocaine hydrocliloride,272-3,
inflation, at bir,187
uterus,404,405
274,354
maturation offetal.156,163
vagina,407
Light programmes
Lupins,124
manipulation of breeding,42
Luprostiol,50,901-2
M
mares,584
Luteal activity,prolonged
sows and gilts, 643
after follicular aspiration,871
MaceratedfetusseeFetalmaceration
see also Photoperiod
mare,587-8
Magnesium,measurements,462
Limbs
Luteal deficiency
Male animals,681-702
accessory, 134,135
bitch,654-5
breeding soundness exainination,
deformities,350-1
cow,465,523
706-17
subcutaneousfetotomy 329-31
mare,591-2
Pffect on female function,5,43
scealsoForelimb(s);Hindlimb
queen cat,671
fertility and infertility,705-60,
Lipolysis,lactatingcow,453,454
Luteal (luteinized) ovarian cysts
819-20,833
Liquid nitrogen,772
bitch,654
immunocastration,54-5
Listeriaivanovi,490,571
cow,443,444,522
libido and mating behaviour,
Listeria monocytogenes
treatment,446-7
700-2
cattle,477,490
seealso Cystic ovarian disease
reproductive abnormalities,
goats,578,579
Luteal phase,oestrous cycle,6,39
717-60
sheep,563,571
puerperium,197
sce also Copulation; Sires
Listeria seeligeri,490
Luteinizing hormone(LH)
Male:female ratios,707
Listeriosis
malereproduction,689-91
Male genital tract
cattle,490-1,524
oestrous cycle,10
accessory glands.685,695-6
goats,578,579
onset of puberty, 4
anatomy,681-4
sheep,563,571-2
postpartum secretion,197,198
buffalo,831
Litter size
regulation of secretion,
camelids,s10-11
cats,117
7,8-9,12
breeding soundness examination,
dogs,estimation,114
surge,regulation,7,8
709-11
pigs,641,644
therapy.44,896
development,687-9,700
small mammals,840
tonic secretion,
endocrinology 689-91
Live foal rate,582-3
bitch,39,40,664
physiology, G89-96
Liver dysfunction,lactatingcows,
buffalo,826,827
Male infertility,705-60
452
coW,29-30
coital failure,717-38
Liveweight,sires09
after superovulation,861
fertilizationfailure,738-50
Llama,809
anovulatory anoestrus,
semen abnormalities,750-60
see also Camelidae
427-8
Mammary glands
Local anaesthetic block
cystic ovarian disease,440-1
diagnosis of pregnancy, 94-5,
caesarean peration,354,367,
lactation,454
110-11,115
372-3
pregnancy,88
prepartum changes,177,183
Caslick's vulvoplasty,610
ewe,31,32,202-3
Mammary tumours
Lochia,196,201,202,204
mare,20
ovariectomyin existing.376
Locomotorlesions
queencat,41,674
surgical neutering to prevent,376
impaired mounting,719-20
sOw,34,35,203
378,380-1
obstetric,causingrecumbency
Luteinizing hormone-releasing
Management practices
317-18
hormone(LH-IRH)see
male infertility,707,719
Looped tails sperm with,757
Gonadotrophin-releasing
bitch fertility,662-7
Low density lipoprotein (LDL)
hormone
buffalo fertility,833-4
769-70
Luteolysin,11
camelid infertility,818
929
Index
Management practices(continued)
cyclical ovarian activity,12-20
genital tract trauma,612,613
cattle herdferility
dystocia seeunderDystocia
timing,13,585
beef sucllers,556
cmbryo collection,866-8
seealso Persistent mating
dairying,536-42
embryonic/fetal loss,124,
induced endomeiritis
pastoral dairying,543-55
137-8,139,590-3
queen cat,674
coW
embryo transfer,868-9
smallmammals,839,840
anovulatory anoestrus,426-7,
epidural anaesthesia,273
sow,timing,641
428-9
fetal fluids,70-1
see also Coitus;Copulation;
dystocia prevention,258
fetal membranes, 62,72
Insemination; Service
oestrus deiection,431-9
fetal sacs,72
Mating behaviour,700-2
pregnancy diagnosis,93-5
hydrallantois,143
observation,711-13
puerperal uterine infections,
infertility/subfertility.128-9,
buffalo,826
409
582-628
camelids,813
venereal disease prevention,
insemination,797-8,861
ca1s,41-2,702
482,499
older maiden,606
cattle,22,701
doegoatfertility,577
ucyteretrieval,870-2
dogs, 36,702
ewe
oocyte transfer,872
guinea pig,843
fertility,561-2
ovaries see under Ovaries
pigs,33,701-2
pregnancy diagnosis,106
ovulationseeunterOvulation
rabbits,841-2
mare
parturition seeFoaling
sheep,30-1,701
fertility/infertility,582,583
placenta,68,69
stallion,700,701
595-6,606-7
pregnancy,80-7
Meatand Livestock Commission
pregnancy diagnosis,83
puberty, 4,5.12
(MLC).559
queen cat fertility.674
puerperium,201-2
Mechanical nose,oestrus detection,
sowand gilt
relaxin,161
437
ertility,636,637,641-5
superfecundation,144
Medetomidine,386
pregnancy diagnosis,102
superovulation,861-2
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
Manchette,694
twin pregnancy seeTwin
(MPA),46,49,900
Manganese,458,460,461
pregnancy,mare
Megestrolacetate,49,119,900
Mange,scrotal,740
uterine retroflexion,242
Melanoma
Manipulativevaginal delivery
uterine torsion,
penis,736,737
decision maling,226-7,228,
239-40
vulva.610
229-30
vagina see uderVagina
Melatonin
faulty fetal position,297-8
ventralhernia,241-2
physiology.7
fetal postural defects,286-95
see also Foal;Hlorse
therapy, 54, 902
twins,302-3
Marereproductivelosssyndrome,
Membranes,fetal seeFetal
bitch and queen cat,275-9
592
membranes
digital manipulations,275,
Marsupials,836
Membrane slip,transrectal
27G
sec also Sugar glider
palpation,98
use ofinstruments,275-7
Masculinization
Merino sheep,testiculr
farm animals and horses,
female fetus,688
degeneration,741
266-74
female pups,648,649
Mesonephric ducis,688
equipment,267,268
Mastitis
aplasia,748
manoeuvres,267-71
cOw,410,488
freemartinism,401
sedation and anaesthesia,266,
small mammals,850
lesions,746-8
271-4
Maternal age see Age,of dam
remnants,400
see also Forceps uraction;Retro-
Maternalmortality
Mesonephros,687,688
pulsion;Rotation;Snares,
caesarean operation,365,371-2
Metabolic profiles,laciating
obstetric;Traction delivery
373,389
cows,462-3
Manmheiniahaenolyica,409
retainedfetal menmbranes,
Metatherian mammals,836
Manxgene,cat,124,128
422-3
Met-enkephalin,12
Mare
uterine torsion,237
Methallibure, 48
abortion,593-608
Mating
Metoclopramide,386
caesareanoperation,368-72
bitch,tining,664-7
Metoestrus,6
corpusluteum see der Corpus
goat, timing,577
bitch,36,37,40
luteum
mare
Metricheck device,412,413,417
930
Index
Metritis,407
semen examination,750-1
Mountingbehaviour
bovine,410-11
trichomonads,495,498
impaired,sires,719-20
after caesarean operation,365
Midazolam,caesarean operation,372
oestrous cows,21-2,432
cervicalinvolvemeni,405
Middle uterine arteriesseeUterine
delection aids,435-7
chronic,repeat breeder,464-5
arteries,middle
optimizing detection,432-5
less severecases,411
Middleuterinevein,rolein luteolysis,
Mouse see Mice
ovariobursal adhesions
11
Mucometra
complicating 403
Midlineincision,caesareanoperation
camelids,816
parturient recumbency,316-17
369
cow,448
pastoral dairy cow,545
Mifepristone,inductionofparturition,
mare,611
postpartumuterine contami-
291
Mucorspp,510,598
nation and,199,409-10
Milk
Mucuspenetration test,fertility760
puerperal(peracute),410-11
assaysincowfertility control,540-1
Mule,132
retainedfetalmembranes
diluents for semen,769,795
Mullerian ducts see Paramesonephric
causing,423,424-5
letdown,176
sequelae,411
oesurus detection assays,437,438
Mullerian inhibiting substance,688
reatmentand prognosis,410-11
pregnancy tests,86,96-8,108,109
Multipleovulation
equine
seealso Progesterone assays(milk
cat,41
contagious see Contagious
or plasma)
cow,23,24
equinemetritis
Millk fever see Hypocalcaemia
mare,588-90
retained fetalmembranes,628
Milking,postpartum changes and,
seealso Superovulation;Twin
ovine,562
200,201
ovulation
post-abortion,564,568
Milkringtest,brucellosis484
Multiple ovulation andembryo
porcine,640
Milkyield,cow
[ransfer(MOET),856,857
Meritiscomplex,407-18
after induced calving,165
Multiple pregnancy,72-3
aetiology and pathogenesis,
cystic ovarian disease and.442
camelids,814
408-9
effect of dystocia,210
cow,72-3
definitions.407-8
fertilityand,394,450,453,518
ewe,72-3
see also Endometritis; Metritis
during oestrus, 21
see also Twin pregnancy
Metronidazole,361,499
postpartum ovarian rebound and,
Mummifiedfetus seeFetalmummi-
Metrorragie,654
200
fication
MHC-Iantigens,420
puerperal uterine infections and
Musclecontractures,fetal,501
Mice,837,844-5
409
Muscular hypertrophy(doublemus-
assisted reproductive
see also Dairy cows
cling),calves with
technologies, 856
Minerals,effectsnfertility,4567
dystocia,213-14,216,217,249-50
reproduction,840,844-5
Mixaploid animals,129,132
fetomaternal disproporion.281
sexing,836-7,845
Molybdenum deficiency,457,458
Mycobacterim bovis,748
vaginal smears,839
Monensin,454,567
see so Tuberculosis,bovine
Microbiologicalculture
Monocyclic species,3,35
Mycobacterinm cell wall extract,
Mycoplasma,493
Monopropylene glycol,454
equine endometritis,602
Tritrichomonasfeus498
Monosomy,126-7
Mycobacterium tuberculosis,524
bovine venereal
Monotocous species, 62
seealsoTuberculosis,bovine
campylobacteriosis,481
parturition,168,173-4,175
Mycoplasma bovigenitalim,492,748
equine cndometritis,599,600-1
Monslers,132-6
Mycoplasma bovis,492
porcine infertility,G35
caesarean operation,348,350-1
Mycoplasma cmis743
Microcotyledons,horse,66
double,134,302,341
Mycoplasmas
Microencapsulation,sperm,7734
control in Al programmes,782,
Micronutrient deficiencies
fetotomy,327,341-3
783,794
effects on fertility,456-60
principles of delivery,303-4
biich,655.656
pastoral dairy herd,545,553
Moore'sobstetricchains,267,268
cattle,403,492,493
Microscopic agglutination test
MortalityseeMaternalmortality;
Mycotic abortion
(MAT).leptospirosis,488
Newborn,mortality,Perina-
cattle,510-11,524
Microscopy
tal mortality
horse,598
cervical mucus,22,667
Morierellawolji510,511
see also Fungal infections
embryo quality assessment, 876-7
Morula,61.62
Mycoticendometritis,602-3
endometrialcytology,600
in-vivo-recovered,865,867
Mycotoxins pigfeed,636-7
931
Index
Mydiavac,565,903
nutritional deficiencies,189-90
Nymphomania
Myometrial contractions,169-70
onseiof respiralion,174,1878
camelids.818
fetal posture and,173
suckling,176
cOW，445,524
first stage of labour,172
thermoregulation,189
goal,576
hormonalregulation,156,169-70
umbilicus,189
Nystatin,602
inadequale,uterineinertia,243-4
Nigrosin,751,754
mechanisms,169
Nitricoxide,11,696-8
0
postpartum,176,194
Nitrofuraz0ne,416,600
relaxin actions,162
Nitrous oxide,386
Obermeyer's anal hook,267,268
5econd stage oflabour 173.174
Nivalenol,636-7
Obesity spayed bitches, 380
separation of fetal membranes,419
Non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs).
Oblique dorsovertical presentation,
third stage of labour,175-6
452,453,454-5,462
299
Myometrial contractures,late gesta-
Non-return rate to first
Obliqueventroverticalpresentation
tion,172
insemination,526,781
(dog-sitting position),176,
Myometrium,169
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
218,299
Myosin light chain (MLC),169
drugs(NSAIDs)
Obstetricinjuries,306-15
Myosin light chain kinase(MLCK).
affer caesarean operation,362
seealsoFemalegenital tract
169,244
persistent mating-induced
injuries,obstetric
endometritis,604-5
Obturatorparalysis313-14
N
puerperal metritis,410
Oedema
Noradrenaline(norepinephrine)
placenta,141
Naloxone,12
female reproduction,7
subcutancous,after caesarean
Napeposture
malereproduction,696,698
operation,371
calf,289
Norgestomet, 45
see aiso Dropsy
foal,291-2
Nuclear vacuoles,defective
Oedematous Ayrshirecalf,134,136
puppies/kintens,277
sperm,754
Oestradiol (L,)
National MillRecords(NMR) Inter-
Nutritional factors
hypothalanic-pituitary feedback,
Herd software,535,535,
embryonicloss,137,138
7-8
536,537,538,539,540
initiation of ovarian activity.42-3
onset of pubery, 4, 5
Navel ill,189
initiation of parturition,155
postpartum changes, 197
Neonates see Newborn
onset ofpuberty,5,449-50
pre-ovulatory surge,8
Neosporosis(Neospora canimum).
parturient recumbency,316
therapy seeEstradiol therapy
bovine,499-502,524
perinatal mortality,189-90
cow,after superovulation,861
aetiology and pathogenesis,
placental morphology,69
mare,pregnan,86,161
499-500,501
postpartum ovarian rebound,
clinical signs,500
200,203-4
initiationofparturition,158,162
diagnosis, 500-2
puerperal uterineinfections,409
separation of fetalmembranes
prevention and control,502
retained fetal membranes,422
and,419
trends in frequency,477
bovineinfertility/subfertility,
uterine inertia and,244
Nerve injuries
449-63
Oestrogen(s)
after caesarean operation,66
anovulatory anoestrus,
assays,pregnancy diagnosis,86,
obstetric,312-14,318
426-7,428
t01
Nervous voluntary inhibition of
cystic ovarian disease,442
initiation ofparturition,155-6,
labour,245
investigation,460-3
158.160-1
Neuteringsurgical,bitch and queen
lactatingcow,450-60
male physiology. 690
ca1,376-81
pastoral dairy herd,553
maternal recognition of preg-
Newborn
puberty and rearing period.
nancy,78
acidosis,188-9
449-50,451
myometrialeffects.169-70
birth injuries,189
calf birth weight,252-3
oestrousbehaviour and,432
care,187-90,817
camelid infertility,819
oestrous cycle, 6
after caesarean delivery,362,
equine infertility,593
postpartum changes,202
388
goat infertility,577
reproductive tractimmunity and,
protection from dam,190,388
lamb birth weight, 260
408-9
infecious agents,189-90
ovineinfertility/subfertility,561
separationof fetalmembranes
licking by dam,176
sow and gilt fertility,641-2
and,420
mortality,187,850
see nlso Feeding
tumours secreting,397,653,745
932
Index
Oestrogen(s)(continued)
queen cal,40-2
prolonged,669-70
bitch,39,40,109,110
rabbit,841-2
sOW,33
buffalo,826,827
rats and mice,845
failure,diagnosis of pregnancy,
cat,41
sow,32-5
102
cow,29,30,87
sugar glider,848
posiparumreturn,204
doe goat,105
see also Cyclical ovarian activity
Oestrus detection
ewe,31,32,105
Oestrouscycle synchronization
artificial insemination,766
mare,20,81
female:male ratios after,707
bitch.664-7
sow,34,35,102
hormonal methods,44-9,50-2,
buffalo, 826
Oestrogens,high dietary intale
53-4
cow,431-9
cow,149,460
superovulationregimens,859
aids.435-8
ewe,234,560-1
bitch,652
environmental factors,434
goats,576-7
buffalo,826
evaluation,528-9
sow,152
camelids,812-13
[ailure,431-2,522,523,529
seelso Cloverpastures
cOw，45-6,50-2,52-4
herd size and calving pattern,
Oestrogen therapy.898-9
herdfertility management,
432-3
ban in food animals,45,54,898
438,553-4,554
dose rate,899
oocyie/embryo transfer,860,
identifying individuals,434
indications,899
866
indirect methods,437-8
doeg0at,47,52,861-2
optimizing,432-5
bitch,termination ofpregnancy,
ewe,46-7,52,561
pastoral dairy herd,547-8,
118
embryo transfer,861-2
553
cow,anoestrus,429,430
mare,52,862
silent ovulations,435
queencat, termination of
sows/gilts,47-8,52,643
titte and place of observation,
pregnancy,119
embryo transfer,863
433-4
see also Estradiol therapy
seeiso Oestrus induction
doe goat, 788
Oestrone
Oestrus,6
ewe,561,766,783
pregnant cow.87
first(at pubery),4,5
mare,18-19.20
pregnant mare,78,86,161
induction see Oestrus induction
queen cat,674
Oestrone sulphate
postpartum,197
small mammals,839
pregnantbuffalo,828
signs see Oestrus signs/behaviour
sOw,642-3
pregnant cow,87,98
silent see Silentheat
see also Oestrus signs/behaviour
601 eo aop uuaid
suppression,44-5,49,55
Oestrus detection efficiency (ODE),
pregnant sow,104
synchronization see Oestrous
529
Oestrous cycle
cycle synchronization
pastoral dairy herd,550-2,554
artificialcontrol,42-55
bitch,35-6,37
Oestrus detectionrate(ODR),528-9
natural regulation,6-12
ovarianremnantsyndrome,382
Oestrus induction
ovariohysterectomy timing,377-8
ovariohysterectomybefore
hormonal methods,43,44
phases,6
first,378
superovulation,859
bitch,35-40
prolonged,652-3
bitch,54,651-2
buffalo,825-7
split (false),652
buffalo,834
camelids,812
buffalo,825
cow,46,438,547-8
chinchilla,844
camelids,812
doe goat, 47
cow,20-30
cow,21
ewe,46-7,52
duration,21
failure,diagnosis of pregnany
mare,52,584-5
endocrine changes, 29-30
93
queen cat,669
morphological changes.22-9
resynchronization in
SOW,642-4
periodicity,20-1
see also Oestrous cycle
ewe,30-2
ewe,30
synchronization;Ovulation
goat,32
mare,12-13,14-16
induction
guinea pig,843
postpartumsceFoal heat
Oestrus signs/behaviour
hamster,846
queen cat,40-42
after ovariohysterectomy,382
mare,12-20,584
ovarian remnant syndrome.
male responses,700-1
endocrine changes,20
382
bitch,36
failure/irregularity,586-7
ovariohysterectomybefore
buffalo, 825
periodicity,12-13
first,378
camelids,812
933
Index
Oestrus signs/behaviour (contimued)
Ovarian arteries, ohstetric injuries,307
lesions causing inferility.
cow, 21-2,432
Ovarian carcinoma,397
621-6
doe goat, 32
Ovarian cystadenoma,377, 625-6
non-neoplastic enlargement.
ewe,30-1
Ovarian cysts
622-3
mare,18-19,20
follicular seeFollicular ovarian cysts
pregnancy-related changes,
queen cat,41,116,117,674
luteal see Luteal ovarian cysts
82,622
sow,33
'retention''inclusion'or‘fossa',
spring transition,585-6,622
see also Oestrus deteclion
620-1,621
sow/gilt, 33-4,632-3
OfficeInternational des Epizooties
bitch, 651, 653-4
Ovariobursal adhesicns
(OIE)
cow,439.442-5
cow,402-4
diseases spread in semen,775,776
ewe,560
queen cai,G68
disease testing for sires used in
mare,585-6, 620, 621
Ovariohysterectomy,376-81
AI,782
queen cat, 671
cumplications,379-80
embryo transfer prccautions, SSG
soW,637-8
gravid,376,387,389
Oocyte
see also Cystic ovarian disease
indications,231,376-7
cryopreseivation,878-80
Ovarian dysplasia,647
pyometra,381-2,661,673
donors, 859, 861
Ovarian failure, premature, 654,671
surgical technique,378-9
fertilization, 61
Ovarian follicles see Follicles,ovarian
timing.377-8
in vitro maturation see in vitro
Ovarian haematoma,mare,623-4
Ovaritis see Oophoritis
maiuration of oocytes
Ovarian hypoplasia,396,522,560.
Overall prenancy rate,526,528
metabolic studies, 878
667-8
see also Pregnancy rates
quality assessment,876-7,878
Ovarian neoplasia
Oviducts see LIterine tubes
recovery,870-2
bitch,377,649-50,652-3
Ovine pregialcy-associated
transfer, 872
cow,396-7
glycoproteins（ovPACs),108
transvaginal-ultrasound-guided
mare, 624-6
Ovsynch programme,53-4
aspiration see Ovum
queen cat,377,668
Ovulation, 6, 61
pickup
Ovarianrebound,postpartum see
coitus-induced se Coitus-induced
unfertilized (UFO), 860, 865.
under Cyclical ovarian
ovulaticn
867-8,869
activity
first, at puberty, 4,5
young and old mares, 591
Ovarian remnant syndrome,382
hornonal regulation,9
Oophoritis, 396, 507
Ovarian torsion,mare, 626
multiple see Multiple ovulation
Opioids
Ovariectomy, 380-1
postpartum,197-8,203
caesarean operation,386
cystic ovarian disease, 446
synchronization see Oestrous
initiation of parturition, 155
laparoscopic, 381
cycle synchronization
oestrous cycle regulation, 12
Ovaries
twin see Twin ovulation
onset of puberty and, 5
cyclical activity see Cyclical ovar-
bitch, 36, 39,663
postpartum cyclic ovarian activity
ian activity
Al timing and, 801-2
and,198
bitch
failure, 653
Opossum, short-tailed, 836,837
congenital abnormalities,647
ultrasonic detection, G66-7
reproduction,840,848
cyclical changes, 37-9
variable timing,652, 653,
Opportunistic pathogens
transplantation, 380
663
canine reproductive disease,
buffalo,824-5, S26-7
buffalo, 826
G55-6
camelids.S11
camelids, 813-14
cquine endometritis,599
cOW
cOw,21,24-6.449
feline reproductive disease,
anoestrs,426,522
abnormalities in repeat
671,673
cyclical changes, 23-9
breeders, 464
Orchitis.742-3,744
lesions causing infertility 395-7
delayed, 449, 523
Orf, 731
postpartum interaction with
silent, 435
Ornithooros coriaceus ticks,511-12
uterus,198
ewe.31
Osmotic pressure,semen diluents,
pregnancy-related changes,
mare,12-13,14
768
88-9
deiection,585
Os penis,700,836
doe goat, 32
during pregnancy, 82
fracture,727
ewe,31,560
Oter (amputate} calf 134, 136
mare
failure, 670
Ovarian abscess,mare,G23
cyclical changes, 13-15,16,
sow,34,643
Ovarian agen1esis, 395-6,522, 647
17,18,19
AI timing and,793
934
Index
Ovulation fossa, mare, 13, 15, 16,
retained fetal membranes, 628
premature induction sce
18.19
small mammals, induction of
Induction of parturition
cysts (retention’ cysts）, 620, 621
parturiion,840
role of relaxin,161-2
Ovulation induction
sow orgilt
stages of labour 170-6
superovulation,S59
acceleration of parturition,
bitch sceWhelping
bitch, 652
167-8
buffalo, 828-30
buffalo,830
dystocia,230,244
camelids,817
induction of parturition,167
chinchilla, 844
mare,797-8
uterine inertia,244
cow see Calving
doe goat see Kidding
rabbit, 841
eve see Lambing
P
see alsn Oestrus induction;
guinea pig.843
Superovulation
Pachysalpinx, 403
hamsters, 847
Ovulation rate
Palpation see Abdominal palpation;
mare see Foaling
artificial manipulation,55,562
Transrectal palpation
queen cat sec Kintening
sows, 642, 644
Pampiniform plexus, 684
rabbit,842
Ovum pick up (OPU), 870-2
Panting. after caesarean operation,
rats and mice, 845
consequences for donot,871-2
388
sow or gilt seeFarrowing
buffalo,834
Papillary cystadenocarcinoma,
seealsoLahour
catile and horses, 870-2
ovarian,649
Pastenrella infections, rabbiis, 50
sheep and goais. 875
Papillomas
Pastoral dairy herd,541-55
Oxytetracycline,411,416
penis,735-6,737,738
anoestrois cows,549
Oxytocin
see nlso Fibropapillomas
breeding season,546-8
corpus luteum regression, 11-12
Paramedian incision, caesarean
calving, 545-8
environmental influences on
operation,364
monitoring fertility,549-50,551,
release,176,177,186
Paramesonephric ducts (millerian
552,553
Ferguson's reflex,156,170,173
cducts)
initiation of parturition,156,161
freemartinism, 400,401
other causes of infertility,553-5
myometrial contractions and,
fusion abnormalities, 611
pregnanry testing.548-9
170,244
male development, 688
reproductive management, 542-3
penile erection,698
remnants causing dystocia,235
PCR sec Polymerase chain reaction
suckling-induced release,176
segmental aplasia,397-400,
Pedometers, oestrus detertion in
Oxyiocin receptors
647-8
cows, 437
endometrial, 11-12,77
Parametritis, 407
Pelvic area:calf birth weight ratio,
myometrial,169,170
Paraphimosis,732-3
216,248,257
Oxytocin therapy 897-8
Parasympathetic activity,penile
Pelvic capacity,maternal
dose raie, 898
erection,696-B
catle, 248,257
fetotomy,343
Paravertebral alaesthesia, caesarean
dogs,262
indications, 897-8
operation,353-4
sheep, 261, 262
postpartum haemotrhage,
Pelvic collapse,fetal,Graham's
Parity of dam
307.366
calf birth weight and,249,250
method,282
uterine inertia,244,245,246
dystocia risk and,256
Pelvic constriction, causing dystocia,
bitch
postparum ovarianrebound and,
232
caesarean operation,387
200
Pelvic fractures,healed,352
uterine inertia,245
Parovarian cysts,400
Pelvic reflex, 173
cOW
Parturition,154-87,177
Pelvimetry
caesarean operation,359,62
accelerating, 167-8
darn selection forbreeding,283
hydrallantois,143
care ofanimals during, 176-87
predicting ease of calving 216. 257
puerperal metritis,411
delaying onse,156,168,898
predicting ease of whelping, 262
retained fetal membranes,424
double, of sows, 144
Penis,682,696-700
uiterine prolapse, 322
abnormal venous drainage.
endocrine changes,157
mare
fetal maturation and,162-3
723,724
caesarean operation, 371
initiation,154-61,828
congenital abnormalities,727
endometritis,602,604,605,
injuries/diseases incidental to.
corkscrew, 724-6
607
306-18
development, 700
induction of parturition, 163
physiology,168-76
deviations,724-6
935
Index
Penis(contined)
Petriellidium boydi510
semen collection and storage,
lateral,726
Pet small mammals, 83G-51
768,790-2
spiral,724-6
artificial insemination,839
assisted reproductive
surgicalteasebull3-
breeding systems,839,840
technologies,856
ventral(rainbow),726
classification,836,837
embryo cryopreservation,881
duplication,738
inductionofparturition,840
embryo recovery and transfer,
ejaculation,698-9,700
normalreproduction,840-8
869-70
failure,738
reproductive disorders and
in vitro embryo production.
erection,696-8,699-700
infertility.S48-51
875-6
failure,720-4,725
sexing 836-8
superovulation and
persistent(priapism),733,734
vaginal smears/oestrus detection,
insemination,863
preputial lesions preventing,
839
breed differences,fetal
727-34
Phantom cows,431
membranes,72
examination,709-10
Phenolsulphonphthalein(PSP) test,
chromosomal abnormalities,128,
infections,729-31
tubalpatency,403-4
131
neoplasia,735-7,738
Phenothiazine tranquillizers,386
chromosome number,129
occlusion oflongitudinal canals,
Phenylbutazone,604-5
cloning,883
724,725
Pleromones,700,813
embryonic development,62,
persistent frenulum,726,727
Phimosis,732
67-8
prolapse,721,722,334
Phosphate, inorganic,462
inherited defects,125
ruptured(fractured or broken),
Phosphorus deficiency,137,458
mating beliaviour,33,701-2
721-3
Photoperiod
transgenic, 884
species differences,699-700,811
artificial manipulation,42
see also Boar;Gilt;Piglets;Sow
strangulation and necrosis,734-5
melatonin and,7
Pineal gland, 7
traumatic injuries,733-4,738,820
postpartum ovarian reboundand,
Pineal peptide hormones.7
seesoPrepuce
200-1
Pituitary
Pentoxifylline,598
camelids,810
anterior
Perimetritis,407
doe goat, 42
oestrous cycle regulation,8
Perinatal mortality,dystocia,209-10,
ewe,7,30,42
stimulation ofhormone
211
hansters,846
release,43
Perineal injuries,obstetric,307,
mare,7,42,584
glandexlract,equine,585,8612
308-12
queencat,40
intermediate,adenomaous
infertility after,406
sow,32-3,637,643
hyperplasia,586
surgicalrepait,309,310-12,312
seealsoBreeding season
Pizzle-ot,ram,7301
first degree,308
Physical inability torise317-18
Placenta
Phyio-oestrogens,460
changes during parurition,172175
third degree,308,309-10,311
see niso Clover pastures; Oestro-
cotyledonary,G8
Perineoplasty, 611
gens,high dietaryintake
diffuse,68
Perineum,abnormalities in mares,
Piedmont caitle,dystocia,213-14
endotheliochorial,68,69
(1-809
Piglets
epitheliochorial,68,69
Periovarian abscesses,402
birth,183,184
expulsion,175,181
Periovarian cysts,mare.620-1
birth weight,261
haemochorial,68,69
Peritonitis
fetalage calculation,75
leptospirosis, 488
after caesareanperation,366,388
number weaned per sow peryear.
oedema,141
ovariobursal adhesions,403
633
relaxin secretion,161
puerperal metritiscausing,410
retained,230
removal,caesareanoperation,
Perivaginal fat,prolapse315
stillbirihs,165-6,185,211
370-1
Perosomus elumbis,133,217,304
thermoregulation,189
retention
caesarean operation,350-1
umbilical cord rupure,165-6,174
inducedparturition,163
Persistent mating-induced endo-
Pigs
seealso Retainedfetal
metritis（PMIE),603-7
artificial insemination,643,
membranes
management ofhighly susceptible
790-4
separation,175,181
mare,606-7
infectious disease control,776,
caesarean operation,370,
prevention/treatment,603-6
782,793
371,387
susceptible mares,603-7
inseminationtechniques,
premature,horse,594
Persson's chain saw,328
792-3
synepithelialchorial,68,G9
936
Index
Placenta (continned)
Ponies
camelids, 814-16
toxoplasmosis.567
corpus luteum,14
chinchilla,844
types,68-70
induction of foaling, 164
cow,87-102
zonary,68
ovulation,13
endocrinology,87-8
buffalo,827
pregnancy, 82
genital organ changes, 88-93
camelids,814
Porcilis PRRS,904
matermal recognition, 77
Placental lactogen
Porcine circo virus(PCV-2).G39
myometrial contractures, 172
bovine,88
Porcine parvovirus (PPV), 638-9, 794
presenting as anoestrus, 425
ewe,105
vaccine,638-9,903-4
Placentitis
Porcinereproductiverespiratory
endocrinology,105
Bacilus licheniformis,491
syndrome (PRRS), 639,794
maternal recognition, 77
brucellosis, 484
vaccines,904
cwe,104-9
campylobacteriosis,483,568
Position.fetal se Fetal position
endocrinology, 104-5
Chlamydophila aborus, 564-5
Possumlesser gliding see Sugar
maternal recognition,76-7
mycotic,511
myometrial contractures,172
retained fetal memhranes,421
Posterior (longitudinal) presentation,
guinea pig.843
salmonellosis,490
262-3
hamsters, 847
mare.abortion,594,597-8
caesarean operation,358
mare,80-7
Placentomes,ruminant,65,68
fetomaternal disproporion, 284
changes in genital organs, 82-3
detachment, 419-20
inherited predisposition, 264
endocrinology, 80-1
enlargement,retained fetal
lateral position,298
maternal recognition, 78-9
membranes, 421
postural defecis of, 293-6
queen cat,115-17
transrectal palpation,98-9
fetotomy, 340, 341
ovariohysterectomy, 376,379
cow,92,98-9
subcuianeous fetotomy,331
prevention and termination,
ewe, 69
total fetotomy,337-40
119
Plants, teratogenic.124
ventral position,298
rabbit.842
Plate agglutination test,brucellosis,
puppies,manipulative delivery,
rats and mice, 845
484
275.278
sheep and goat, 104-9
Plters,329
Postmaturity see Prolonged gestalion
sOw,102-4
Pneumouterus, 611
Postpartum dysgalactia syndrome
endocrinology,102
Pneumovagina
(PPDS).644
maternal recognition,77-8
perineal injuries causing, 308,
Postpartum haemorrhage, 306-7
myometrial contractures,172
310,406
after caesarean operation,
sugar glider,848
windsucker lest, 608, 609,611
366,388
Pregnancy-associated glycoproteins
mare,608-9, 611
Postpartum septicaemia, chinchilla,
bovine (bPAGs), 95-6
Polledness gene goats, 131, 575
850
caprine,109
Poll glands, camelids, 810-1
Post-slaughter examination,genitals
ovine (ovPAGs),108
Polycyclic species, 3
of sow or gilt,635
Pregnancy-associated plasma protein
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Postre, fetal see Fetal posture
(PAPP-A),10
bovine viral diarrhoea virus,505
Pregnancy, 76-119
Pregnancy diagnosis, 79-80
brucellosis,484
exirauterinesgePseudoectopic
bitch, 110-15
emhryo evaluation, 877
pregnancy
clinical meihods, 110-12
neosporosis,502
maternal recognition,76-9
laboratory tests, 115
trichomoniasis,498
myometrial contractues in late,
radiography, 112-13
venereal campylobacteriosis,482
172
ultrasonography, 113-15
Polyoestrous species
prevention, 117-19
buffalo,827-8
puerperium,194
prolonged seeProlonged gestation
camelids,815-16
cat,40
termination see Termination of
cow,93-102
cow,20-1
pregnancy
heef suckler herds,556
goat,32
bitch,109-15
clinical methods,98-100
pig,32-3
endocrinology 109-10
laboratory methods, 95-8
Polyploidy.127
maternal recognition,79
management methods, 93-5
Polyspernic block, G1
myometrial contractures,172
optimum time,102
Polytocous species, 62
avariohysterectomy,376,379
pastoral dairying,548-9
fetal mummification,139
prevention,118
parturition,173,175
buffalo,827-8
us pyometra,417-18
937
Index
Pregnancy diagnosis (continued)
Prepuce
Progesterone assays (milk or plasma)
doe g0at,108-9
adhesions,731-2
bitch
ewe,105-8
breeding soundness examination,
ovarianremnant syndrome,382
mare,83-7
709-10
predicting onset ofparturition,
clinical examination,83-4
eversion andtrauma,727-9
383
hazards,87
lesions preventing normal
pregancy diagnosis,115
laboratory tests,86
erection,727-34
timingofmating/Al,664,8012
management methods,83
oedema,penilerupture,721,722
buffalopregnancy diagnosis828
optimum time,86-7
scrapings,bull,481,498
camelids, pregnancy diagnosis,
ultrasonography,84-6
traumaticinjuries,820
815
queen cal,117
Presentation,fetal see Fetal
cow
rabbit,842
presentation
cysticovarian disease,443
sow,102-4,634
Prevotellapostpartum uterus,
fertilitymanagement401
Pregnancy(conception)rates
199,201
oestrus detection,437,438
buffalo,832
Priapism,733,734
pregnancy diagnosis,96-7
camelids,814
PRID see Progesterone-releasing
repeatbreeder,465
cattle,528
intravaginal device
doegoat,pregnancy diagnosis,109
cumulative sum(Cu-Sun),
Problem-breeding mare,582
ewe,pregnancy diagnosis108
536,538
see alsoInfertility/subfertility.
mare
embryo transfer,866,874
mare
gestational progestogen
first-servicc.526,528
Processus vaginalis,681
therapy.592
overall,526,528
Progesterone
pregnancy diagnosis,86
pastoral dairying,550,554
corpus luteum,11,12
queencat
recording systems,536
hypothalamic-pituitary
predicting onset ofparturition,
retained fetalmembranes and,
feedback,7-8
389
423
longlowphenomenon,51
pseudopregnancy,670
statistics,393-4,395,451
myometrial effects,169-70
sow.pregnancy diagnosis,104
target,526
oestrous cycle, 6,9
Progesterone:oestrogen ratio sce
timing of insemination and,
onset of puberty, 5
Oestrogen:progesterone
439
pregnancy.76
ratio
ewe,560
superovulationand,861
Progesterone/progestogentherapy,
after Al,786,787
therapy seeProgesterone/
899-900
goats,IVP embryos,875
progestogen therapy
oestrous cycle manipulation,
mare
tumours secreling,397
44-9
afterAl.798
bitch
pyometra development and,659
end-of-season,582-3
initiation ofparturition,161
bitch
per oestrous cycle,582-3
0estrous cycle,39-40
oestrus suppression,49
Pregnancy-specific proteins B
pregnancy, 109, 110
pregnancy,649,655
bovine(bPSP-Bs).95-6
pyometra and,658
camelids,S12-13
ovine(ovPSPBs),.108
buffalo,826-7,828,830
cOW
goat,109
camelids,812,814
anoestrus,429,430-1
Pregnancy toxaemia,guinea
coW
cystic ovarian disease,447
pig,849
initiationofparturition,156-8
oestrouscycle manipulation,
Pregnant mare serum gonacdotrophin
lactation,455
45-6,53
(PMSG)see Equine
oestrous cycle,30
repeatbreeder,465-6
chorionic gonadotrophin
posipartum changes,197-8
doe goat.47
Pregnenolone,initiation of
pregnancy,87
ewe,46-7
parturition,160
puerperal infctionand409
mare
Prematurebirth,retainedfetal
doe goat,105,158
endometrial cysts,616
membranes and,421
ewe,32,104,105
oestrous cyclemanipulation,
Premature induction of parturition
mare,83-4,160
44-5.584-5
see Induction of parturition
queen cat
placentitis,598
Premature ovarian failure,
initiation of pariurition,161
pregnancy,59i,592
654,671
oestrous cycle,40-42
queen cat,49,671
Preovulation period,mare,
pregnancy,115-16
sow,oestrous cyclemanipulation,
15-16,17
sOW,34-5,102,159
47-8,49,643,644
938
Index
Progesterone-receptor antagonists,
Prolonged gestation(postmaturity)
retained fetal membranes,424
900
fetal abnormalities,141
termination of pregnancy,118
ser also Aglepristone
fetal death,140
doe goat,52,118,167,576
Progestcrone releasing intravaginal
bitch,382,385
cwe,52,118
device（PRID）,47,899
cow,348-9,351-2
mare
buffalo,830,832
queencat,389
endometritis,602,604
camelids,812
Pro-oestrus,6
induction of foaling,164
cOw,45,46,53
male responses,700
oestrous cycle manipulation,52
anovulatory anoestrus,429
bitch,6,35,36-37,38,39
termination of pregnancy,118
cystic ovarian disease,447
prolonged, 652-3
queen cat119
repent breeder,466
queen cat,674
5OW,52,118,166-7
mare,winter angestrus,584
Pro-opiomelanorortin(POMC),155
Prostaglandin I,(PGL,）,myometrial
Progestogens, equine
Propionibacter,equine endometritis,
effects,170
initiation of parturition,160
602
Prostaglandins
oestrous cycle, 20
Propofol,386
deficiency,erineinertia,244
pregnancy,83-4
Prostaglandin E(PGE)
initiation ofparturition,155-6
Progestogen therapy see
myometrial effects,170
158,161
Progesterone/
penile erection,698
myometrial contractions and,170
progestogen therapy
separation offetalmembranes,
Prostaglandin synthase inhibitors,
Progressis, 904
420
delay of parturition,156,
Prolactin
Prostaglandin E,（PGE,）,induction
168
control of secretion,7,12
ofparturition,165
Prostaglandin synthetase(PGHS-1),
luteotrophic support,79
Prostaglandin E（PGE,)
155
oestrous cycle regulation,10,12
induction ofparturition,163,165
Prostaglandin therapy,901-2
bitch
initiationofparturition,155
oestrous cyclecontrol,49-53
cyclical changes,40
maternal recognition of preg-
bitch,52,662
at onset of parturition,161
nancy,78
cow,50-2,165
in pregnancy, 109,110
Prostaglandin F (PGF)
doe goat,52
cow,30
embryonic loss in horses,592
ewe,52
anovulatory anoestrus,428
initiationofparturition,155-6
mare
postparum cyclicity and,198
maternal recognition of preg-
cndometritis,602,604,607
in pregnancy,87
nancy,78
oestrous cyclecontrol,52
secretion in pregnancy,88
separation of fetal membranes,
pyometra,619-20
420
superovulationprotocols,862
ewe,32,105
Prostaglandin F,a(PGF,α)
queen cat,52,673-4
mare,81
initiationof parturition,156,158,
sow/gilt,52,863
queen cat,116
159.161
Prostate gland,682,685.696
soW,35
luteolytic activity,11,12,31,34
examination,711
Prolactin antagonists,902
maternal recognition of preg-
lesions affecting fertility,749
oestrus induction,35,54,651
nancy,76-7.78
Prostatic hyperplasia,749
pregnancy termination,119
myometrial contractionsand,170
Prostatitis,749
pseudopregnancy,40
postpartum changes,194,195,198
Protein
pyometa,673-4
Prostaglandin Fu（PGF,α) therapy
ietaryintakeeffectonfrility
Prolapse
bitch,118
455-6
bladder,234,235,315,316
buffalo,832,834
serum, pregnant bitch, 115
cervical folds,405
camelids,812-13
Proteoglycans, 420
cervix andvagina see Cervical and
coW
Proteolysis,detachmentof fetal
vaginal prolapse
anoestrus,430-1
membranes,419-20
intestines,uterinerupture,14
cystic ovarian disease,447
Proioplasmic droplets,sperm,757
penis,721,722,7334
endometritis,415,417
758
perivaginal fat,315
induction ofcalving165
Protozoal infections
rectum,149,150,316,317
oestrous cyclemanipulation,
bovineinfertility/abortion,
uterusostparturient,31924,
45,50-2,53-4
495-502
817
pastoral dairy herd,547-8
goat abortion,579-80
Prolapseretainers,ewe,148,149
puerperal metritis,411
mare,607-8
Proligestone, 49, 900
pyometra,418
ovine abortion,566-8
939
Index
Pseudoectopicpregnancy,314,352
ewe and doegoat,2023
placenta,68-9
387
mare,201-2
pregnancy,79,115-17
Pseudohermaphroditism
queencat,204
pseudopregnancy,42,44,670
camelids,816
puberty,4,40,668
cattle,401
Pulley blocks,267,282
puerperium,204
dogs,648-9
tractive forces,269,270
relaxin,116,117,161
goats,575
Pulserate,second stage of labour,
uterine torsion,241
sheep,560
181
seealso Cats
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Puppy
Quinapyramine,608
endometritis,599,600
birth,185,186
transmission in semen,799
birth weight, 262
R
vesicular gland infection,748
care ofnewborn,388
Pseudopregnancy
disposition during parturition173
Rabbits,836,837
bitch,40
thermoregulation,189
artificial insemination,839
camelids,816,818
Pyobursitis,402
assistedreproductive
doe goa, 576
Pyometra
technologies,855
mare,587
definition,407-8,417
infectious diseases,850
queen cat,42,44,670
bitch,657-62
reproduction,840-2
rabbits,842
aetiology, 657-9
reproductive disorders/infertility.
Pseudorabies,639
clinical signs,659
848-9
Puberty
diagnosis, 659-61
sexing.837,838,839
female,3-5
ovariohysterectomy,381-2,661
syphilis,850
ageal,4
treatment,376,661-2
seealso Buck rabbit;Doe rabbit
induction ofpremature,43,44
camelids,815-16
Radiation,testicular damage.741
infuences on timing,5-6,449
cow,417-18
Radiography
male,708
after embryonic death,139
diagnosis of pregnancy 112-13
bitch,4,650-1
trichomoniasis,417,418,497
pyometra in bitch,661
delayed, 650-2
mare,619-20
Radio-telemetricheat-mount
buffalo,825,831
queencat,672-4
detec1ors,436-7
camelids,810
ovariohysterectomy,381-2
Ram
treatment,376,673-4
accessory glands,685,695-6
ewe,4,5
Pyometritis,ovariohysterectomy,
brerding soundnessexamination,
gilt,3-4,32,634
378-9
709,710-12,715-16
heifer,4,5,20
Pyosalpinx,402
chromosomal abnormalities,131
delayed,522
Pyrexia,testicular damage,741
effect on female puberty,5
mare,4,5.12
Pyriformhead defect,sperm,754
infections
queencat,4,40,668
balanoposthitis,730-1
delayed,668-9
Q
brucellosis,573,746
Pudendal nerve,698
Chilamydophila abortis,564
Puerperal infections,407-18
Qfever see Coxiella burmeti
epididymiis,746-7
ovariobursal adhesions after,403
Quarterorse,breedingseason,582
orchitis,742,744
see also Metritis complex
Queen cat
infertility
Puerperal laminitis,316
abortion, 671-2
ereciile failure,721,724
Puerperium,194-204
cyclical ovarian activity,40-2
testicular conditions,739,
complications,306-18
dystocia see under Dystocia
740-1,742,744
bitch,204
embryonic/fetal loss,138-9
mating behaviour,700,701
buffalo,830-1
fetal fluids,71
penis,699-700
camelids,817-18
fetal membranes,62,68
examination,709
cow,194-201
fetalmummification,139
rupture,721
eliminating bacterial contami-
genital surgery,376-89
strangulation and necrosis,
nation,198-200
infertility/subfertility,646-7,
734-5
endomeirialresioration,195-6
667-74
puberty,708
factors influencing,200-1
insemination,802
Teproductive organ anatomy.
involution,194-5
mating behaviour,41-2,702
681-2
return ofcyclicalactivity.
ovulationseeumder Ovulation
reproductivesystem development,
197-8
parturition seeKittening
G87
940
Index
Ram (continued)
Repcat-brceder cow,463-6
Rete testis, 682-3
semen
diagnosis of cause,523
Retractor penis muscle,
collection,715-16,783
paihogenesis,464-5,520
682,697
disease testing for Al,782
treatment, 465-G
atrophy,738
examination,750,751
Reproductive efficiency (RE)
congenital abnormalities,727
preparation forAl,768,784-5
bitch and queen cat, G46-7
Retropulsion,267-9
sperm microencapsulation
buffalo, 832
faulty positions,297,298
774
cow,526,528,530
faulty presentations, 299
storage,770,783-5
mare, 582-3
postural defects,286.287,290
spermatogenesis, 692
Reproductive performance
Rhinotracheitis,infectious bovine
sperm granuloma,747
cow,optimal.526
(IBR),506,507
teaser (raddled vasectomized)
sheep flork,559
see also Bovine herpesvirus-1
oestrus detection,561,783
sow herd,paramelers.632,633
Rhizopus spp.,510
qestrus synchronization, 47
Research,assisted reproductive tech-
Rift valleyfever,124,816
pregnancy diagnosis,106
nologies,858
Ringwomb,219,233-4
surgical preparation,373-5
Respiration, at birth,174,1878
management, 229
testicular descent,689
Respiratory stimulants,newborn,
Roberts's guarded knife,32s,329
see also Wethers
188
Roberts's modification of Caslick's
Ram:ewe ratio,561,707
Restlessness
operation,152
Rampley's sponge-holding forceps,
first stageoflabour 172,177181
Robertss snare forceps, 229.
276-7
oestrus,18,21,30,33
276,277
before onset of labour, 183, 185
Rodents
reproduction, 840,445
uterine torsion, 237
classification, 836,837
sexing.836-7,844-5
Restraint
male reproductive system devel-
vaginal smears, 839
animal with dystocia,224,225
opment, 687
Recording systems, dairy herd fertil-
caesarean operation,353
neonatal mortality, 850
ity, 532-6
mount animals,bull service test
sexing,836-7
computerized,535
ing,711,712.713
see also Chinchilla: Gerbils:
manual,532,533-5
camelids,810
Guinea pig; Hlamsters;
visual data presentation, 535-6,
Resuscitation,neonatal,188
Mice;Rats
537.538,539
equipment for foals, 188,267
Rolling method, uterine torsion,
Rectal examination,digital,bitch,
Retained fetal membranes (RFM)
238,239-40
112,661
buffalo,828-9
Rose Bengal plate test,brucellosis,
Rectal palpation see Transrectal
camelids.818
484
palpation
cow,418-25
Rotation
Rectalprolapse,149,150,316,317
aetiology and pathogenesis,
of dam's body, uterine torsion,
Rectovaginal constrictionJersey
418-20
238,239-40
cattle,134
after cacsarean operation,365
of fetus per vaginum, 270-1
Rertovaginal fistulas,310-12
afterinduced calving,165,546
faulty positions. 297, 298
conigenital,313
brucellosis,484
faulty presentations, 299
pathogenesis,298,308,612
as cause of metritis complex,
uterine torsion,237-8,240
surgical repair,311-12
408
of uterus, caesarean operation.
mare,612
clinical features,422-3
358
Recunbency
duration,423
RU 486,induction of
female camelid during mating
effecis on fertility,423
lambing, 167
813
incidence,420-2
Rumen degradable protein (RDP),
parturient,316-18,408
manual removal,424
456
Red bag delivery,mare 225,594
pastoral dairying, 545
Ruminants
5a-Reductase,690,695
predisposing factors,421-2
cryptorchidism,739
Relaxin,161-2
treatment,423-5
embryonic development,63-5
role in parturition,162
ewe,562
fetal sacs, 71-2
sources,161-2
mare,178,626-8
mating behaviour, 700,701
bitch, prenant, 109,115,161
clinical signs, 627
teratogenic agents,124
queencatprenant,116,117,11
incidence and aetiology, 626-7
umbilical cord rupture, 174
Relaxin-like hormoncs,161-2
treatment,627-8
see also Buffalo; Camelidae; Cattle;
Repeat-breeder buffalo, 833
uterine prolapse and,34
Goats; Sheep
941
Index
S
Season ofyear
Semen diluents for Al,767-9
calf birth weight and,250-1,252
boat,790,791,792
Sacrococcygeal articulation,repeated
cystic ovarian disease,442
buffalo,832
dislocation,352
effect on puerperium,200-1,202
bull,7757
Saline,intrauterine infusion
onset of puberly and,5
dog.799-800
endometritis,605-6
puerperaluterine infections and.
goat,788-9
retained fetal membranes,627-8
409
ram,784-5
terminationof pregnancy,118
retained fetal membranes and,
stallion,795-6
Salmonellaaboruus ovis,563,569-70,
421,422
tom cat,802
578
seealso Climate/weather
Seminal plasma,696
Salmonelia dblin
Second cleansing,196
camelid,820
cattle,477,489-90
Second-littersyndrome,sows,641,
goat semen storage and,788
goats,578
644,645
ram semen cryopreservation,785
sheep,563,570
Second stage of labour 173-5
Seminalvesicles seeVesicular glands
Salnonella montevideo,570
buffalo,828,829
Seminal vesiculitis,738,748-9
Salmonella spp.477,489-90
camelids,817
Seminiferous tubules,681-2
Salmonella typhimarim
Secundus,196
developmenl,687
caule,477,489,490
Sedation
spermatogenesis,691-3
sheep,563,570
caesarean 0peration,353,372,
Seminomata,testicular,745
Salmonellosis
Sendai virus infection,850
bovine abortion,489-90,524
manipulative vaginal delivery.271
Sepsis,pyometra,381
caprine abortion,578,579
persistent mating-induced endo-
Septicaemiapostpartum,chinchilla
ovineabortion,563,569-70
metritisand,605
850
Salpingitis
Selenium,458-9,460,461
Serological tests
cow,402-3
embryonic loss and,137,138
bovine herpesvirus-1,508
mare,G20-1
retainedfetal membranes and,
bovine venereal campylobacteriosis,
Saphenous vein sampling
420,421,422
481-2
sow,635
uterine infections and,409
bovineviral diarrhoea virus.505
Sarcocstis infectionsbovine abor
Semen
brucellosis,484,573
tion,502
abnormalities,750-60
Clilamydopilaabortus,565
Sarcoids,penile,736.737
testicular degeneration,741-2,
leptospirosis,488-9
Schistosomareflexus,133,217
758-9
neosporosis,502
caesareanoperation,305,350
collection,713-17,820-1
salmonellosis,570
fetotomy,228-9,305
cooling,769-70
toxoplasmosis,567
percutaneous technique,3413
cryopreservation see Cryopreserva-
Serotonin,7
obstetricmanagement,304-5
tion,semen
Serous cystadenomasovarian,625
visceral presentation,304,
examination,717,750-1,831
Sertoli cells,681
341-2
interpretation,759
developmenl, 687-8
vswins,302
sperm abnormalities,751-8
endocrinecontrol,690-1
Scrotum,681,683,811
infections transmitted775,776
spermatogenesis,691-3,694
examination,710-11
liquid,for Al
tumours,745
innervation,684
ambient temperaturepreserva-
Serum agglutination test (SAT),
ligaments,683,684
tion,773
brucellosis,485
mange,740-1
cooling,769-70
Serum proteinsprenantbitch,115
temperature,ferility and,
cattle,775,777
Service
740-1
dogs,799-800
conception failure after normal,
testicular descent,688-9
goats,788-9
717
Seasonal infertility/anoestrus
horses,795-6
failure ofnormal,717
buffalo,832
pigs,790-1
management factors,719
coW,426
sheep,783
cOW
gilt and sow,637
normal characteristics,750,819,
natural,438
mare,12,583-6
820
preventing dystocia,258
genital tract changes16
preparation for Al,767-9
see also Copulation; lnsemina-
ovaries,14,15
sexing of sperm,774,775
tion;Mating
queen cat,G68-9
see also Sperm(atozoa):ales of
Service testing,bulls,712-13
seealso Breeding season
individual species
Serving capacity test,bul12
942
Index
Sex chromosome
Short-tailed opossuim see Opossum,
fetomaternal disproporion,281-2
abnormalities,126
shiort-tailed
head,269,281
chimerism, freemartins, 401
Shoulder flexionposture
limb,269,281
Sex determination (sexing)
fetotomy technique,336-7
mandibular,288-9,291
embryos, 886
calf, 287-8
techniques of use,269,270
fetus,86,101-2
foal, 290
Somatic cell nuclear transfer(SCNT),
sperm,774,775
lamb/kid, 293
856,882-3,884
small mammals,836-7.838,839
Shoulder presentation see Lateral
large offspring syndrome after,
Sex-determining gene (sry gene).
deviation of head
254-5, 885-6
648,687
Shriever's wire inuroducer,328
Somatotropin,recombinant bovine
Sexing see Sex determination
Silage
(rbST), 860
Sex reversal, 129, 648-9
overestimating intake, 461
see alsa Growth hormone
Sexually active group (SAG) of cows,
as source of infection,490,491,
Sow
432-3,547
571-2
caesarean operation,372-3
Sheep
Silage disease, 571
corpus luteum,10,11,34,632
artificial insemination, 561,
Silent heat (suboestrus), 5, 20
cyclical ovarian activity,32-5
783-8
bitch,652
downward deviation of uterus.
conception rates,786,787
buffalo,832
242
infectious disease control,776,
cow,20-1,197,435,522
dystocia seeuder Dystocia
782,787-8
ewe and doe goat,202
embryo collecuion, 869-70
insemination techniques,
mare,83,586-7
embryonic/fetal loss,124,136-7,
785-7
queen cat,669
139
oestrus detection.766,783
sow,33
embryo transfer,870
semen collection and storage,
Sileni ovulations,435
epidural anaesthesia, 273-4
768,783-5
Single-pup syndrome,385
fertility, 632,633, 641-5
assistedreproductivetechnologies
Sires
fetal fluids,71
embryo micromanipulation,
disease testing for Al, 782
feial membranes. 62,63,64,
881-2
easy calving,216,248-50.283
67-8,72
embryo/oocyte cryopreserva-
inexperienced or immature,
fetal sacs.72
tion,878,s81
718-19
hypocalcaemia,220,317
cmbryo recovery and transfer,
selection for Al,705-6.765-6
infertility/subfertility, 632-45
869
young, fertility limitations, 701,
insemination,792-4.863
history,856
708-9,718-19,758
ovaries,33-4,632-3
in vitro embryo production,
see also Male animals;mdles of
ovulation,34,643,793
875
individual species
parturition see Farrowing
superovulation and
Skimmed milk semen diluents,769,
placenta,68
insemination,862-3
776,784,788-9,795-6
pregnancy, 102-4
breed differences
Skin preparation, caesarean operation,
puerperim,203-4
birth weights, 259-60
354
relaxin,161,162
breeding season, 30
Small mammals, pet sce Pet small
superfetation,144
dystocia,214
mammals
superovulation,863
mating behaviour,30-1
Smears, stained
uterine torsion, 240-1
oestrus synchronization,48
brucellosis, 484
vaginal prolapse,152,153,372
pelvic capacity,261,262
campylobacteriosis,569
seealso Gilt
twinning rate, 31
equine endometritis, 600
Sow guinea pig
chimeras,882
see also Vaginal cytology
anatomy, 842
chromosomal abnormalities,
SMEDI viruses.139
lactation, 843
128,131
Smooth muscle relaxants, 898
mating behaviour, 843
chromosome number, 129
Snare forceps
oestrous cycle,843
cloning,882-3
bitch,276.277
pregnancy and parturition,843
embryonic developmen,Gl,62,65
ewe, 229
reproductive disorders/infertiliry.
inherited defects,125
Snare introducer,267,268
849-50
mating behaviour, 30-1, 701
Snares, obstetric,267,268
Spasmolytics, 898
sce also Ewe; Lamb; Ram: Wethiers
faulty fetal positions,297-8
Spastic paresis congenital, 136,767
Shorthorn cattle, white heifer
fetal postural defects,286,287-9.
Spaying see Ovariohysterectomy
disease,400
290,294
Spermatic artery,683-4
943
Index
Spermatic rord
endometritis transmission, 599
Streptococci
anatomy,682,683
equine viral arteritis carriage.
transmission in semen,799
examination,710
596
cattle,198-9,409,492,748,749
torsion,746
infertility
dogs,381,655,656,749
Spermatic sac,683,684
ampullary blockage,750
horses, 599
Spermatids.692,693
chromosomal abnormalities,
Streptococcus zooepidemicus,599,628
Spermatocytes, 692,693
129-30
Streptomycin,489
Spermatogenesis, 691-4
haemospermia,738
Stress
buffalo,831
penile lesions,733-4
affecting course of parturition,186
Spermatogonia, 92, 693
seminal vesiculitis,749
anovulatory anoestrus and,427,
Sperm(at020a),685,686
testicular conditions, 739-40,
428-9
abnormalities,751-8
742,744
cystic ovarian disease and, 440
classification,751-2
unwillingness to
induced embryonic loss/abortion,
head.752-4
copulate, 719
137,138,577,593
head attachment,753,755-6
mating behaviour, 700,701
inhibiing onset of parrurition,
interpretation,759
penis,698, 699,700
176,177
midpiece and tail,755,756-7
examination,709-10
testicular damage. 741
protoplasnic droplets, 757,758
neoplasia,736-7
sec also Hleat stress
testicular degeneration,741-2,
prolapse. 733-4
Subfertilecow,520-5
758-9
seinen
breeding listory,521
cold shock,769-70
collection,715,795
clinical examination,521
count,750-1
normal characteristirs,750
definition, 520-1
effects of freezing, 770-1
storage forAl,767,795-7
diagnostic tests, 521
fertilization,6l,685
teaser,oestrus detection,18-19,
investigation and diaguosis of
function tests,759-60
20,83
cause,522-5
in vitro fertilization,873
testicular descent, 689
see also Infertility/subfertility,cow
live:deadratio,751
testicular neoplasia,745
Subfertility seelufertility/subfertility
microencapsulation.773-4
see also H-lorses
Submission rate
morphology, assessment, 751
Stallion-like behaviour, mare,
frst-service,526,529-30
motility, 685,695,750
624,625
pastoral daiy herd,550-2, 551,
sexing,774,775
Staphylococci
553,554
transit through epididymis, 694-5
huffalo, 833
Suboestrns see Silent heat
camelid, S19,820
cattle,198-9,405,409
Suclling
seeaisoSemen
dogs, 381, 749
newbon animals, 176
Sperm gramuloma,747
horses, 599, 799
cOW
Spermiogenesis, 693-4
rabbits, 850
anovulatory anoestrus and,428
Sperm-mediated gene transfer,884
Stat, equine allantocdiorion,
postpartu changes and, 198,
Spina bifida,350
67,593
200,201
Spinal fractures, bull, 720
Starch, dietary, 454
pigs,interrupted orredured,64
Spirovac,903
Starc test,tubal patency,404
see also Lactation
Splitoestrus syndrome,bitch,652
Sterilecow,definition,521
Sugar glider,836,837,847-8
Spring (vernal) transition, mare, 12,
Sterilization, male,374
reprodurtion,840,848
584-6
Stilboestrol,149,163,234
Sulphonamides,567
induction ofoestrus,584-5
seealso Diethylstilbestro!
Superfecundation,115,117,143-4,842
ovarian changes,585-6,621-3
Stillbirths, 141
Superfetation,116-17,144,843
Squamous cell carcinoma
calves, 209-10, 216
Superovulation,858-9
penis,736-7
investigation,524-5
embryo recovery after see Embryo
vagina,612
twins,302
recovery
vulva,407,610
foals, 211
historical milestones,856
Sry gene, 648, 687
infeclious causes,595-608
vum pick up after,872
Stag,brucellosis,573.746
piglets,165-6,185,211
buffalo, 834
Stallion
small mammals,850
camelids,821-2
accessory glands, 685, 695-6
see aiso Abortion;Embrvonic/fetal
cow, 859-G1
balanoposthitis,731
loss;Fetal death
mare,861-2
breeding soundness examination,
Straining sce Abdominal
pigs,863
709-10, 711, 715
contractions
sheep and goats, 862-3
944
Index
Surfactant,pulmonary.187
Teratomas
Tocolytic agents,168,898
Suturematerials
ovarian,625-6
caesarean operation,354
caesareanoperation,365-6
testicular,745
fetotomy,331-2
ovariohysterectomy,378
Terminally coiledtails,spcrm with.757
sce also Clenbuterol
Suturing techniques
Terminationof pregnancy,117-19
Tolazoline,272
flank closure,361,362
mummified fetus,140
Tom cat
uterine closure,358-61,370-1
rwins in mare,590
accessory glands,685
Suvaxyn Parvo,903-4
Testes
infertility,132,719
Swedish Highland cattle,gonadal
anatomy,681-3,811
mating behaviour,702
hypoplasia,396.744
blood supply.681,683-4
orchitis,743
Swine fever virus,132-3,794
degeneration,740-2,758-9
puberty,40
Synchorial tubes,72
descent,G88-9,811
semen collection and storage802
Syphilis,rabbit,850
development,G87-9
testicular descent,689
disorders,739-46
Tortoiseshell cats,131-2,744
endocrinerelationships,689-91
Toxaemia
T
examination,710-11
of pregnancy guinea pig, 849
Tail painting estrus detection,435,
growthinyoung sires,708,709
puerperal metritis,410
436,547
hypoplasia,744-5
pyometra,659
Tail-stump dfectsperm,755,756
neoplasia,745-6
Toxins,male infertility,741
Tailveinsampling,sow,635
nervous supply,681,684
Toxoplasmosis(Toxoplasma gondi)
Tashweel,815
physiology, 689-94
cats,566,568,672
Tau interferon seeInterferon-tal
spermatogenesis,691-3
dogs,656
Tayloreqgenilis592,599-00
torsion,746
goats,578,579-80
611,613
undescended seeCryptorchidism
sheep,563,566-8,903
transmission in semen,799
Testicular one,classification,710
Toxovax,568,903
TCM-99culturemedium,834,873
Testosterone
Tracherine,903
Teasermales
behavioural functions,700
Traction delivery,269-70
estrus deiection,18-19,20,83,
control of secretion,689-90,691
decision making 226-7
437-8
cryptorchidism,739-40
equipment,267,268
oestrus synchronization,47,561
maintenance of spermatogenesis
bitch/queen cat,230,270,
surgical preparaton,373-5,374
692
278-9
Temperament,sires,709
metabolism,690
cow,269-70,281-4
Temperature
penile erection and,698
indications,228,229
body
therapy.901
posterior presentation,284
fetal regulation,162
androgenizedcows,438
predicting success,283
first stageof labou,72
mare,granulosacell tumours,
ewe,285
oestrous cyclechanges,22
624,625
mare,270,284
prepartum changes,178,
Telanus
Traction ratio (TR),283
183,185
prophylaxis,315,318,628
Trade,international seeInternational
regulation in newborn,189
puerperal,318
trade
bitch,predicting whelping
Tetraploidy,127
Transforming growth factor-β
Thawing
(TGF-β)family,687,688
control,semen examination,750
embryo,879
Transgenic animals, 856,884
environmental
semen,772
Transitional phase,mare oestrous
effectsonferlility,463,740
Thermoregulation,newborn
cycle,12,584
eimbryonic death and,138
animals,189
seeaisoSpring ransition,mare
newborn animals,189
Third stage of labour175-6,817
Transmissiblevenereal tumour
oestrous behaviour and,434
Thorax amputation,total fetotomy,
(TVT),650
see also Climate/weaiher;Heat
334-5,339
Transport pregnant mares593
stress
Thoroughbreds
Transrectal palpation
liquid semen storage.769-70,
breedingseason,12,582
buffalo,827-8
773
rwin ovulation,13
camelids,815
scrotal,740-1
Thyroxine,457
cow
semen cryopreservation,772
Ticl-borne fever, sheep,574
hazards,99-100
semen thawing.772
Ticks, disease transmission,
pregnancy diagnosis,92,
Teralogens,124,132-9
511-12,580
94-5,98-100
945
Index
Transrectal palpation(contimuel)
Twin ovulation
timing of mating, 666-7
subfertility/infertility,403,
Cow,23
uterine umours,650
412,426
ewe,31
buffalo,828
superovulation evaluation,
mare,13,84-5,588-90
caelids,815
863-4
seeaisoMultiple ovulation
cOW
mare, pregnancy diagnosis,
Twin pregnancy
ovarian cysts,443,444
83-4
assistedreproductive technologies,
ovaries,25,26,29
soW
858
pregnancy diagnosis,100-2
pregnancy diagnosis,102-3
fetal membranes,72-3
pyomctra,418
subfertility/infertility,632-3
parturition,181
doe goat, pregnancy diagnosis,
Transverse presentations,263,298,
cow,72-3,93
108-9
299-301
calf birth weight,255
ewe
bicornual type(mare),300-1
freemartinism,131,401
ovaries,31
Trenbolone acetate,fetal mummifi-
hydrallantois,141,142-3
pregnancy diagnosis,106-8
cation,140
retained fetal membranes,421
mare
Treponema cuiculi850
uterine torsion,236
endometrial cysts,614-16
TrichGuardvaccine,499
ewe.72-3
endometritis.601-2,603
Trichomoniasis(Tritrichononas fetus
dystociarisk,219-20
granulosa celltumours,625
infections),495-9,524
mare,72,73,303
infertility/subfertility,585
aetiology and pathogenesis,
abortion,594
ovaries,14,15,16,17,18,19
495-7
diagnosis,83,84-5,86
placentitis,598
clinical signs,139,497
embryonic/fetalloss,137,139
pregnancy diagnosis84-6
control,476,498-9,782
management,589-90
twin pregnancy,588-90
diagnosis,497-8
Twins
queen cat,pregnancy diagnosis,
pyometra,417,418,497
conjoined.134,302.351
117
treatment,499
dystocia relatedto,301-3
sow or gilt
Trichostatin,499
embryo bisection producing.
ovarian cysts,637,638
Triple-X syndrome see
881-2
pregnancy diagnosis,103,104
XXXgenotype
simultaneous preseniation,217,
subfertility/infertility,633-4
Triploidy.127
301,302-3
Ulmbilical cord
Tris diluents, semen,768,
postpartum haemorrhage from,
769,784,785
306-7
U
Trisomy,126-7
rupture
Tririchononsfetusinfectionssee
[lltrasonic fetal pulse detector
at birth,174,178,181,183,
Trichomoniasis
(Doppler),79
185,189
Trophoblast, 61
bitch,113
premature,165-6,189
Trophoblast protein
cow,100
torsion,equine abortion,594
bovine(bTP-1).77
doe goat, 108
Umbilicus,care,189
caprine (cTP-1）.77
ewe,106
LIndegradable dietary protein
ovine(oTP-1),7G
Ultrasonography
(UDP),456
Trypanosona equiperdum,
A-mode,79
Unsworth'sguardedknife,328,329
607-8,731,799
B-mode,79
LTrea
Tuberculosis,bovine
curved array transducers,80
fertility and,455-6
control in Al programmes782
fetalgrowth/size,74-5
plasma concentrations,462
female genital tract,486-7,524
guided oocyte aspiration see
Ureaplasma diversum,492-3,730
male genital tract,730,743
Ovum pick up
Ureaplasmosis (Llreaplasma infec-
Tubulocervical contractions,172
linear-array transducers, 80
lions)
Tumour necrosis factor (TNF),
pregnancy diagnosis,79-80
cattle,492-3,730
11,34
principles,79-80
ascause ofinfertility,395,555
Tunica albuginea,681
sector scanners,80
tontrol in Al programmes,
rupture,721
testes,710
782,783
Tunica dartos,681,683
bitch
ovariobursal adhesions,403
Tunica vaginalis propria,681,683
dystocia,226
dogs,656
Tunica vaginalis reflexa,681
ovaries,39
sheep,574
Turkeys,artificial insemination,765
pregnancy diagnosis,113-15
Uretericocclusion,ovariohysterectomy,
Turner's syndrome seeXO genotype
pyometra,661
379
946
Index
Urethral calculi,penilenecrosis,
Uterineinertia
LIterine rupture,314-15
734-5
acceleratingparturition,167-8
caesareanoperation,352,387
Urinary incontinence, after ovario-
caesarean operation,372
causes,314
hysterectomy,378,
causing dystocia.217,220,221,
postpartum haemorrhage.307
379-80
383-4
twin births,302
Urinary tractnfections,sow,40
hydrallantois,142,244
Uterine splanchnopiosis,61114
Lrovagina,406-7,611-12
primary,243-5,385
Lterine stumpgranuloma,379.30
terine adhesions,405,616
complete,220,244
terinene,renantmare3,4
terine arteries,middle
partial,220,244,245-6
Uterine torsion,235-41
fremitus,83,92,99,103
unnoticed,382-3
caesareanoperation,349,355
obstetric injuries,307
retained fetal membranes,
incompletecervical dilatation,233
cow, pregnant, 92,99
421-2
bitch/queen cat,241,389
sow.pregnant,102,103
secondary（to dysiocia）,229-30,
buffalo,830
Uterine biopsy/cytology
245-6
camelids,816
bovine endometritis,
twin births,301
cow,217-18,235-9
412,414
uterineprolapse and,320
aetiology,236
equine endometritis,600-1
Uterine infections
clinical features,236-7
sce also Endometrial biopsy
buffalo,833
diagnosis, 237
Uterine caruncles
camelids,819
treatment,237-9
detachment ofplacentome,
coWs,407-18
ewe/doegoai,240
419-20
ewes,562
mare,239-40
placentome formation,65
mares,599-607
sow,240-1
postoestrous bleeding.23
soWs,644
Uterine tubes
posipartum changes,196,202
see also Endometritis;Metritis;
assessment ofpatency,403-4
Lterine clearance,delayed see
Pyometra;specific
development of conceptus, 61
Persistent mating-induced
infections
lesions causing inferility,402-4,
endometritis
Lterine involution,194
620-1,647
Uterine contractions seeMyometrial
factors influencing.200
camelids, 811
contractions
bitch,204
Uterine tumours
Uterine cysts,616
buffalo,830
bitch,650
Lterine drainage, pyometra in
camelids,818
cow,404-5
bitch,661
cow,194-5
mare,620-1
Lterine eversion,postparturient
eweand doegoat,202
rabbit,849
queencat,376,377
mare,201
Lteroferrin,78
see also Lterine prolapse,
sow,203
Uteroverdine,204
postparturient
Uterinelavage
Uterus
Lterinefluid see Intrauterine
after fetotomy,343
didelphys,398-9,400
pinu
afierretainedfetal membranes,
displacements of gravid,241-3
Lterine horns
628
embryonic development within,62
congenitally isolated portions,
bovine puerperalmetritis411
luteolyticactivity,10-11
398,399
equineendometritis,601,602-3,
unicornis,398
luteolytic activity,11
605-6,607
bitch
non-gravid bovine,92
equine pyometra,G19-20
cyclical changes,36-7
sideof pregnancy
feline pyometra,673
opportunistic pathogens, 655
cow,92-3
Uterine milk,62
buffalo,824-5,827
mare,74,82
Uterine oedema,estral,mare
camelids,812
transrectal palpation,98
585,601
cow
Uterine incisions
Uterineprolapse,postparturient.
bacterial contamination,
caesarean operation,
319-24
198-200,407,409-10
356-7,369,386
buffalo,828-9,830
changes in pregnancy, 89-90.
closure techniques
camelids,817
91
bitch,387
cattle,319-22
cyclical changes,22-3
cow,358-61,364
dog and cal,324
cxteriorization,caesarean
sheep,368
horse,323-4
operation,356-7
sow,373
pig324
host defencemechanisms,
haemostaticsuturing,mare,3701
sheep andgoat,322-3
408-9
947
Index
[hterus(continmued)
transmissiblegenital
Vaginal injuries (lacerations and
interaction with ovaries,198
fibropapillomas, 510
contusions)
ventral herniation,241-2
trichomoniasis,499
breeding-related,612
doe goat, bacterial
seealsoImmunization
obstetric,307
contamination,203,562
Vaccines,902-4
Vaginal mucous agglutination
ewe
Vagina
test,481
bacterial contamination,
artificial see Artifcial vagina
Vaginal neoplasia
203,562
aspiration of airinto see
causing dystocia,235
ventral herniation,241-2
Pneumovagina
bitch,650
mare
posterior,incomplete relaxation,
coW,407
bacterial contamination,
234
mare,612
201-2,599
urinepooling see Lrovagina
queen cat,668
changes in pregnancy,82
bitch
Vaginal plH,cyclical changes,22
cyclical changes,16
congenital lesions,647-8
Vaginal prolapse seeCervical and
disorders causing infertility,
cyclical changes,36-7,38
vaginalprolapse
G14-17
digital stimulation in uterine
Vaginal rupture,31415
foreign bodies,617
inertia,244
VaginalsmearsseeVaginal cytology
host defencemechanisms,603
normal bacterial flora,655
Vaginalwashsamplescow
mobility ofembryos in see
buffalo,827
Vaginitis
under Embryo
coW
epivag,509
retroflexion,242
campylobacteriosis,478,
postpartumecrotic,307,406
ventral herniation,241-2
479-80
prepubertal,378
ventral sacculations,614
cyclical changes, 22
trichomoniasis496
queen cat, congenital
lesionscausinginfertility,406-7
bitch,655
abnormalities,668
obstetric injuries,406
bovinecatarrhal,509-10
sOW
mare
Vaginoplasty,611-12
changes in pregnancy, 102-3
abnormalities causing
Vaginoscopy
downward deviation,242
infertility,611-12
bitch, tining of mating, 665-6
Ltrechi fetotome,328
breeding trauma, 612
cow,endometritis,412
Utrecht uterine suture technique,
cyclical changes,15-16
gilt or sow subfertility,6345
pregnancy-related changes, 82
seealso Endoscopy
359,360
queencatdigital stmulationn
Vaginovestibular fold(orsphincter),
uterine inertia,244
611
V
Vaginal aplasia,647-8,668
Vandeplasschehaemostaticuterine
Vaccination
Vaginal atresia,668
suturing method,370
blue nguevirus,509,575
Vaginal cystocele,234-5
Varicocele,741
bovine herpesvirus-1,508,903
Vaginalcytology(smears)
Varicoseveinsequine vagina,612
bovine para-influenza virus and
bitch,36,37,38,664-5
Vas deferens,682,683
infectious bovine
queen cat,674
aplasia,748
rhinotracheitis,903
small mammals,839
examination,710
bovineviral diarrhoea virus,
Vaginal delivery,manipulative see
Vasectomy,teaser males,373,374,
505-6,903
Manipulative vaginal
374,375
brucellosis,485-6,573
delivery
Vasoactiveintestinal peptide(VIP),698
campylobacteriosis,482-3,569
Vaginal discharge seeVulvar
Vectis,270,275,276
canine herpesvirus,657
discharge
Vehicles.pharmaceutical,endo-
chlamydophiliosis,565,579,903
Vaginal examination
metrial damage.416
equine herpes virus,9023
dystocia.225-6
Venereal disease
equineviral arteritis,596-7,903
pregnancy diagnosis,83,100.815
roleof Alin controlling.766
feline herpesvirus,672
uterineinfectionsand,412,819
transmissible in semen,782
felinelekaemia virus,672
Vaginal fibrosis,cow,406
calile,395
leptospirosis,489,573,903
Vaginal fuids,conductivityoestrous
changing patterns,476-7
neosporosis,502
cows,437
clinical presentation,480
porcine parvovirus,638-9,903-4
Vaginal yeplasiaith146,
hotses,599-600,607-8
porcine reproductive and
152,649
see also specific diseases
respiratory syndrome,904
Vaginalhysterotomy,ringwomb,
Ventral flexion ofneck seeDown-
toxoplasmosis,568,903
233-4
ward displacement of head
948
Index
Ventral hernia,241-2
Vitamin E,458-9
VulvoplastyseeCaslick'svulvoplasty
Ventral midlineincision,caesarean
antioxidant activity,460,461
operation
operation,364,386
embryonic loss and,138
Vulvovaginitis
Ventralposition
retained fetal membranes and,
granular,491,492,493
anterior presentation,298
420,421,422
infectious pustular(IPV).
posteriorpresentation,298
rabbitinfertility and,848-9
506,507
Ventrolateral incision,caesarean
Vitrification
operation,363-4
embryo cryopreservation,879-80,
W
Ventrotransversepresentation001
881
Ventrovertical presentation,oblique
semen cryopreservation,772
Waddliachondrophila,494
see Oblique ventrovertical
Voluntary waiting period (VWP),527
Wart-like tumours see
presentation
Vulva
Fibropapillomas
Verarumcalifornicum,124,138
cyclical changes, 6
Water-bag,173,181
Vernaltransition,mare sceSpring
haematoma,307-8
Weaning
transition,mare
incompleterelaxationof
split, pigs, 641
Version,manipulativeobstetrics271
posterior,234
stimulating cyclic ovarian activity.
Vertebral fractures,bull,720
obstetricinjuries,307-8,406
43.203
Vertex posture(buttpresentation),221
bitch,cyclical changes,35,36,667
Weaning-to-oestrusinterval,sow,
digitalmanipulation,275,276
cow,signsofoestrus,22
632,633,636
calf,289
ewe,signsofestrus
deliberate extension,641,644
Vertical presentations,298,299
mare, abnormalities causing
feedintakeand,642,644-5
VesicovaginalrefluxseeLlrovagina
infertility,608-10
Weather sce Climate/weather
Vesicularglands,682,685,695-6
sow,signs ofestrus,33
Well-of-the-well(wOw) system,
examination,711
Vulvaratresia,401,68
embryoculture,878,883
lesions affecting fertility.748-9
Vulvar(orvaginal) discharge
WelshMountain ponytesticular
Vesiculitis(seminal vesiculitis),738,
protracted dystocia,224
hypoplasia,744
748-9
bitch
Wesselbron virus,124
Vestibule,mare,611
after caesarean operation,
Wethers
Vestibulo-vaginal abnormalities,
388-9
balanoposthitis,730,731
bitch,648
after ovariohysterectomy,379
penile necrosis7345
Vetrabutine hydrochloride,233,898
differential diagnosis,660
see lsoRam
Vicuna,809
mucohaemorrhagic.654
Whelping,177,185-6
see also Camelidae
primary uterine inertia382-3
complications,324
Videorecordingsoestrus deiection,
pro-oestrus/oestrus,636,667
dystocia seeDystocia,bitch
438
pyometra,659
first stage of labour,172,173
Vink calving jack,267,268,282
coW
initiation,161
Viral infections
bovine herpesvirus-1
oxytocinrelease,170
embryonic/fetal loss,138-9
infection,507
predictingtimeof383
neonatal small mammals,850
campylobacteriosis,478,479
prematureinduction,167
teratogenic,124,132-3
oestrus,22
second stageof labour,175
transmissible in semen,782,788,
postpartum endometritis,412,
third stage of labour,175
794,799
414,415
Whelpingrate,646
cats,671-2
trichomoniasis.497
Whiteheiferdisease,398,399,400
cattle,503-10
queencat
Whites,412
dogs,656-7
after ovariohysterectomy,379
Whitten effect,845
goats,580
pyometra,673
Wildlife parks,857
horses,595-7,607
sow,infertility,635
Wilgils,560
pigs,638-9
see aiso Lochia
Windsuckertest,mare,608,609,611
sheep,572-3,574-5
Vulvar dischargesndrome,ow
Windsucking see Pneumovagina
Virilismysticvariandisease445
WinteranoestrusmareseeSeasnal
VitaminA
Vulvar hyoplasiabitch,648
inferuility/anoestrus,mare
antioxidantactivity,460,461
Vulvarneoplasms,235,407,610
WireftotomyseeFetotomywie
deficiency,422,459-60
Vulvarretention sutures
Wolffian ducts seeMesonephric ducts
VitaminB456-7
cervical andvaginal prolapse,
World OrganisationforAnimal
Vitamin C deficiency, guinea pigs.
148,150-2
H-ealth see OfficeInterna-
849
uterine prolapse,322,323
tional des Epizooties
949
Index
Wound dehiscence after caesarean
Xylazine
Zona pellucida, penetration by
operation, 366
caesarean operation, 353,
sperm,685
Wryneck,218,264,291
354,386
Zoonotic risks
fetotomy,337
manipulative delivery,271,273
brucellosis,577,640
persistent mating-induced endo-
Chlanrydoplila ahortus,494,
metritis,605
565-6
X
legalresponsibility,525
X chromosome aneuploidy, 126,129
leptospirosis,487,489
Y
Xenotransplantation,884
Qfever.574,580
XO genotype (lurner's syndrome),
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis,563
salmonellosis, 570
126
Yoll sac,62,63
1oxoplasmosis,568,579-80
bitch,132,648
Young sires, limitations on fertility.
Zoos, 857
ewe, 131
701,708-9,718-19,758
Zorlesco diluent,790,791
mare,129,588
Zorpva diluent, 790,791
queen cat,131
Zygote, 61, 62
XXX genotype, 126,129,131
in vitro culture see in vitro
dogs, 648
Zearalenone,636
culture of presumptive
XXY genotype see Klinefelter syndrone
Zinc,4G0,461
zygotes
950