MARGARET ROOT KUSTRITZ
CLINICAL
CANINE
AND
FELINE
REPRODUCTION
Evidence-Based Answers
WILEY-BLACKWELL
Clinical
ICanine
and Feline
Reproduction
EVIDENCE-BASED ANSWERS
Margaret V. Root Kustritz
DVM, PhD, DACT
Associate Professor
University of Minnesota College of Veterinary Medicine
St. Paul, MN
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
Clinical Canine and Feline Reproduction
EVIDENCE-BASED ANSWERS
Clinical
ICanine
and Feline
Reproduction
EVIDENCE-BASED ANSWERS
Margaret V. Root Kustritz
DVM, PhD, DACT
Associate Professor
University of Minnesota College of Veterinary Medicine
St. Paul, MN
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
Edition frst published 2010
@ 2010 Margaret V. Root Kustritz
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing program has been
merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell
Editorial Office
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services, and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book, please see our Website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is
granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a
separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1584-8/2010.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks, or registered trademarks of their
respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This
 publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is
sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice
or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Root Kustritz, Margaret V.
Clinical canine and feline reproduction : evidence-based answers / Margaret V. Root Kustritz.
P.; cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1584-8 (alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8138-1584-3 (alk. paper)
1. Dogs-Reproduction. 2. Cats-Reproduction. I. Title.
Handbooks. 4. Cats-physiology-Handbooks. 5. Clinical Laboratory Techniques-veterinary-Handbooks.
6. Dog Diseases-Handbooks. SF 768.2.D6 R782c 2010]
SF992.U75R66 2010
636.7'08982-dc22
2009023115
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
Set in 10 on 12 pt Minion by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong
Printed in Singapore
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientifc research, understanding, and discussion only and
are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specifc method, diagnosis, or
treatment by practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifcally disclaim all
warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of ftness for a particular purpose. In view of ongoing
research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating
to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and eyaluate the information provided
U sasueyo Aue shuyi xayio suowe tog aap io quawdmba auripaw yoea io suononsut io jiasut abeyed ay u!
the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers should consult with a
specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the
organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet
Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is
read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor
the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
12010
Dedication
Non nobis nomine Domine, sed nomini tuo da gloriam.
Contents
Preface, xili
Acknowledgments, xy
Section I
Canine techniques, 3
1. What is the technique for collection of a vaginal cytology specimen?, 5
2. How do I interpret vaginal cytology?, 7
3. What equipment do I need to perform vaginoscopy and how do I interpret what I see?, 13
4. What is the technique for vaginography?, 19
5. What techniques are available for pregnancy diagnosis and when are they best used?, 21
6. What is the technique for semen collection from male dogs?, 25
7. What is the technique for semen evaluation in dogs?, 29
8. What is the technique for testicular ultrasound and how do I interpret what I see?, 35
9. What is the technique for prostatic fine-needle aspirate or biopsy?, 37
10. What is the technique for testicular fine-needle aspirate and how do I interpret what
I see?, 39
11. What is the technique for testicular biopsy?, 41
12. What is the technique for preparation of chilled semen in dogs?, 43
13. What is the technique for preparation of frozen semen in dogs?, 47
14. What is the technique for vaginal insemination?, 51
15. What is the technique for transcervical insemination?, 55
16. What is the technique for surgical insemination?, 57
vii Contents
17. What is the technique for anesthesia for Cesarean section?, 59
18. What is the technique for Cesarean section?, 63
Section  )
Canine reproductive physiology. 67
19. What is the normal age for puberty onset in bitches and dogs?, 69
20. What are the normal parameters for the estrous (heat) cycle in bitches?, 71
21. What are the normal parameters for semen quality in dogs?, 75
Section ")
Canine reproductive management, 79
22. What age is best for ovariohysterectomy of female dogs?, 81
23. When is it best to perform ovariohysterectomy of female dogs relative to heat?, 83
24. What age is best for castration of male dogs?, 85
 25. Are nonsurgical alternatives available for sterilization or contraception of female or male
dogs?, 87
26. What comprises recommended pre-breeding evaluation for bitches?, 91
27. What effect does hypothyroidism have on fertility?, 93
28. What are the pros and cons of treatment with antibiotics during heat in bitches?, 95
29. How do I use progesterone and other measures for breeding management?, 97
30. What drugs are unsafe to use during pregnancy in bitches?, 101
31. Are there dietary supplements proven to improve fertility in bitches?, 105
32. How can we prevent dystocia?, 107
33. What are the normal physiologic and physical changes in bitches pre-partum?, 109
34. How can I terminate pregnancy in bitches?, 111
35. Should bitches be spayed at the time of removal of a mammary mass?, 115
36. Are there dietary supplements proven to improve semen quality in male dogs?, 117
37. Can I locate retained testes without surgery?, 119
38. Is there a medical therapy to cause testes to descend into the scrotum after 8 weeks
of age?, 121
(Section IV ) Canine disease, 123
39. How do I diagnose and treat dystocia?, 125
40. How do I diagnose and treat eclampsia (hypocalcemia)?, 129
41. What are the causes of prolonged vulvar discharge after whelping in bitches?, 131
Contents ix
42. What is the best treatment for puppy vaginitis? Should the dog be allowed to go through one
heat cycle?, 133
43. What is the best treatment for chronic vaginitis in a spayed female dog?, 135
44. How do I test for and treat canine brucellosis?, 139
45. What are the causes of vulvar discharge during pregnancy?, 143
46. What diagnostic tests can be performed to identify the cause of pregnancy loss?, 145
47. How do I diagnose and treat pyometra in bitches?, 149
48. What are the causes of agalactia in bitches and how is it best treated?, 155
49. How do I treat mastitis in a nursing bitch?, 157
50. What are the causes of persistent estrus (heat) in dogs?, 161
51. What are the causes of lack of cycling (persistent anestrus) in dogs?, 165
52. What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of a bitch?, 169
53. How do I treat benign prostatic hypertrophy?, 173
54. How do I treat prostatitis?, 177
55. What is the best treatment for recurrent paraphimosis (extrusion of the penis from the
prepuce) in neutered male dogs?, 179
56. What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of a male dog?, 181
(Section V ) Feline techniques, 185
57. What is the technique for collection of a vaginal cytology specimen?, 187
58. How do I interpret vaginal cytology?, 189
59. What techniques are available for pregnancy diagnosis and when are they best used?, 191
60. What are the techniques for semen collection from male cats?, 193
61. What is the technique for semen evaluation in cats?, 195
62. What is the technique for vaginal insemination?, 199
63. What is the technique for surgical insemination?, 201
65. What is the technique for Cesarean section?, 207
(Section Vl) Feline reproductive physiology. 209
66. What is the normal age for puberty onset in queens and toms?, 211
67. What are the normal parameters for the estrous (heat) cycle in queens?, 213
           s
X Contents
(Section Vll)
Feline reproductive management, 217
69. What age is best for ovariohysterectomy of female cats?, 219
70. When is it best to perform ovariohysterectomy of female cats relative
to heat?, 221
71. What age is best for castration of male cats?, 223
72. Are nonsurgical alternatives available for sterilization or contraception of female or male
cats?, 225
73. What comprises recommended pre-breeding evaluation for queens?, 227
74. How do I use progesterone and other measures for breeding management?, 229
75. What drugs are unsafe to use during pregnancy in queens?, 231
76. How can I terminate pregnancy in queens?, 233
77. Should queens be spayed at the time of removal of a mammary mass?, 235
 Section Vlll)
)Feline disease, 237
78. How do I diagnose and treat dystocia?, 239
79. What diagnostic tests can be performed to identify the cause of
pregnancy loss?, 243
80. How do I diagnose and treat pyometra in queens?, 245
81. How do I treat mastitis in a nursing queen?, 249
82. What are the causes of persistent estrus (heat) in cats?, 251
83. What are the causes of lack of cycling (persistent anestrus) in cats?, 253
84. What are the causes of estrus after ovariohysterectomy of female cats?, 255
male cats?, 257
86. What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of a queen?, 259
87. What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of a male cat?, 261
Section Ix )
Pediatric techniques, 263
88. What are some of the techniques for venipuncture?, 265
89. What are some of the techniques for collection of a urine sample?, 267
91. How do I determine safety and efficacy, and calculate correct dosage for drugs used in
puppies and kittens?, 271
Contents Xi
Section X )
 Pediatric physical examination and management, 275
92. What are normal physical examination findings at various ages in puppies and kittens?, 277
93. What are normal values on complete blood count, chermistry profle, and urinalysis of
puppies and kittens?, 281
94. How are orphan puppies and kittens best fed?, 285
95. What flea and tick control products are safe to use in puppies and kittens?, 289
(Section Xl )
Pediatric disease, 291
 96. What are the causes of failure to thrive in puppies and kittens?, 293
97. What are the common causes of diarrhea in puppies and kittens?, 299
98. What are the clinical manifestations of septicemia and how is it diagnosed and treated?, 301
99. How is neonatal isoerythrolysis diagnosed, treated, and prevented in cats?, 303
100. What are the causes of stillbirths and neonatal mortality in kittens and puppies?, 305
Resources, 307
Index, 309
Preface
This text is based on the many questions I have been asked by practicing veterinarians over the
years and on my own experience as a veterinarian in general practice and as a specialist. It is
intended not to cover every nuance of the discipline of small animal theriogenology but rather
to be a useful reference for you as you work with clients. I have tried to include citations to
relevant literature whenever possible, both to justify information provided and to make that
information more readily available to you. I have also included an appendix of resources to make
it easy for you to find the equipment you need to do this work in practice. I hope this text answers
many of the questions you encounter and am happy to help with those questions it does not
answer. Feel free to contact me at rootko01@umn.edu for further assistance. Many veterinarians
learn little about small animal theriogenology in veterinary college or choose not to do this work
in practice. I encourage you to join the Society for Theriogenology (www.therio.org) and to ask
questions to help you learn this discipline. I find small animal theriogenology fascinating and
hope this text will help you have that same experience.
Xill
Acknowledgments
I thank the veterinarians who reviewed the list of questions that became the Contents, and my
many colleagues who have shared their experience and knowledge with me so I could share it
with others. I especially thank my mentors, Dr. Shirley Johnston and Dr. Patricia Olson, and my
parents for their constant encouragement throughout my career. Finally, I thank my loving and
 supportive husband, Jason, and our wonderful children, Cecilia, Marie, and Monica. Yes, you
may have the computer now.
Clinical Canine and Feline Reproduction
EVIDENCE-BASED ANSWERS
Section
Canine techniques
What is the technique for collection of a vaginal
cytology specimen?
Anatomy
The vulvar lips cover the ventral clitoral fossa and dorsal vestibule. The vestibule is angled dor-
sally and extends from the vulva to the urethral orifice. Cranial to the urethral orifice is the
vagina.
Pre-procedure considerations
The vagina is not sterile. A non-sterile cotton-tipped applicator, moistened with saline or tap
water, is used. Some describe use of a speculum to guide placement of the swab; the author finds
this irritating to the bitch and cumbersome to the operator so does not advocate its use.
Procedure
 Introduce the moistened swab at the dorsal-most point of the vulvar cleft and angle it upward
at a 45-degree angle, rolling it between the fingers if necessary to advance it beyond the urethral
papilla (Fig. 1-1). Roll the swab against the vaginal surface and pull it straight out. Roll the swab
several times over a clean glass slide (Fig. 1-2). Stain the slide with a triple stain or new methylene
blue.
Post-care and complications
Occasionally, the cotton comes off the applicator stick. This is easily retrieved digitally. Neither
exact site in the vagina from which the sample is retrieved nor staining method alters results.
5
6 what is the technique for collection of a vaginal cytology specimen?
EOOINH
J
31
Figure 1-1: Introduction of the moistened swab at the dorsal commissure of the vulva for collection of a
vaginal cytology specimen.
Figure 1-2: Rolling of the swab on a glass slide prior to staining.
Supplemental reading
Hiemstra M, Shaefers-Okkens AC, Teske E, et al. 2001. The reliability of vaginal cytology in determining
the optimal mating time in the bitch. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 126:685-689.
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. Collection of tissue and culture samples from the canine reproductive tract.
Theriogenology 66:567-574.
2
How do I interpret vaginal cytology?
Anatomy
 Not applicable.
Pre-procedure considerations
Not applicable.
Procedure
Breeding management
The healthy cuboidal epithelial cells that line the vagina at all times are termed non-cornified
and include the parabasal and intermediate cells (Fig. 2-1). Under the influence of estrogen, these
cells are stimulated to divide. As the cells divide and the vaginal lining thickens, the cells nearest
the lumen become nonviable and lose the characteristic appearance of a healthy cell monolayer.
The misshapen, clumped cells are termed cornified. Specific cell types are superficial cells and
anuclear squame cells (Fig. 2-2).
During proestrus, the cell population changes from completely non-cornifed in early proes-
trus to completely cornified in late proestrus. Red blood cells (RBCs) may be present throughout.
 Polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) are present early in proestrus but are less evident as the epi-
thelium thickens in late proestrus (Figs. 2-3, 2-4, and 2-5).
 Estrus is also called standing heat. During this stage, the epithelium is at maximum thickness,
with a prominent layer of keratinized cells on the luminal surface. Estrus is defined cytologically
as 100% cornified cells with greater than 50% being anuclear squame cells. There are no PMNs
    a   d a  s 
At the onset of diestrus, the cornifed cells are abruptly shed. The smear is non-cornified and
many PMNs may be present in the first couple of days (Fig. 2-7). Anestrus is characterized by
presence of few cells, all of which are non-cornified. Occasional healthy PMNs may be seen
(Fig. 2-8).
Diagnosis of disease
Spayed female dogs and bitches not in proestrus or estrus have non-cornified vaginal epithelial
cells. Presence of cornified cells at any other time suggests estrogen influence. Possible disorders
8 How do I interpret vaginal cytology?
10
NH
N
Figure 2-1: Non-cornified vaginal
epithelial cells, parabasal cells (small,
and intermediate cells (large)
Figure 2-2: Cornified vaginal
epithelial cells, superficial cells, and 
anuclear squame cells.
Figure 2-3: Early proestrus vaginal
cytology. Note the polymorphonuclear
Cells.
Canine techniques 9
Hgure 2-4: Mid-proestrus vaginal
cytology.
Hgure 2-5: Late proestrus vaginal
cytology.
Hgure 2-6: Estrus vaginal cytology.
All cells are cornified and greater
than 50% are anuclear squame cells.
Note the bacteria.
10 How do I interpret vaginal cytology?
2
Figure 2-7: Early diestrus vaginal cytology. Note the presence of non-cornified vaginal epithelial cell and
polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs). Also note the diestrum or metestrum cells (epithelial cells engulfing a PMN,
arrowhead) and the foam cell (epithelial cell filled with fat vacuoles, arrow).
Figure 2-8: Anestrus vaginal cytology.
associated with abnormally cornified cytology include ovarian remnant syndrome, ovarian cystic
disease, ovarian tumor, or estrogen ingestion or absorption, usually from a human pharmaceuti-
cal source.
Vulvar discharge may be serous, serosanguinous, hemorrhagic, mucoid, mucopurulent, or
purulent. Serous discharge may be normal at the time of parturition and is not described as a
common component of any disorder in dogs. Serosanguinous discharge is normal during pro-
estrus and estrus (see Chapter 20), and postpartum, and may be evidence of abnormal estrogen
secretion in dogs with ovarian remnant syndrome, ovarian cystic disease, or ovarian neoplasia.
Hemorrhagic discharge is never normal and is most commonly associated with subinvolution
of placental sites (see Chapter 41), neoplasia of the reproductive tract, or coagulopathy. Mucoid
Canine techniques 11
discharge may be evident in the first days of diestrus, as cornified cels are shed. Mucoid to
purulent discharge commonly evidences inflammation of the vagina (see Chapter 43) or pyo-
metra (see Chapter 47).
Post-care and complications
Not applicable.
LOUES
Supplemental reading
Holst PA, Phemister RD. 1974. Onset of diestrus in the beagle bitch: Definition and significance. Arm J Vet
Res 35:401-406.
 Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 225-242.
 Rehm S, Stanislaus DJ, Williams AM. 2007. Estrous cycle-dependent histology and review of sex steroid
receptor expression in dog reproductive tissues and mammary gland and associated hormonal levels.
Birth Defects Res (Part B) 80:233-245.
 Root Kustritz MV. 2008. Theriogenology question of the month: Diestrual vulvar discharge in a bitch.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 232:841-843.
3
What equipment do I need to perform
vaginoscopy and how do I interpret what I see?
Anatomy
The vulvar lips cover the ventral clitoral fossa and dorsal vestibule. The vestibule is angled dor-
sally and extends from the vulva to the urethral orifice. Cranial to the urethral orifice is the
vagina. The cranial two-thirds of the vagina is narrowed in diameter from the presence of a tissue
fold that hangs from the ceiling of the vagina, the dorsal median post-cervical fold. The cranial
end of the vagina is a dead-ended fornix. The external cervical os is a rosette of tissue hanging
from the ceiling of the vagina just caudal to the fornix.
Pre-procedure considerations
Vaginoscopy can be performed using either a small scope with direct lighting, such as a handheld
vaginoscope (Fig. 3-1), or a long, rigid, fber-optic endoscope (Fig. 3-2). Note that the cone of
the handheld vaginoscope is not significantly different in length or diameter than the largest
otoscope cone, which can be used equally successfully. The endoscope required must be very
narrow in diameter; most commonly, cystoscopes, which can be passed into the urethra, are used.
Bitches in estrus tolerate vaginoscopy well. Most other bitches, including spayed female dogs,
do not tolerate the procedure well. When using the handheld vaginoscope, female dogs seem to
most resent the introduction of the cone. Once it has been introduced, the dog may tolerate its
use. For this reason, veterinarians using this equipment may wish to aftempt the technique in
standing, unsedated dogs. The handheld vaginoscope can be used for an assessment of the ves-
tibule, urethral papilla, and caudal vagina.
The long, rigid endoscope should not be used in fractious dogs because of its inflexibility and
 length. Female dogs should be sedated before vaginoscopy with an endoscope is performed. Place
the dog in dorsal recumbency to keep her tail out of the way and to make it possible to secure
her hindlimbs if necessary.
Procedure
For vaginoscopy with a handheld vaginoscope, attach a vaginoscope cone appropriate to the size
of the female dog or attach the largest otoscope cone. Lubricate the cone with water-soluble
lubricant. Insert the cone at the dorsal commissure of the vulva, advancing it dorsocranially. To
evaluate the vagina, move the scope gently to assess the color and elasticity of the vaginal folds
and to look for masses, anatomic abnormalities, discharge, lesions, or foreign objects.
13
14 what equipment do I need to perform vaginoscopy?
UH
3NIN
Figure 3-1: Vaginoscope with stylet within cone;
 otoscope and cone (photo courtesy of Marie Kustritz)
Figure 3-2: Cystoscope.
Canine techniques 15
CANINE TECHNIOUES
Hgure 3-3: Normal vaginal mucosa
Hgure 3-4: Erythematous vaginal mucosa.
16 what equipment do I need to perform vaginoscopy?
NH
ANINE
Figure 3-5: Lymphoid follicles on the vaginal mucosa (photo courtesy of Dr. Jody Lulich).
Figure 3-6: Vaginal septum (reprinted with permission from Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's
Guide to Successfur Breeoing and Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier).
For vaginoscopy with a long, rigid endoscope, insert the scope as described above. Viewing is
easier if the scope is attached to a camera and monitor; this may also permit capture of images
for the medical record. Warmed, sterile saline may be infused through the irrigation port of the
scope to ensure distension of the vaginal vault.
Normal vaginal mucosa is the healthy pink color of oral mucous membranes (Fig. 3-3).
Inflamed mucosa will vary from dark pink to red (Fig. 3-4). Lymphoid follicles are nonspecific
indicators of inflammation (Fig. 3-5). Other things that may be noted are discharge, urine pooling,
masses or foreign objects, and anatomic abnormalities such as septa or strictures (Fig. 3-6).
Canine techniques 17
Post-care and complications
Fluid will drain from the vagina after the procedure by gravity. Depending on the findings and
concerns about introduction of bacteria, empirical therapy with a broad-spectrum antibiotic may
be considered.
Supplemental reading
Lulich JP. 2006. Endoscopic vaginoscopy in the dog. Theriogenology 66:588-591.
LOUES
What is the technique for vaginography?
Anatomy
The vulvar lips cover the ventral clitoral fossa and dorsal vestibule. The vestibule is angled dor-
sally and extends from the vulva to the urethral orifice. Cranial to the urethral orifice is the
vagina. The cranial two-thirds of the vagina is narrowed in diameter from the presence of a tissue
fold that hangs from the ceiling of the vagina, the dorsal median post-cervical fold. The cranial
end of the vagina is a dead-ended fornix. The external cervical os is a rosette of tissue hanging
from the ceiling of the vagina just caudal to the fornix.
Pre-procedure considerations
Vaginography requires heavy sedation or general anesthesia. Place the dog in lateral
recumbency.
Procedure
Dilute iodinated contrast medium (iothalamate meglumine 60%) with an equal volume of lac-
tated Ringer's solution. A total volume of 1 to 5ml/kg should be prepared. Fill the lumen of a
balloon-tipped catheter with contrast medium to prevent introduction of air bubbles into the
vagina. Introduce the catheter into the vestibule and inflate the balloon so it sits just caudal to
the urethral papilla. Infuse contrast medium into the vagina until back pressure is felt on the
syringe. Obtain lateral and ventrodorsal radiographic views.
The normal vagina is bottle-shaped, with the spoon-shaped cervix visible cranially. A slight
constriction, the cingulum, lies just cranial to the urethral papilla (Fig. 4-1). Vaginal anomalies
will be visible as flling defects (Fig. 4-2). During proestrus and estrus, and postpartum, the cervix
s n  o o m  n e do aq 
Post-care and complications
 Fluid will drain from the vagina by gravity. For dogs in whom contrast moves into the uterus,
the effect of contrast medium on the endometrium and possible effects on future fertility are not
defined.
19
20what is the techniqueforvaginography?
IOINH
3J
3NI
Cranial to the urethral papilla (star)
denotes stricture; white star denotes spoon-shaped cervix.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 225-242.
5
What techniques are available for pregnancy
diagnosis and when are they best used?
Anatomy
The uterine body is the only organ between the colon and the urinary bladder in the caudal
abdomen. The uterine horns are tortuous and lie among the small intestines.
Pre-procedure considerations
Stage at which pregnancy can be diagnosed varies with technique used. There are few reasons to
see potentially pregnant dogs outside this window and, in fact, examination may expose them
to disease or otherwise potentially harm the pregnancy.
Procedure
 Diagnostic tests valuable for pregnancy diagnosis in bitches and the time they are best used are
listed in Table 5-1. There are no early pregnancy tests for dogs. Human early pregnancy tests do
not work in dogs since they assay a hormone produced only by humans, human chorionic
gonadotropin.
Post-care and complications
There are no reported detriments to the bitch or pup with any of the diagnostic techniques if
 performed at the proper time with technical skill and use of well-maintained equipment.
Supplemental reading
Aissi A, Slimani C. 2008. Time of initial detection of fetal structures and anatomic differentiation by using
B-mode ultrasound examination in bitches. Pak J Biol Sci 11:1750-1753.
Kim B-S, Son C-H. 2007. Time of initial detection of fetal and extra-fetal structures by ultrasonographic
examination in Miniature Schnauzer bitches. J Vet Sci 8:289-293.
Lenard ZM, Hopper BJ, Lester NV, et al. 2007. Accuracy of prediction of canine litter size and gestational
age with ultrasound. Aust Vet J 85:222-225.
Purswell BJ, Parker NA, Hess M, et al. 2000. Managing pregnant and whelping dogs. Vet Med
95:793-800.
Root Kustritz MV. 2005. Pregnancy diagnosis and abnormalities of pregnancy in the dog. Theriogenology
64:755-765.
Ulutas PA, Musal B, Kiral F,et al. 2008. Acute phase protein levels in pregnancy and oestrus cycle in bitches.
Res Vet Sci doi:10.1016/j.rvsc.2008.09.001.
21
22  what techniques are available for pregnancy diagnosis?
Table 5-1. Pregnancy diagnostic techniques for the bitch.
Technique
Time
Comments
Litter Size?
Viability?
When Best
Used
Abdominal
28 to 35
Prior to 28 days, the
Palpation is a
Palpation cannot
palpation 
J0 sAep
individual amniotic vesicles
poor indicator of
be used to asses5
pregnancy
are difficult to feel and
Itter size.
viability of pups.
after 35 days, they enlarge
At term, puppy
and become confluent,
movement may
E
again making them
be visible or
N
difficult to feel as
palpable but lack
individual entities. Care
AT
 of movement is 
should be taken not to
 not invariably
 squeeze the amniotic
associated with
vesicles but rather to let
puppy death.
them "blip" through the
fingers; vigorous palpation
can injure fetuses.
Palpation is difficult in
obese and tense bitches.
Transabdominal
Beyond 24
At 24 to 30 days. the
Ultrasonography is
Ultrasonography
ultrasonography
days of
amniotic vesicles are visible
 a poor indicator
 the best
pregnancy
as black balls with a
of litter size unless
indicator of
comma-shaped tissue mass
the litter is very
viability. Beyond
within thern (Fig. 5-1).
small and the
assessment of
Beyond 23 to 30 days.
pups are widely
movement, heart
beating hearts can be
paced in the
late can be
 seen. Fetal heart rate
abdomen, and if
assessed; heart
should be consistently
evaluation is done
late of less than
greater than 200 bpm
prior to 41 days
150 to 170bpm
Beyond 32 to 36 days.
from ovulation. In
 indicative of
movement can be seen
one study, litter
fetal stress.
Mineralization of the
size was
 skeleton is visible beyond
accurately
35 days.
 predicted in only
65% of cases.
Abdominal
Beyond 42
Mineralization of fetuses
Radiography is the 
If pups have
radiographs
to 45 days
must be present.
best indicator of
been dead for at
of
 Radiographs are most
Itter size.
least 1 day. signs
pregnancy
useful very late in 
Miscounts are
of fetal death
pregnancy. when not only
most common in
may be visible on
can pregnancy be
very large litters
radiographs.
diagnosed but litter size.
(nine or more
including gas
size of individual pups, and
pups).
within and
 some notion of viability
 around the pups,
may also be elucidated
and collapse of
(Fig. 5-2).
the skull or axial
skeleton.
Canine techniques 23
Table 5-1. Continued
Technique
Time
Comments
Litter Size?
Viability?
When Best
Used
Relaxin assay
Beyond 28
Relaxin is secreted to a
There is no
There is no
days of
much greater extent in
comelation
correlation
pregnancy
pregnant dogs than in
between litter size
between viability
 nonpregnant dogs in
and result of the
and result of the
diestrus. A positive result
relaxin assay.
relaxin assay.
may be evident as early a5
21 days post breeding but
all negatives must be
rechecked no sooner than
7 days later. Relaxin stays
positive for a variable time
 after pregnancy loss.
Acute-phase
Beyond 28
 Acute-phase proteins are
There is no
There is no
proteins
days of
secreted in increasing
comelation
correlation
pregnancy
armounts in the presence of 
between litter size
between
physiological inflammation.
and results of the
fibrinogen assay
 such as pregnancy and
fibrinogen assay.
esults and fetal
 placentation, or pathology.
viability.
such as uterine disease.
Concentrations of
fibrinogen greater than
a1e 1p/6w00E 01 082
 indicative of pregnancy but
 because pyometra occurs
at the same stage of the
estrous cycle as does
pregnancy. measurement
 of fibrinogen does not
differentiate these
conditions. Many assays
report results in g/dl.
making interpretation of
results difficult.
24 what techniques are available for pregnancy diagnosis?
LOINHD3I
ANINE
Figure 5-1: Mid-pregnancy ultrasound in a bitch. Note the fluid-filled amniotic vesicle containing an echoic
embryo.
Figure 5-2: Late gestation radiograph in a bitch. Nine puppies are visible
6
What is the technique for semen collection from
male dogs?
Anatomy
The canine penis lies within the prepuce. The penis is made up of the distal glans, the pars longa
glandis, which contains the os penis, and the proximal bulbus glandis, which trebles in size as
the penis becomes erect. The prostate encircles the urethra at the neck of the urinary bladder
and is the only accessory sex organ in dogs, providing the majority of the fluid portion of the
ejaculate.
Pre-procedure considerations
Semen can be collected into any clean container. Cold shock is not as great a concern in dogs as
in other species. Many operators prefer the use of some sort of a collection sleeve, or artificial
vagina, made of rubber or polypropylene, with a centrifuge tube at the end as the actual collec-
tion vessel (Fig. 6-1). Sterile, disposable polypropylene collecting cones also are available (see
Resources). This arrangement best mimics natural breeding as it provides circumferential pres-
sure on the penis as would occur during intromission; permits the operator to tightly encircle
the penile shaft between the bulbus glandis and the body wall with the fingers, mimicking the
copulatory lock, or tie; and prevents loss or contamination of the sample.
Semen collection should be attempted in a fairly quiet area with a nonslip surface. Consistent
use of one room or one rug acts as a training aid if the procedure is to be performed more
than once. Presence of a teaser bitch, especially if she is in estrus, is associated with ejaculation
of better quality semen. Causes of poor libido and poor semen quality are discussed in
Chapter 56.
Procedure
 If a teaser bitch is present, she should be restrained such that her hindquarters are on the rug,
and should be muzzled if necessary to ensure that she does not endanger the dog. The male dog
is presented to her, and is allowed to lick at her vulva and mount her if he so chooses. Massage
the area of the bulbus glandis through the prepuce, briskly and enthusiastically. As soon as erec-
tion begins, use the hand holding the prepuce to put pressure on the caudal bulbus glandis and
“squirt"* the penis out of the prepuce while using the hand holding the collecting cone to push
the preputial skin proximal to the engorging bulbus glandis. The goal is to make sure that the
25
26 what is the technique for semen collection from male dogs?
3OOINH
31
Figure 6-1: Rubber collecting cone for collection of canine semen (reprinted with permission from Root
Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successfur Breeoing and Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier).
Figure 6-2: Direction of the erect penis caudally to simulate the copulatory lock, or tie (reprinted with
permission from Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successfuf Breeoing ano Hearth
Management. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier).
Canine techniques27
shaft tightly through the collecting cone just proximal to the bulbus glandis. You cannot constrict
it enough with your hand to stop ejaculation.
The dog ejaculates three fractions. The first fraction is ejaculated as the dog thrusts vigorously.
This fraction is of fairly small volume and is clear; it is prostatic in origin. The second fraction
may be ejaculated while the dog is thrusting or just after he stops the vigorous thrusting behavior.
Many dogs attempt to lift a leg to form the tie after thrusting is done. The operator should pick
up the dog's leg and move the penis in a horizontal plane until it is directed caudally (Fig. 6-2).
The second fraction is the sperm-rich fraction, and is white. The third fraction is prostatic in
origin and is secreted in pulses that will be palpable in the hand holding the collecting cone.
Concurrent anal contractions are evident. Once the third fraction is present, no more sperm-rich
fluid will be collected.
Post-care and complications
Some inexperienced dogs will exhibit bleeding from small vessels on the penile surface with
complete erection. This is not dangerous to the dog and usually is not a persistent problem. Some
dogs will have persistent erection with prolonged secretion of prostatic fluid. Ways to encourage
detumescence of the penis include walking the dog away from the teaser bitch and the collection
area; gently cold-packing the dog's penis with cool cloths or providing cool hydrotherapy in a
tub; or feeding the dog. Make sure complete detumescence has occurred and that the tip of the
 penis is not protruding before kenneling the male dog.
Supplemental reading
Kutzler MA. 2005. Senmen collection in the dog. Theriogenology 64:747-754.
7
What is the technique for semen evaluation
in dogs?
Anatomy
Not applicable.
Pre-procedure considerations
Cold shock is not a problem in dogs as it is in other species. Equipment and samples can be
 maintained at room temperature for evaluation.
Procedure
Color
  n o  (a     s     s
seen include clear (no spermatozoa in the ejaculate), yellow (urine contamination), brown (old
 blood from prostate disease), red (blood from penile trauma or prostate disease), or green
(infection).
Volume
Volume varies depending on how much of the third, or prostatic, fraction of the ejaculate was
collected by the operator. Volume is not correlated with quality. Record volume collected before
 any samples are removed for evaluation; this value willbe needed later to calculate total number
of spermatozoa in the ejaculate.
Motility
Motility should be assessed soon after semen collection. Place one drop of semen on a glass slide.
You may or may not use a cover slip. Subjectively assess the percentage of spermatozoa that are
moving forward; normal is 70% or greater. Some people also assess the speed of movement of
the spermatozoa; there are no reported correlations between speed of motility and fertility in
that dog or with use of that particular sample.
Concentration/total number
 Make a 1: 100 dilution of semen by diluting 1 part semen (0.1 ml) with 9 parts formal-buffered
saline (0.9 ml) to make a 1: 10 dilution and then mixing 1 part of that initial dilution with 9 parts
29
30 what is the technique for semen evaluation in dogs?
日N
N行
Figure 7-1: Normal semen color. Volume measurement can be read directly off the markings on the
centrifuge tube (reprinted with permission from Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeders Guioe t0
formal-buffered saline. This can also be done using the Unopette system for white blood cel
counts (Fig. 7-2). Use the enclosed piercing device to make a hole on the top of the diluent
container. Remove the piercing device to reveal the pipette. Fill the pipette by capillary action.
Squeeze the diluent container and insert the pipette, letting go of everything at once so the semen
is sucked from the pipette into the diluent. Remove the pipette and turn it around, reseating the
hub to form a dispenser.
With either technique, spermatozoa are counted using a hemacytometer. Place the glass cover
slip over the central area of the hemacytometer. Dispense diluted semen such that capillary action
carries it across the central area. Fill each side of the hemacytometer separately. Allow the hema-
cytometer to sit for about 5 min after filling, to allow spermatozoa to settle.
 The hemacytometer grid consists of nine large squares. Using the 10X objective, one of these
large squares fills the microscope field. Count all the spermatozoa visible in one of the nine large
squares. This yields the concentration in millions per mililiter.
Canine techniques 31
Fgure 7-2: Unopette system and hemacytometer for determination of concentration of spermatozoa in
Breeding and Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier).
Other, less time-consuming, techniques for evaluation of number of spermatozoa in the ejacu-
late have been assessed. None, including computer-assisted systems, have been demonstrated to
be as accurate as the hemacytometer method.
Concentration varies with semen collection technique; if much prostatic fluid was collected,
the sample will be dilute with low concentration of spermatozoa. However, the total number of
spermatozoa in the sample does not vary with technique and is the valued number in semen
evaluation. Volume (milliliter per ejaculate) multiplied by concentration (spermatozoa per mil-
liliter) yields total number (spermatozoa per ejaculate). Normal value is dependent on the size
of the dog, ranging from 300 million to 2 billion.
Morphology
Morphology, or shape, of spermatozoa is not specifically associated with fertility in dogs as in
other species. However, a higher percentage of morphologically normal spermatozoa is desirable
as poor morphology is often associated with poor motility and, presumably, with a decreased
ability to reach the uterine tube and fertilize ova. There is also some reported correlation between
abnormalities of head shape and degree of DNA denaturation within the cell.
Place one drop of semen at one end of a glass slide and smear it out as for a blood smear. Let
it air-dry and stain with a triple stain, leaving it in each of the three solutions (fixative, safranin,
and crystal violet) for 5min. Rinse and allow to air-dry before evaluating under oil immersion.
Another technique is to place one drop of semen at one end of a glass slide and place a drop
of an eosin-nigrosin stain next to it. Using a pusher slide, rock the two drops together to mix
them and draw it out into a thick smear. Allow to air-dry and evaluate under oil immersion.
Morphology can be broken down into normal spermatozoa, those with primary defects, and
those with secondary defects (Fig. 7-3). Primary defects occur during spermatogenesis and
include anything doubled, any abnormality of the head shape, proximal cytoplasmic droplets,
and bending of the midpiece. Secondary defects occur during sample preparation or are an
indication of infection and include detached heads, distal cytoplasmic droplets, and bent tails.
Normal is 80% or greater morphologically normal spermatozoa. Significance of specific primary
or secondary defects is not known in dogs, although a preponderance of primary defects may
32 What is the technique for semen evaluation in dogs?
10
NH
N
Figure 7-3: Two normal spermatozoa: one spermatozoon with a primary Cytoplasmic droplet (primary defect),
one spermatozoon with a distal cytoplasmic droplet (secondary defect)
carry a worse prognosis than a preponderance of secondary defects, simply because the underly-
ing cause is less likely to be something easily addressed.
Miscellaneous tests
Other tests that may be indicated, based on clinical presentation of the animal and other semen
evaluation findings, are cytology and culture. The dilute nature of canine semen often makes
examination of raw specimens for cytology less than useful. Centrifuge the sample and example
the pellet for infla mmatory cells, abnormal epithelial cells, bacteria, or other cell types. Cytology
is not well associated with culture results; if infection is suspected, culture should be performed
even if cytology is not inflammatory. Because semen collection is not a sterile procedure, culture
results must be interpreted recognizing the presence of normal flora. Growth of any single organ-
ism at 10 bacteria/ml or greater is considered significant.
In human medicine, tests for the fertilizing capability of spermatozoa are routinely performed.
These tests are not commonly used in veterinary medicine. One simple test that could be used
to assess the integrity of the sperm plasma membrane is the hypo-osmotic swelling test. In this
test, spermatozoa are placed in a hypo-osmotic medium. If the plasma membranes are intact,
suggesting that the spermaotozoa are normal and viable, fluid will leave the spermatozoa cells
and the tail will curl. One simple protocol involves placement of 10μl of semen into 100μl of a
100 mM sucrose solution, with assessment of sperm morphology after 1 min.
Use of automated semen evaluation systems
Many facilities that do many semen evaluations, especially those that freeze semen, use an auto-
mated system for semen evaluation. These are commonly called computer-assisted sperm analy-
sis (CASA) systems. CASA systems must be specifically calibrated for dog semen, which is more
dilute than that of other species.
Post-care and complications
Not applicable.
Canine techniques 33
Supplemental reading
 Christensen P, Stryhn H, Hansen C. 2005. Discrepancies in the determination of sperm concentration using
 Burker-Turk, Thoma and Makler counting chambers. Theriogenology 63:992-1003.
Nunez-Martinez I, Moran JM, Pena FJ. 2005. Do computer-assisted, morphometric-derived sperm char-
acteristics reflect DNA status in canine spermatozoa? Reprod Dom Anim 40:537-543.
Pinto CRF, Kozink DM. 2008. Simplified hypo-osmotic swelling test (HOST) of fresh and frozen-thawed
canine spermatozoa.Anim Reprod Sci 104:450-455.
Rijsselaere T, Van Soom A, Tanghe S, et al. 2005. New techniques for the assessment of canine semen
quality: A review. Theriogenology 64:706-719.
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. The value of canine semen evaluation for practitioners. Theriogenology
68:329-337.
Root Kustritz MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN, et al. 2005. Relationship between inflammatory cytology of
canine seminal fluid and significant aerobic, anaerobic, or mycoplasma cultures of canine seminal fluid:
95 cases (1987-2000). Theriogenology 64:1333-1339.
Root Kustritz MV, Kilty C, Vollmer M. 2007. Spermatocrit as a measure of concentration of canine sper-
matozoa. Vet Rec 161:566-567.
8
What is the technique for testicular ultrasound
and how do I interpret what I see?
Anatomy
The testicular tissue is tightly packed within a firm capsule,the tunica albuginea, which is encased
within the parietal and visceral vaginal tunics and the spermatic fascia. The testes lie obliquely
in the scrotum, with the head of the tightly adhered epididymis on the cranial end of the testis
and the tail of the epididymis at the caudal end of the testis. The spermatic cord contains the
cremaster muscle, ductus deferens, and testicular artery and veins. Within the testis, the indi-
vidual seminiferous tubules empty into a central, fibrous rete testis.
Pre-procedure considerations
Most dogs tolerate testicular ultrasound without sedation. Sedation may be required if manipula-
fion of the testes or scrotum is painful to the dog. Even dogs with thick haircoat usually have
minimal haired skin on the scrotum. Scrotal skin is sensitive and elevations in intrascrotal tem-
 ap n siads ps m ps aq u sp  ad
testicular tissue. For these reasons, the scrotum is not shaved.
LTTESTICLE
Hgure 8-1: Ultrasonogr am of a normal canine testis.
35
36 what is the technique for testicular ultrasound?
Procedure
Apply ultrasound gel. A transducer ranging from 4 to 7MHz may be used to assess testicular
tissue. The hyperechoic rete testis should be visible in the center of each testis. The rest of the
testicular parenchyma should be uniformly dappled (Fig. 8-1). Skilled operators may be able to
identify the fluid-flled epididymis. There should be no free fluid in the scrotum.
Post-care and complications
 Abnormalities identified may be diagnosed by fne-needle aspirate (see Chapter 9), or histopa-
thology after removal of a biopsy specimen (se Chapter 10) or the entire testis. Testicular
ultrasound is a more accurate indicator of true testicular volume than is external measurement
of testicular size with a pair of calipers.
Supplemental reading
Gouletsou PG, Galatos AD, Leontides LS. 2008. Comparison between ultrasonographic and caliper mea-
surements of testicular volume in the dog. Anim Repro Sci 108: 1-12.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 312-322.
9
What is the technique for prostatic fine-needle
aspirate or biopsy?
Anatomy
The prostate encircles the urethra at the neck of the urinary bladder. Depending on its size, it
may lie within the pelvis or within the abdominal cavity. The prostatic parenchyma is broken
Pre-procedure considerations
 Fine-needle aspirate can usually be performed on unsedated animals. Biopsy requires sedation
as it is a more invasive and painful procedure. Blind techniques have been reported in the vet-
erinary literature but are inherently inferior to ultrasound-guided techniques, which permit
collection of samples from areas of interest and minimize risks associated with perforation of
fluid-filled areas of the gland, including the urethra. Only ultrasound-guided techniques are
described.
Procedure
 Sedate the animal if necessary and place it in dorsal recumbency for ultrasound. Shave the groin
of hair. Identify the hypoechoic urinary bladder and look for the prostate caudal to the main
body of the urinary bladder. The tight prostatic capsule is hyperechoic. The urethra is visible in
the center of the prostate as a hypoechoic round or V-shaped area. Normal prostatic parenchyma
is lightly mottled and uniform. Specific abnormalities are described in Chapters 53 and 54.
For fine-needle aspirate, prep the skin as for surgery. Cover the ultrasound probe with a sterile
sleeve. Attach a sterile, long, 22-gauge needle to a sterile 6cc syringe. Pass the needle through
the port on the side of the transducer or alongside the transducer, watching it pass through the
parenchyma to the area of interest. Exert negative pressure several times, repositioning the needle
cytology assessment or into a transport medium for culture. Cytology should be assessed by a
pathologist or an experienced cytologist.
For biopsy, prep the skin as for surgery. Cover the ultrasound probe with a sterile sleeve. While
viewing the prostate, pass a triggered biopsy instrument into the prostate. Trigger the instrument
and retrieve the sample. Make sure the sample appears adequate for histopathology and/or
culture before reversing sedation. Histopathology should be assessed by a pathologist.
37
38 what is the technique for prostatic fine-needle aspirate or biopsy?
Post-care and complications
Transient hematuria (no more than 4 days duration) is a reported complication of prostatic
fine-needle aspirate and biopsy. Transient hemospermia may also occur. In human medicine,
 prophylactic antibiotic therapy is recommended after prostatic biopsy, this may be of less impor-
tance in dogs because of variations in biopsy technique between species.
Supplemental reading
Bootsma AMJ, Pes MPL, Geerlings SE, et al. 2008. Antibiotic prophylaxis in urologic procedures: A sys-
tematic review. Euro Urol 54:1270-1286.
 Root Kustritz MV. 2006. Collection of tissue and culture samples from the canine reproductive tract.
Theriogenology 66:567-574.
10
What is the technique for testicular fine-needle
aspirate and how do I interpret what I see?
Anatomy
The testicular tissue is tightly packed within a firm capsule, the tunica albuginea, which is encased
within the parietal and visceral vaginal tunics, and the spermatic fascia. The testes lie obliquely
in the scrotum, with the head of the tightly adhered epididymis on the cranial end of the testis
and the tail of the epididymis at the caudal end of the testis. The spermatic cord contains the
 cremaster muscle, ductus deferens, and testicular artery and veins.
Pre-procedure considerations
sedation for fine-needle aspirate of the testis to be performed. However, most dogs are exquisitely
sensitive to manipulation of the testes and require sedation for this procedure. Clean the scrotal
skin as for any fine-needle aspirate; do not shave the scrotal skin.
Procedure
The procedure may be performed with or without ultrasound guidance. Attach a sterile, 20-gauge
needle to a sterile 12cc or larger syringe. Introduce the needle on the midline of the testis, redi-
recting the needle and exerting negative pressure three or four times. Release pressure and
withdraw the needle. Expel the contents onto a glass slide. Ensure adequacy of the sample col-
lected before reversing sedation.
This technique does not allow evaluation of the normal testicular architecture but permits
gross assessment of spermatogenesis (whether or not maturing spermatozoa are present) and
assessment of infection ( whether or not infla mmatory cells are present). It is reported that Sertoli
cells and maturing spermatozoa are readily seen but that Leydig (interstitial) cells are not identi-
fied. Polymorphonuclear cells and bacteria are seen in dogs with orchitis, and atypical sperma-
tozoal cells and Sertoli cells in dogs with testicular neoplasia. The slide should be evaluated by a
pathologist or an experienced cytologist.
Post-care and complications
Reported complications are short-term and include mild scrotal swelling and erythema; these
signs should subside within 3 days. No long-term effect on libido or semen quality is apparent
in the vast majority of dogs.
39
40 what is the technique for testicular fine-needle aspirate?
Supplemental reading
 Dahlbom M, Makinen A, Suominen J. 1997. Testicular fine needle aspiration cytology as a diagnostic tool
in dog infertility. J Small Anim Pract 38:506-512.
Romagnoli S, Bonaccini P, Stelletta C, et al. 2008. Clinical use of testicular fine needle aspiration (FNA)
 cytology in oligozoospermic and azoospermic dogs. Proceedings, International Symposium on Canine
and Feline Reproduction, Vienna, Austria.
30
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. Collection of tissue and culture samples from the canine reproductive tract.
Theriogenology 66:567-574.
IOINH
J
31
11
What is the technique for testicular biopsy?
Anatomy
The testicular tissue is tightly packed within a firm capsule, the tunica albuginea, which is encased
within the parietal and visceral vaginal tunics, and the spermatic fascia. The testes lie obliquely
in the scrotum, with the head of the tightly adhered epididymis on the cranial end of the testis
and the tail of the epididymis at the caudal end of the testis. The spermatic cord contains the
cremaster muscle, ductus deferens, and testicular artery and veins.
Pre-procedure considerations
 The three most prevalent cell types in the canine testis are the spermatogonia, or germ cells,
which divide to form spermatozoa; the Sertoli cells, which support the developing spermatozoa;
and the interstitial or Leydig cells, which produce testosterone. The testis is made up of seminif-
erous tubules. Within a cross-section of a seminiferous tubule, spermatogonia lie against the
basement membrane, with Sertoli cells surrounding increasingly mature spermatozoa toward
the center. The individual seminiferous tubules empty into a central, fibrous rete testis.
Testicular biopsy rarely yields information that leads to resolution of a clinical abnormality.
Rather, testicular biopsy answers basic questions regarding pathologic processes within the testes
(inflammation, neoplasia, degeneration) and informs the client and veterinarian regarding pos-
sible future fertility; if there are no spermatogonia present, future spermatogenesis is impossible.
Testicular biopsy is reported to be less useful if overt testicular atrophy is present, evidenced by
small size and soft consistency of the testes.
Procedure
Place the dog under general anesthesia. Shave and surgically prep the pre-scrotal area as for a
castration. Make a single pre-scrotal incision and advance one testis to the incision. Cut through
the spermatic fascia and vaginal tunics to expose the testis within the tunica albuginea. To retrieve
a biopsy sample, several techniques are described. One is to stab through the testicular capsule
with a small scalpel blade. A portion of the testis will well through the capsular break (Fig. 1l-1).
Gently shave off this piece of testicular tissue. An alternative is to make an incision through the
testicular capsule through which a triggered biopsy instrument can be introduced.
Immediately place tissue samples in a fixative and submit for assessment by a pathologist.
Zenker's and Bouin's fixatives are preferred to formalin, which may introduce artifactual
41
42 what is the technique for testicular biopsy?
30
IOINH
3J
N
Figure 11-1: Testis excised at the time of castration to demonstrate the appearance of the welling of
testicular tissue through the capsule
defects. Close the testicular capsule with an absorbable suture. Close the skin in a routine
manner.
Post-care and complications
Incision care is as for castration. Particular attention should be paid to minimizing scrotal swell-
fertility. Gross and histologic lesions were identified experimentally in dogs castrated after tes-
ticular biopsy. Gross lesions included hemorrhage and adhesion formation, seen in 31 and 23%
 of dogs, respectively. The most severe microscopic lesion seen was arrest in continuing sper-
 matogenesis, noted in 26% of dogs after incisional biopsy and in only 2.6% of dogs after biopsy
with a triggered instrument.
Supplemental reading
Lopate C, Threlfall WR, Rosol TJ. 1989. Histopathologic and gross effects of testicular biopsy in the dog.
Theriogenology 32:585-602.
 Root Kustritz MV. 2006. Collection of tissue and culture samples from the canine reproductive tract.
Theriogenology 66:567-574.
12
What is the technique for preparation of chilled
semen in dogs?
Anatomy
Semen is collected as for any other procedure (see Chapter 6).
Pre-procedure considerations
All male dogs used for breeding should be certified free of heritable conditions and infectious
disease. All dogs should be tested and proven negative for canine brucellosis before semen is
collected for chilling and shipment (see Chapter 44).
Specific tests for hereditary conditions vary by breed. Most breeds require Orthopedic Founda-
tion for Animals or University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program certification for hip
dysplasia and Canine Eye Registry Foundation evaluation for ocular defects. Breeders should be
referred to their national breed club web site or printed materials to see which tests are recom-
mended by the health organization unique to their breed.
If the pups are to be registered with the American Kennel Club (AKC), the male must have a
DNA profle on record with the AKC. This rule has been in effect since October 1, 1998. The
DNA sample is collected using a cheek swab and may be done by the dog's owner. Breeders are
referred to the AKC web site for complete information about sample collection, sample submis-
sion, and registration and payment (see Resources).
Chilled semen may be inseminated into the vagina (see Chapter 14) or the uterus (see Chapters
cervical intrauterine insemination 81%.
Procedure
Chilled semen is made up of ejaculated spermatozoa suspended in an extender. Extender is a
fluid medium containing nutrients, buffers, and anti-microbials. Recipes for homemade extend-
ers exist. Most veterinarians use a commercial extender. Extenders specifically for dogs are avail-
able commercially through several companies (see Resources). Extenders produced commercially
for other species may work in dogs. In an emergency, skim milk that has been heated to 92 to
95F for 10 min and then cooled to room temperature will work but it does not contain buffers
or anti-microbials.
Collect semen in a routine fashion and maintain it at room temperature. A complete semen
evaluation may be performed (see Chapter 7); at the very least, one drop should be evaluated
43
44 What is the technique for preparation of chilled semen in dogs?
for subjective assessment of the percentage of progressively motile spermatozoa and a superficial
evaluation of concentration or total number of spermatozoa in the sample. Poor-quality semen
 e ra  si s sd se m  e e ssd  q 
and centrifuged. Abnormal spermatozoa and blood products are retained and normal sperma
tozoa gather into a usable pellet. If this technique is used, the centrifugation step described below
is skipped. Blood in semen has no effect on viability after extension, chiling, and shipment as
long as the relative volume of blood to semen is less than 10%.
 If the total number of spermatozoa in a single ejaculate is low, several samples can be pooled
and processed together. Techniques to increase number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate include
serial collections at 30- to 60-min intervals; presence of an estrous teaser bitch; and administra-
trifuge the semen at the setting used for urine sedimentation (300 to 500 g) for about 5 min.
Draw up one drop of supernatant and evaluate it for spermatozoa; if many motile spermatozoa
is complete, pour off the supernatant and resuspend the pellet of semen in a ratio of 1 part semen
to 3 to 5 parts of room temperature extender. Evaluate one drop of the extended semen, again
 s s  s  d n d  
specific instructions and paperwork asking for assessment of the speed of progression of sper-
matozoa, the percentage of morphologically normal spermatozoa, and the total number of
spermatozoa in the extended sample.
extended semen should be tightly capped and placed in bag to ensure that the semen is not lost if
the tube breaks during transport. Place the tube in a small Styrofoam box or wrap it wellin news-
 paper, cotton, or some other cushioning product. Wrap it in a layer of newspaper. In commercial
products, this is usually sandwiched between frozen ice packs in a Styrofoam or plastic enclosure
for shipment. Some people report success plunging the wrapped tube of semen into ice in a
thermos-type container. It has been demonstrated that thermos containers, Styrofoam boxes, and
more elaborate shipping containers (see Resources) maintain semen quality equally well for up to
24 h; motility of spermatozoa remains higher beyond that time in more elaborate systems.
Shipment should ensure that the sample reaches the bitch within 24h after collection. If
properly packaged, chilled, and maintained, the sample should maintain its quality for up to 48 h
and perhaps longer. Samples delayed in shipment benefit from centrifugation and suspension of
counter-to-counter at the airport or a commercial shipper can be used. The advantage of using
airlines is that the sample can be collected shortly before a flight is due to leave and the bitch
 inseminated soon after its arrival, permitting a very short turnaround time from collection to
insemination. The disadvantages are inconvenience, cost, and the ability of the airline to open
or refuse to carry unaccompanied packages. This may be lessened by the veterinarian requesting
"favored shipping" status with the airline; this is required by some airlines for any packages to
 be shipped from your address. The advantages of using a shipping service are convenience and
inability of that service to open a package once it has been checked and sealed. The disadvantage
is the necessity of abiding by their shipping schedule. It is up to the individual veterinarian if he
or she chooses to take on the responsibility of shipping or asks each client to take on that respon-
sibility him or herself.
Post-care and complications
The semen of some male dogs does not tolerate chilling and shipment, presumably because of a
subclinical disease or because of the semen's chemical incompatibility with the extender. It is
Canine techniques 45
strongly recommended that dogs intended for use as a stud with chilled semen have semen col-
lected, extended, stored in the refrigerator overnight, and evaluated the next day, to best mimic
chilling and shipment. This should be done well before any bitches of interest are in heat. If
semen quality is not maintained, problems with the particular male dog can be addressed or
another suitable male can be identified to perform the breeding if necessary.
The most common problem with chilled semen is diffculty during shipment. Follow packag.
ing instructions to the letter will minimize logistical problems with the shipper. The breeder is
encouraged to trace all package tracking numbers and to have a back-up plan in place should
the sample be damaged or lost.
Supplemental reading
paday 'saop ui uaas uazoy pue ysay yim I yo aau pue sia a sooz ' r o puelug
Dor Anirm 43 (Suppl. 2): 165-171.
Lopes G, Simoes A, Ferreira P, et al. 2008. Differences in preservation of canine chilled semen using differ-
ent transport containers. Anim Reprod Sei doi:10.1016/j.anireporsci.2008.04.003.
 Pena FJ, Nunez-Martinez I, Moran JM. 2006. Semen technologies in dog breeding: An update. Reprod Dom
Anim 41 (Suppl. 2):21-29.
Rijsselaere T, Van Soom A, Maes D, et al. 2004. Effect of blood admixture on in vitro survival of chilled
and frozen-thawed canine spermatozoa. Theriogenology 61:1589-1602.
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. The value of canine semen evaluation for practitioners. Theriogenology
68:329-337.
13
What is the technique for preparation of frozen
semen in dogs?
Anatomy
 Semen is collected as for any other procedure (see Chapter 6).
Pre-procedure considerations
All male dogs used for breeding should be certified free of heritable conditions and infectious
disease. All dogs should be tested and proven negative for canine brucellosis before semen is
 collected for chilling and shipment (see Chapter 44). Specific tests for hereditary conditions vary
by breed. Most breeds require Orthopedic Foundation for Animals or University of Pennsylvania
Hip Improvement Program certification for hip dysplasia and Canine Eye Registry Foundation
evaluation for ocular defects. Breeders should be referred to their national breed club web site
or printed materials to see which tests are recommended by the health organization unique to
their breed.
If the pups are to be registered with the American Kennel Club (AKC), the male must have a
DNA profle on record with the AKC. This rule has been in effect since October 1, 1998. Frozen
semen collected and stored prior to October 1, 1998 in accordance with AKC regulations and
 procedures is exempt from this requirement. The DNA sample is collected using a cheek swab
and may be done by the dog's owner. Breeders are referred to the AKC web site for complete
information about sample collection, sample submission, and registration and payment (see
Resources).
ing identification of pellets or straws of frozen semen and their storage must be followed. Vet-
erinarians wishing to freeze semen should contact the AKC so their site can be inspected and
listed through the AKC as a certified freezing center.
Viability of canine spermatozoa is decreased after freezing and thawing. This is due to physical
destruction of cells as they undergo osmotic change, dehydration, ice crystal formation, and
induction of chemical reactions during the freeze-thaw process that mimics capacitation. Insem-
ination directly into the uterus is strongly recommended. Reported conception rates with
frozen-thawed semen for vaginal insemination (see Chapter 14) average 45%, for transcervical
insemination (see Chapter 15) 70%, and for surgical intrauterine insemination (see Chapter 16)
95%.
Procedure
 Frozen semen is made up of ejaculated spermatozoa suspended in an extender. Extender is a
fluid medium containing nutrients, buffers, and anti-microbials and, for frozen semen, a cryo-
protectant to minimize disruption of the spermatozoa cells as they freeze and thaw. Cryoprotec.
tants most commonly used are egg yolk and glycerol. Egg yolk may also prevent premature
capacitation of spermatozoa. Milk-based extenders have proven successful as alternatives to
egg-yolk-based extenders in countries concerned about transmission of avian influenza. Recipes
for homemade extenders exist. Most veterinarians use commercial extenders and a commercial
veterinarians freeze semen include Synbiotics (www.synbiotics.org), CLONE ( www.cloneusa.
com/chilled.html), and International Canine Semen Bank (ICSB; www.ik9sb.com). ICSB also
provides a kit that permits veterinarians to collect semen, extend it, and ship it to ICSB for freez-
ing and storage (see Resources).
Collect semen in a routine manner and perform a complete semen evaluation (see Chapter
7). Only very good- to excellent-quality semen warrants freezing. Samples with high percentages
freezing and thawing. Semen samples containing 40% or greater blood and blood products are
 not suitable for cryopreservation; hemoglobin released by hemolysis decreases post-thaw viabil-
ity. Poor-quality semen may benefit from passage through a filter. With this process, semen is
layered over a gradient and centrifuged.Abnormal spermatozoa and blood products are retained
and normal spermatozoa gather into a usable pellet. If this technique is used, the centrifugation
step described below is skipped.
The following is one example of a technique for semen freezing in dogs. Semen can be frozen
in 0.25 or 0.50 ml straws or in pellets, formed when extended semen is deposited in aliquots into
depressions on solid dry ice. There are no industry standards for semen freezing in dogs.
Collect semen by manual ejaculation. Determine the total number of spermatozoa in the
ejaculate so each straw can be identified as containing “x" number of spermatozoa after dilution
in extender and freezing. Centrifuge the semen for about 5min at the setting used for urine
sedimentation (500 to 700 g). Draw up one drop of supernatant and evaluate it for spermatozoa;
if many motile spermatozoa are still present in the supernatant, centrifuge the semen for another
temperature for 1 h. Label the 0.5 ml polyvinylchloride straws with the animal's AKC registration
number and breed, and the date. Add two parts of a second extender, containing glycerol, in
four equal aliquots over a 45-min period for a final glycerol concentration of 4%. Fill the straws,
leaving an air bubble to prevent expulsive loss of the semen during freezing. Seal the straw and
place it at refrigerator temperature for 90min. Suspend the straws about 5 in above a pool of
liquid nitrogen for 5 to 10 min, then slowly lower the straws into liquid nitrogen. Machines that
automate this equilibration and lowering process exist; use of such machines is associated with
better post-thaw longevity of spermatozoa. At least 5 min later, transfer the straws to a permanent
tank containing liquid nitrogen. All samples must be maintained in fluid liquid nitrogen or liquid
nitrogen vapor for storage or shipment until they are to be thawed for insemination.
Post-care and complications
The semen of some male dogs does not tolerate freezing, presumably because of a subclinical
disease or because of the semen's chemical incompatibility with the extender. It is strongly rec-
ommended that dogs intended for use as a stud with frozen semen have semen collected and
Canine techniques 49
frozen, and one straw or pellet immediately thawed to assess post-thaw quality. This should be
If semen quality is not maintained, problems with the particular male dog can be addressed
and another suitable male can be identified to perform the breeding if necessary. Because some
males can be identifed as having semen that is diffcult to freeze, breeders should be reminded
that their unique problem may have a genetic basis and strongly encouraged to be thoughtful
about maintaining their dog in the gene pool long-term.
Semen must be maintained in fluid liquid nitrogen or liquid nitrogen vapor at all times. Some
shippers refuse to carry canisters containing fluid liquid nitrogen.“Dry shippers" contain liquid
nitrogen vapor and will remain charged for 1 to 3 weeks, permitting shipment; either the dry
shipper should be replenished with fluid liquid nitrogen on arrival or the straws transferred to
Supplemental reading
Abe Y, Lee C-S, Sano H, et al. 2008. Artificial insemination with canine spermatozoa frozen in a skim milk/
glucose-based extender. J Reprod Dev 54:290-294.
Cheng F-P, Wu J-T, Tsai P-S, et al. 2005. Effects of cryo-injury on progesterone receptor(s) of canine
p sio u s azo e yay m I yo au e sa a o  r  pn
Dom Anim 43 (Suppl. 2): 165-171.
Hermansson U, Linde Forsberg C. 2006. Freezing of stored, chilled dog spermatozoa Theriogenology
65:584-593.
H   s o ss   e a      s
better? Theriogenology 57:327-344.
Pena AI, Barrio M, Becerra JI, et al. 2008. Infertility in a dog due to proximal cytoplasmic droplets in the
ejaculate: Investigation of the significance for sperm functionality in vitro. Reprod Dom Anim
doi:10.1111/j.1439-0531.2006.00809.x.
Pena A, Linde-Forsberg C. 2ooo. Effects of spermatozoa concentration and post-thaw dilution rate on
survival after thawing of dog spermatozoa. Theriogenology 54:703-718.
Rijsselaere T, Van Soom A, Maes D, et al. 2004. Effect of blood admixture on in vitro survival of chilled
and frozen-thawed canine spermatozoa. Theriogenology 61: 1589-1602.
 Schafer-Somi S, Kruger S, Knapp E, et al. 2006. Effects of semen extender and semen processing on motility
and viability of frozen-thawed dog spermatozoa. Theriogenology 66:173-182.
Watson PF. 20o0. The causes of reduced fertility with cryopreserved semen. Anirm Reprod Sci
60-61:481-492.
Witte TS, Schafer-Somi S, Kuchar A, et al. 2009. Effect of hen's egg yolk on capacitation and acrosome
reaction of diluted canine spermatozoa. Anim Reprod Sci 110:293-205.
14
What is the technique for vaginal insemination?
Anatomy
The vulvar cleft provides entrance to the ventral clitoral fossa and dorsal vestibule. The vestibule
is not horizontal in bitches but instead rises at a 45-degree angle relative to the spine. Anything
placed in the canine vagina should be introduced dorsally and aimed toward the spine as it is
advanced cranially. The vagina of the bitch is very long and the cranial lumen is compressed to
nearly one-third in size by the presence of a tissue fold suspended from the dorsal vaginal surface.
The cervix is abdominal and the external cervical os hangs from the dorsal surface of the vagina,
with a dead-ended fornix lying cranial to it.
Pre-procedure considerations
Vaginal insemination is most commonly used for introduction of fresh or fresh chilled semen.
This may be necessary if the bitch and stud do not show compatible breeding behavior, if they
are too different in size to permit natural breeding, if the semen is being shipped, or if the owners
wish to avoid potential exposure to disease.
All bitches used for breeding should be certified free of heritable conditions and infectious
disease. All bitches should be tested and proven negative for canine brucellosis before breeding
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals or University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program
certification for hip dysplasia and Canine Eye Registry Foundation evaluation for ocular defects.
Breeders should be referred to their national breed club web site or printed materials to see which
tests are recommended by the health organization unique to their breed. Progesterone assay and
other tests should be used to verify the ovulation date (see Chapter 29). Fresh or chilled semen
is usually introduced 2 days after the ovulation date.
Procedure
Pass the gloved finger of the nondominant hand, lubricated with water only, into the vaginal
canal. This protects the urethral papilla and prevents accidental introduction of semen into the
urinary bladder. Draw semen up into a sterile syringe. Pass a pipette (Fig. 14-1) along the gloved
index finger and as far forward into the vagina as possible without causing the bitch discomfort.
Sterile pipettes marketed for insemination in dogs are available (see Resources) or one may use
51
52 What is the technique for vaginal insemination?
HOOINH
N
Figure 14-1: Passage of the pipette over the gloved finger into the bitch's vagina (reprinted with permission
from Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successfuf Breeoing and Hearth Management. St.
Louis, MO: Elsevier)
Figure 14-2: Pipettes suitable for intravaginal insemination of bitches (reprinted with permission from Root
Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successful Breeding and Heaith Management. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier).
bovine uterine infusion pipettes (Fig. 14-2). Balloon-tipped pipettes are also available; success
rate does not vary between plain and balloon-tipped pipettes. Pull the pipette back so you know
it is not lodged against a fold of vaginal mucosa and introduce the semen (Fig. 14-3). Semen
should flow freely through the pipette. Flush the pipette with a small amount of air. Withdraw
the pipette, leaving the gloved finger in place, and use that finger to tickle the ceiling of the vagina.
This may stimulate vaginal contractions as would occur during natural breeding and presumably
aids in the forward movement of spermatozoa. Withdraw the gloved finger.
The bitch's hindquarters may be elevated for several minutes (Fig. 14-4). No upward pressure
should be placed on the bitch's caudal abdomen as she is moved from the examining table or
put in the car. She should not be permitted to squat to urinate as she leaves the hospital. All of
these instructions may be unnecessary, as it may well be that the spermatozoa that will fertilize
the ova are well into the uterus and oviduct within moments of insemination.
Canine techniques 53
CANINE
Hgure 14-3: Introduction of semen (reprinted with permission from Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog
Breeder's Guide to Successfuf Breeoing ano Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier)
Hgure 14-4: "Wheelbarrowing" of the bitch's hindquarters (reprinted with permission from Root Kustritz
MV. 2006. The Dog Breeoer's Guide to Successful Breeoing and Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier).
Post-care and complications
There are occasional reports of vaginal perforation or respiratory distress in bitches restrained
for vaginal insemination. These are uncommon. Most bitches are very cooperative. The author
has had good success with uncooperative bitches by restraining them on their side for the pro-
cedure; however, very anxious bitches often do not conceive.
54  what is the technique for vaginal insemination?
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 57-65.
Nizanski W. 2006. Intravaginal insemination of bitches with fresh and frozen-thawed semen with addition
of prostatic fluid: Use of an infusion pipette and the Osiris catheter. Theriogenology 66:470-483.
Thomassen R, Farstad W. 2009. Artificial insemination in canids: A useful took in breeding and conserva-
UES
tion. Theriogenology 71:190-199.
IOINHD
31
15
What is the technique for transcervical
insemination?
Anatomy
The vulvar cleft provides entrance to the ventral clitoral fossa and dorsal vestibule. The vestibule
is not horizontal in bitches but instead rises at a 45-degree angle relative to the spine. Anything
placed in the canine vagina should be introduced dorsally and aimed toward the spine as it is
advanced cranially. The vagina of the bitch is very long and the cranial lumen is compressed to
nearly one-third in size by the presence of a tissue fold suspended from the dorsal vaginal surface.
The cervix is abdominal and the external cervical os hangs from the dorsal surface of the vagina,
with a dead-ended fornix lying cranial to it.
Pre-procedure considerations
Transcervical insemination most commonly is used for introduction of fresh chilled or frozen
semen. The short viability of frozen semen after thawing necessitates it being placed into the
uterus and this technique is less invasive than is surgical insemination. Transcervical insemina-
tion may also be desirable if quality of fresh semen is poor. Transcervical insemination can be
performed multiple times in one heat cycle and can be performed with vaginal or surgical
insemination during a given heat cycle.
All bitches used for breeding should be certified free of heritable conditions and infectious
disease. All bitches should be tested and proven negative for canine brucellosis before breeding
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals or University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program
certification for hip dysplasia and Canine Eye Registry Foundation evaluation for ocular defects
Breeders should be referred to their national breed club web site or printed materials to see which
tests are recommended by the health organization unique to their breed. Progesterone assay and
other tests should be used to verify the ovulation date (see Chapter 29). Fresh and chilled semen
is usually introduced 2 days after the ovulation date. Frozen semen is usually introduced 3 to 4
days after ovulation.
Procedure
A rigid, narrow-diameter endoscope, as is used for cystocopy, is required (see Chapter 3, Fig.
3-2). Introduce the endoscope dorsally at the vulvar cleft and move it gently forward at a 45-
degree angle, then angle it horizontally. The vaginal mucosa should be blanched and crenated
55
56 what is the technique for transcervical insemination?
(sharply wrinkled; see Chapter 29, Fig. 29-1). Identify the caudal end of the post-cervical dorsal
the scope to one side or the other. When the dead-ended fornix is seen, the cervix should be
visible dorsally, appearing as a rosette of folds from which issues the serosanguinous or straw-
colored discharge of estrus.
Pass a long, sterile, polypropylene urinary catheter through the biopsy channel of the scope,
 i adossoa a po d an s adossoa an o d a ne io so d s rn 
external cervical os and advance the catheter into the cervical lumen. This is most easily achieved
 by spinning the catheter between the fingers. Several attempts may be necessary. Once the cath-
 eter is in place, frozen semen should be thawed. Semen should be drawn into a sterile syringe
and introduced through the catheter. The semen should flow easily and be visible flowing
through the catheter into the uterus with minimal backflow. Withdraw the catheter and the
endoscope.
Post-care and complications
There are occasional reports of vaginal perforation during passage of the long rigid endoscope.
This occurs very rarely during estrus, when the vaginal epithelium is thick and cornified. Most
bitches are very amenable to the procedure; however, if a bitch is jumpy or resists restraint, the
long, rigid endoscope should not be passed.
The pioneer of this technique, Dr. Marian Wilson, reports success in dogs ranging from toy
to giant breeds. There are some bitches whose anatomy is such that passage of the catheter by
this route is not possible. In those bitches, vaginal or surgical insemination is recommended.
Supplemental reading
Thomassen R, Farstad W. 2009. Artificial insemination in canids: A useful tool in breeding and conserva-
tion. Theriogenology 71:190-199.
Wilson MS. 2001. Transcervical insemination techniques in the bitch. Vet Clin North Amm 31:291-304.
16
What is the technique for surgical insemination?
Anatomy
The uterus of the bitch has a small body and long, torturous horns. Semen can be deposited
 anywhere within the lumen of either horn.
Pre-procedure considerations
Surgical insemination is used to introduce semen directly into the uterus, bypassing the vagina
and cervix. It is most commonly used with frozen-thawed semen but it can also be used for
breeding bitches with a history of subfertility or when using semen of questionable quality.
Although canine oocytes may remain viable for more than 200 h after ovulation, cervical closure
occurs 6 to 8 days after the luteinizing hormone peak, requiring introduction of semen directly
into the uterus.
All bitches used for breeding should be certified free of heritable conditions and infectious
disease. All bitches should be tested and proven negative for canine brucellosis before breeding
 s s r  a s  e sise s t  
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals or University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program
 ro  aa  i a  n ii d  
Breeders should be referred to their national breed club web site or printed materials to see which
other tests should be used to verify the ovulation date (see Chapter 29). Frozen semen is usually
 introduced into the female 3 to 4 days after ovulation. Preparation and diagnostic testing should
be completed as for any procedure requiring general anesthesia.
Procedure
 Place the animal under general anesthesia and shave and prepare the abdomen for sterile surgery.
Make a ventral midline incision and exteriorize the uterus. Pass a 22-gauge needle or catheter
into the lumen of the uterine body (Fig. 16-1).
 If frozen semen is being used, semen should be thawed using the instructions provided by the
 person who froze that semen. Semen should be thawed as close to the moment of insemination
as possible to minimize the time the thawed semen is held at room temperature.
Draw the semen up into a sterile syringe. Introduce the semen through the catheter; it should
flow freely into the uterine lumen. Even small volumes distend the uterine body and both horns
57
58 What is the technique for surgical insemination?
30
10
NH
N
N
Figure 16-1: Insertion of a catheter into the lumen of one uterine horn (photo courtesy of Inver Grove
Heights Animal Hospital)
Muscle fasciculations of the uterus may be evident after the semen is introduced. Withdraw the
needle or catheter and blot the hole with gauze until hemostasis is achieved. Replace the uterus
 in the abdomen and close in a routine manner.
Post-care and complications
Incision care is as for any abdominal incision.
Supplemental reading
 Boland P. 2004. Surgical insemination and other ways. Proceedings, European Veterinary Society for Small
Animal Reproduction, Barcelona, Spain.
 Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 62-63.
Thomassen R, Farstad W. 2009. Artificial insemination in canids: A useful tool in breeding and conserva
tion. Theriogenology 71:190-199.
Verstegen JP, Silva LD, Onclin K. 2001. Determination of the role of cervical closure in fertility regulation
after mating or artificial insemination in Beagle bitches. J Reprod Fertil 57:31-34
17
What is the technique for anesthesia for
Cesarean section?
Anatomy
Anatomic changes of pregnancy are reflected in physiologic changes, as described below.
Pre-procedure considerations
Physiologic changes of pregnancy that impact anesthesia include an increase in plasma volume
 and decrease in hematocrit, increased oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production,
increased cardiac output, decreased blood pressure due to vasodilation and hypotension due to
mechanical compression from the gravid uterus, and slowed gastrointestinal (Gl) motility. The
clinical significance of these changes are the need to address hydration to maintain normal blood
pressure during surgery, and the need for a well-fitted, cuffed endotracheal tube to counter
aspiration of GI contents.
Once a decision has been made to perform Cesarean section (C-section), time is of the essence.
An intravenous catheter should be placed and fluid therapy instituted. The surgical site should
be clipped and prepped as much as possible before any anesthetic agents are introduced. Equip-
ment for neonatal resuscitation should be assembled including oxygen and small masks
Or endotracheal tubes, hemostats to clamp off the umbilical cords, suction apparatuses to
remove fluid from the oral and nasal cavities, warm towels, and appropriate medications (see
below).
Procedure
Considerations of anesthesia
Maternal stability under anesthesia should be monitored by assessment of heart rate and rhythm
blood pressure, and oxygenation status (pulse oximetry), if possible. Maintaining maternal blood
pressure is an important component in maintaining placental blood flow and supporting the
pups until they are delivered. Adequately oxygenate the bitch at all times.
Choosing appropriate anesthetic agents
Remember that most anesthetic agents exert effect because they are soluble in fat and move
readily into tissue. That means that most will readily cross the placenta and that anything given
or that are easily reversed. Short-acting drugs will have less of an effect on the fetuses as they are
59
60 What is the technique for anesthesia for Cesarean section?
Table 17-1. Dnugs used for anesthesia of bitches for Cesarean section.
Drug Class
Representative Drugs
Pros
Cons
Opioids
Buprenorphine.
Reversible with
May cause respiratory
 butorphanol, 
auoxoleu
 depression in darn and pups.
hydromorphone,
buprenorphine difficult to
morphine, oxymorphone
reverse.
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam, midazolam
Reversible with
May cause profound sedation
flumazenil
'sdnd u!
Alpha-2-
Medetomidine,
May cause profound sedation
adrenergic
 detornidine, xylazine
in pups, may cause
agonists
bradycardia and arrhythmias
in dam, may decrease uterine
blood flow leading to fetal
hypoxemia
Phenothiazine
Acepromazine
May cause profound
long-lasting sedation in pups,
not reversible, may cause
hypotension in dam.
Dissociatives
Ketamine, tiletamine
Not reversible, may cause
(Telazol)
uterine vasoconstriction
leading to fetal hypoxemia.
Thiobarburitate
 Thiopental 
 Rapidly distributed and
Not reversible.
can be metabolized by
fetal liver
Propofol
Very short-acting
Not reversible, may cause
transient apnea in the dam.
Etomidate
Minimal cardiovascular
Not reversible, relatively
effects on mother and
expensive.
pup5
 Anticholinergics
Atropine, glycopymolate
 Atropine can increase
Atropine can increase fetal
fetal heart rate—this
heart rate—fetal tachycardia
 may be beneficial if 
not always beneficial,
countering drugs given
glycopyrrolate less likely to
to dam
cross the placenta and show
fetal effects.
Local
 Bupivicaine, lidocaine
Epidural and/or line
 Vasodilation in darm may
anesthetics
block provides pain
 precipitate hypotension, if 
control and minimizes
darn agitated may be difficult
need for systemic drugs
to maintain sterile field.
Inhalants
Isoflurane, sevoflurane,
Can minimize fetal
All cross the placenta rapidly
halothane
 depression by altering
dose quickly
Nitrous Oxide
Use permits use of
Hypoxia in dam and pups.
lower doses of more
 potent inhalants
Canine techniques  61
Protocol 1—If the mother is calm and quiet, and can be catheterized without sedation
* Induce anesthesia with propofol to effect.
* Intubate and maintain a light plane of anesthesia with sevoflurane or isoflurane in oxygen.
* Line block or epidural for pain management
 * After neonates are delivered, add hydromorphone or oxymorphone IV for additional maternal pain
control.
Protocol 2
* Sedate with fentanyl and diazeparn.
 * Epidural containing bupivacaine and morphine.
* Provide oxygen via facermask
Protocol 3
* Mask induction with sevoflurane or isoflurane in oxygen
* Intubate and maintain a light plane of anesthesia with sevoflurane or isoflurane in oxygen.
* After neonates are delivered, add hydromorphone or oxymorphone IV for maternal pain control.
more rapidly cleared; longer acting drugs for the sake of the dam can be added after the pups
are delivered.
Pregnant animals have an increased pain threshold due to release of endogenous endorphins.
When considering anesthetic agents, generally this translates to a reduction in inhalant anesthesia
requirements and reduced need for opioids to achieve desired analgesia. If epidural anesthesia
 is desired, venous engorgement in the epidural space and increased epidural pressure are reflected
in the need for lower doses of local anesthetics to achieve desired effect. The pros and cons of
various drugs are described in Table 17-1. Sample protocols are outlined in Table 17-2.
Post-care and complications
The bitch is recovered from anesthesia and extubated in a routine fashion.
Puppy mortality is greater with C-section than with free-whelping, and within C-sections, is
greater for emergency than for elective surgeries. Specifc steps that can be taken to enhance
success in puppy resuscitation include ( 1) appropriate selection of anesthetic agents, as described
above, and (2) implementation of a sequence of steps to be taken by all personnel resuscitating
puppies (Table 17-3). Although it has been demonstrated that puppy vitality is lower at birth in
   sr o  a q sd n  os n  s
nally in dystocia, appropriate resuscitation should lead to normalization within 5min of life.
Supplemental reading
Cesarean section in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:313-317.
Silva LCG, de Fatima Lucio C, Veiga GAL, et al. 2008. Neonatal clinical evaluation, blood gas and radio-
graphic assessment in normal birth, vaginal dystocia or cesarean section in dogs. Proceedings, Interna
tional Syposium on Canine and Feline Reproduction, Vienna, Austria.
Luna SP, Cassu RN, Castro GB, et al. 2004. Effects of four anesthetic protocols on the neurological and
cardiorespiratory variables of puppies born by caesarean section. Vet Rec 154:387-389.
Moon PF, Erb HN, Ludders JW, et al. 1998. Perioperative management and mortality rates of dogs under-
going cesarean section in the United States and Canada. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:365-369.
62 what is the technique for anesthesia for Cesarean section?
Table 17-3. Puppy resuscitation.
1. Keep the puppy wamm. Dry by vigorously nubbing the pup with a warm, dry towel. Clear the mouth
and nose of fluid by suction.
2. If opioids were given to the darm, reverse with naloxone (one drop from a 25-gauge needle.
sublingually). If benzodiazepines were given to the dam, reverse with flumazenil
3. If the neonate is breathing at least 10bpm and moving or crying. finish drying the pup. place it in a
30
wamm area (warm air circulating pad or radiant heat), and clamp or tie off the umbilicus. If the pup is
10l
 NOT breathing at least 10 bprm and moving or crying, provide oxygen for 30 to 40 s and continue
NH
tactile stimulation by rubbing
 4. If the pup does not begin to breathe spontaneously. attempt to stimulate respiration with placerment
J (ans ainsundnoe bunuo uar jo gz As) wnumud jeseu ayn orul aipaau abneb-sz e jo uonerou pue
N
that does not work, consider adrministration of doxapram sublingually.
5. If there is no discermible heart rate, begin gentle chest compressions (1 to 2 per second).
 6. If oxygenation and chest compressions do not elicit spontaneous breathing and heart beat, consider
trying placerment of an intraosseous catheter (see Chapter 9o) and administration of intravenous
10% dextrose solution (2 to 4ml/kg as a slow bolus) or sodium bicarbonate (1 ml/kg of the 1 IU/ml
concentration)
7. If there is no response by 30 min, the pup is declared dead
Moon PF, Erb HN, Ludders JW, et al. 2000. Perioperative risk factors for puppies delivered by cesarean
section in the United States and Canada. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:359-368.
 Moon-Massat PF, Erb HN. 2002. Perioperative factors associated with puppy vigor after delivery by cesar
ean section. J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 38:90-96.
Pascoe PJ, Moon PF. 2001. Periparturient and neonatal anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am 31:315-341.
si d e   u s t   r  
Compendium 28:34-42.
Traas A. 2008. Resuscitation of canine and feline neonates. Theriogenology 70:343-348.
18
What is the technique for Cesarean section?
Anatomy
The ovaries lie caudal to the kidneys and each is encased in an ovarian bursa. The primary blood
 supply is the ovarian artery. The body of the uterus lies within the pelvis the uterine horns lie
in the abdomen. The uterus and ovaries are suspended and attached to the body wall by the
broad ligament. The primary uterine blood supply is the bilateral uterine arteries, which arise
from the vaginal arteries caudally and lie along the uterine body with small branches supplying
the uterine horns over their length.
Pre-procedure considerations
Cesarean section (C-section) is indicated if obstructive dystocia is present, if the bitch is exhibit-
ing primary or secondary uterine inertia, if medical therapy for dystocia has been unproductive,
or if fetal heart rate is less than 170bpm (see Chapter 39). Concurrent ovariohysterectomy (OHE)
should be offered to the owner, especially if uterine tissue does not appear viable. The primary
advantage is that the bitch will not have to undergo another anesthetic episode for OHE in the
future. The disadvantages are an increased risk of hemorrhage and hypovolemia, and possible
increase in length of hospital stay. Milk production will not be altered by concurrent OHE.
The bitch should be prepared for surgery to the greatest extent posible before any anesthetic
medications are administered. Details of anesthesia are presented in Chapter 17.
Procedure
The bitch is shaved and prepped for sterile surgery. Place the bitch in dorsal recumbency; ensure
that the head is not lower than the abdomen, as pressure on the diaphragm will compromise
ventilation. Both ventral midline and flank approaches have been described; the former is more
common. Make an incision from just cranial to the pubis to the umbilicus. The abdominal
musculature is stretched thin; use caution when incising the linea alba.
Exteriorize the gravid uterus and pack it off with saline-moistened laparatomy sponges (Fig.
18- 1). Make an incision in a relatively avascular area of the uterus in one horn near the uterine
body. All pups can be milked from both horns to this single incision readily (Fig. 18-2). If there
 is a large number of pups, an incision may be made in each uterine horn. If a pup is stuck in the
pelvic canal, an incision should be made in the uterine body.
63
64 What is the technique for Cesarean section?
UH
日N
N
Figure 18-1: Exteriorized gravid canine uterus (photo courtesy of Inver Grove Heights Animal Hospital)
Figure 18-2: Removing pup through uterine incision (photo courtesy of Inver Grove Heights Animal Hospital).
The pup is removed, still encased within its amniotic sac, and handed off to waiting personnel
for resuscitation (see Chapter 17). The placenta and other fetal tissues should be removed with
the pup if they come readily. If the placenta is still tightly adhered to the endometrium, it may
minimize bleeding if it is left in place and allowed to detach and pass with postpartum lochia.
When all pups have been removed, palpate the entire uterus and into the pelvic canal to make
sure no pups have been missed. If the bitch is not to be spayed, close the uterus with an absorb-
able suture in an inverting pattern, in one or two layers. If the bitch is to be spayed, the uterus
is roughly closed in a continuous pattern to minimize leaking of uterine contents into the
abdomen during manipulation, and routine OHE is performed. Flush and inspect the abdomen.
Canine techniques 65
Close the abdominal layers routinely. Nonabsorbable suture may be used to ensure closure and
healing of the thinned linea alba.
En-bloc OHE has been described as a means of performing concurrent OHE and C-section
in bitches. The ovarian arteries and uterine arteries and body are clamped and the gravid uterus
removed. The uterus is handed off to an assistant who quickly opens the uterus and removes all
the pups for resuscitation. The surgeon returns to the bitch to ligate the ovarian and uterine
vessels and complete the OHE. The advantage of this technique is minimal transfer of anesthetic
agents to the pups and decreased possibility of abdominal contamination with uterine contents.
The disadvantage is the possibility of fetal stress secondary to loss of uterine and placental blood
flow. There are few studies documenting success rates with this technique compared to standard
C-section.
Post-care and complications
Little is known about pharmacokinetics of pain medications in lactating bitches. Nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs do not reach significant concentrations in milk but are contraindicated
 in humans breast-feeding premature infants as the Cyclooxygenase-2 enzymes inhibited by these
drugs are necessary for normal neonatal renal development. Opioids enter milk but total dose
ingested by any given pup is low so this may be the preferred drug class for this indication.
Necessity of C-section to relieve dystocia at one parturition is not indicative of a requirement
for C-sections at future whelpings. For most bitches that require more than one C-section it is
because there is a common underlying cause for dystocia in both cases or because they are of a
breed that does not readily free-whelp.
Supplemental reading
'sueiapisuos aaeadouad pue ionoisud sop ui uoas ueaiesa sooz "Tv iause s uery
Compendium 28:34-42.
Traas AM. 2008. Surgical management of canine and feline dystocia. Theriogenology 70:337-342.
Section ll
Canine reproductive physiology
19
What is the normal age for puberty onset in
bitches and dogs?
General information
Puberty is defned in bitches as first proestral bleeding or heat. Normal breeding behavior is
expected but rarely tested as few bitches are purposefully bred on their first heat. The average
age of first estrus in bitches is 6 to 10 months with a wide normal range varying from 4 months
to 2 years. Small breed bitches cycle earlier in life than do large and giant breed bitches. All
bitches are considered abnormal if they have not exhibited obvious signs of estrus by 24 months
of age (see Chapter 52).
Puberty is defined in male dogs as normal semen quality and exhibition of normal breeding
behavior. The average age of puberty in dogs is 10 months with a wide normal range varying
e op u a un natea Aaqnd qnoi o shop paarg s si 7 on so g ot  o
or giant breed dogs. Beagles have been demonstrated to have normal spermatogenesis by 8 to 9
months of age. All intact male dogs should have normal semen quality by 24 months of age (see
Chapter 56). Normal breeding behavior may or may not be present by 24 months of age; many
nonmedical factors affect breeding behavior.
Clinical implications
aopu oliapun oi aie pe shop aeu pue area go sae an oi pied aq pmous uoua
prior to puberty onset, with ovariohysterectomy or castration scheduled at about 4 to 6 months
for toy and small breeds. Intact females and males should not be housed together unsupervised
after 6 to 10 months of age if breeding is not desired. Wild dog crosses and one domestic breed,
the Basenji, cycle seasonally. Basenjis cycle in the fall in the northern hemisphere and may come
into heat slightly young if it is the right time of year.
Supplemental reading
Goedken MJ, Kerlin RL, Morton D. 2008. Spontaneous and age-related testicular findings in Beagle dogs.
Toxicol Pathol 36:465-471.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 18, 276-277.
69
20
What are the normal parameters for the estrous
(heat) cycle in bitches?
General information
The heat or estrous cycle consists of four stages. These are proestrus, estrus, diestrus, and anes-
trus. Bitches are monoestrus and are nonseasonal; they do not cycle continuously and do not
cycle in response to season. The only exception to this is the Basenji, which cycles in autumn in
the northern hemisphere.
 Proestrus is the stage where the bitch first exhibits physical and behavioral changes of heat.
Physical changes are turgid swelling of the vulva and passage of serosanguinous vulvar discharge
(Fig. 20-1). This discharge arises in the uterus and should not be frankly hemorrhagic or have a
foul odor. Male dogs will be attracted to the proestrous bitch but she will not allow the male to
mount her. Proestrus lasts an average of 9 days but may range from 0 to 17 days.
Estrus, or standing heat, is the stage where the bitch allows the male to mount and breed her.
The classic signs include softening of the vulva and change in color of vulvar discharge from
serosanguinous to straw-colored at estrus onset (Fig. 20-2). However, many normal, fertile
bitches do not show these physical changes. Some estrous bitches will mount other females. The
male will investigate the bitch's hindquarters and she will allow him to mount and breed her.
Estrus lasts an average of 9 days but may range from 3 to 21 days.
Diestrus is the stage during which successfully bred bitches are pregnant. Most species have a
mechanism in place for maternal recognition of pregnancy such that nonpregnant females cut
this stage of the cycle short and return to proestrus and estrus repeatedly unless that cycle is
broken by pregnancy, disease, or season. Bitches do not recognize pregnancy but instead all
bitches that go through estrus continue through a prolonged diestrus whether they were bred or
not and whether they are pregnant or not. A milky, odorless discharge may be seen very early in
diestrus but, in general, vulvar discharge should cease during this stage. Because all the hormonal
changes of pregnancy take place, even nonpregnant bitches may show mammary development
and lactation late in diestrus. Male dogs are no longer interested. Some bitches exhibit mild
lethargy during this stage. Diestrus lasts about 60 days.
Anestrus is the stage of reproductive quiescence. Underlying hormonal changes during this
stage are characterized by increasing frequency and amplitude of gonadotropin secretion, medi-
ated by dopamine. There are no specifc physical or behavioral changes. Anestrus lasts about 4.5
7 months.
71
72 what are the normal parameters for the estrous (heat) cycle in bitches?
NOII
Figure 20-1: Swollen vulva and serosanguinous vulvar discharge characteristic of proestrus (reprinted with
permission from Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successfur Breeding ano Hearth
Management. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier).
2000
Figure 20-2: Softer vulva and tan-colored discharge characteristic of estrus (reprinted with permission from
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeoer's Guioe to Successfuf Breeoing and Hearth Management. St. Louis.
MO:Elsevier).
Canine reproductive physiology 73
Clinical implications
There are no tests available that permit us to predict when a bitch is going to enter proestrus.
Experienced male dogs become more interested in the urine of female dogs just before they
exhibit signs of proestrus, investigating where they urinate and urinating over it as if it hides
evidence of the proestrous bitch from other males.
Many breeders expect to breed their bitch on days 9, 1l, and 13 of their cycle, counting the
first day of proestrus as day 1. This is based on the fact that the average bitch is in proestrus for
9 days and ovulates on the second day of estrus. Bitches bred on days 9, 11, and 13 are then bred
prior to ovulation, on ovulation day, and again 2 days after ovulation. However, many normal
bitches are not average bitches. Uncooperative bitches should be evaluated to determine if they
are at the appropriate stage of the cycle (see Chapter 29) or if they have a vaginal anomaly or
some other physical impediment to breeding (see Chapter 52).
Because all bitches go through a complete diestrus, with hormonal and physical changes
similar to those in pregnant bitches, pregnancy diagnostic techniques commonly used in other
species do not work well in bitches (see Chapter 5). The prolonged diestrus of bitches predisposes
them to pyometra (see Chapter 47) and false pregnancy.
False pregnancy is a misnomer; the condition is more correctly termed pseudocyesis or false
whelping. Clinical signs appear concurent with decrease in serum progesterone concentration
at the end of diestrus and include mammary development, lactation, mothering of inanimate
objects, and possible aggression. Most clinical signs resolve without therapy. Wrapping the
pressure, which inhibits prolactin production. This, coupled with cutting food and water in half
for a day, may hasten resolution. Prolactin-inhibiting drugs can be used to inhibit lactation; the
 J (shep 01 o1 s 1oy Aep aouo By/ar g) auoliaqeo si shop u1 asn 1oy paaondde Bn1p yons Aquo
a sedative is needed to quiet an aggressive bitch, a benzodiazepine such as diazepam should be
used in preference to a phenothiazine such as acepromazine, as the latter may stimulate prolactin
release.
Anestrus averages 4.5 months, such that the average bitch cycles, or begins a new proestrus,
every 7 months. Some breeds, including the German Shepherd dog and Rottweiler, cycle as
frequently as every 4.5 to 5 months. Some lines of dogs cycle less frequently. Bitches are not
considered abnormal unless they cycle less frequenly than every 12 months (see Chapter 52).
Supplemental reading
Gobello C, De la Sota RL, Goya RG. 2001. A review of canine pseudocyesis. Reprod Dom Anim
36:283-288.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PN. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 16-31.
Okkens AC, Kooistra HS. 2006. Anoestrus in the dog: A fascinating story. Reprod Dom Anirm 41:291-296.
21
What are the normal parameters for semen
quality in dogs?
General information
Semen collection and evaluation are described in Chapters 6 and 7, respectively. Semen evalua-
tion in dogs includes assessment of color, volume, percentage of progressively motile spermato-
zoa, concentration and total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate, and percentage of
morphologically normal spermatozoa. Other parameters that may be evaluated include pH,
concentration of alkaline phosphatase in seminal fluid, cytology, and microbiological culture
(Table 21-1).
Clinical implications
Bright or dark red coloration is due to fresh blood contamination, most commonly due to
prostate disease (see Chapters 53 and 54) or penile trauma (Fig. 21-1). Breaking of multiple
small vessels on the surface of the penis may be seen at a young dog's first semen collection.
Brown discoloration is usually indicative of old blood, associated with prostate disease.
Yellow color is urine contamination. Green discoloration is indicative of prostate infection (see
Chapter 54).
Volume varies with collector and is not a reflection of the dog's capabilities. Volume must be
noted, however, as it is concentration multiplied by volume that yields total number of sperma-
tozoa in the ejaculate.
Morphologic defects can be classified as primary (occurring during spermatogenesis) or sec-
ondary (occurring during storage in the epididymis or as an artifact of sample preparation).
Examples of primary morphologic defects are double heads, double midpieces, double tails, bent
midpieces, and proximal cytoplasmic droplets. Examples of secondary defects are bent tails.
detached heads, and distal cytoplasmic droplets. Effect of a preponderance of any given defect
on fertility is not well defined in dogs. If most defects are primary, this suggests that a problem
lies within the testis and prognosis for return to normal semen quality is worse than if most
defects are secondary.
 The wide range of normal for the total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate is due to the
wide range of testicular size in domestic dogs. The minimum number of normal spermatozoa
needed to impregnate bitches is about 250 milion. A dog with 500 million spermatozoa in his
ejaculate would probably be fertile even if only 50% were morphologically normal (500
million x 0.5 = 250 million). However, if that same male only had 10% morphologically normal
75
Table 21-1. Normal semen quality parameters in dogs
Parameter
Normal
Color
Milky or opalescent
Volume
1 to 30ml
Percentage of progressively motile spemmatozoa
70% or greater
Total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate
300 million to 2 billion
 Percentage of morphologically normal spermatozoa
80% or greater
pH
6.3 to 6.7
Alkaline phosphatase of serminal fluid
>5000IU/
Cytology
Noninflammatory: low numbers of healthy
polymorphonuclear cells may be present in
normal semen.
NO
Microbiological culture
Fewer than 10,0o0 bacteria/ml is nonsignificant
bacterial growth
NIN
Figure 21-1: Red discoloration of semen associated with prostate disease.
 spermatozoa, he would have to breed a given bitch five times over her fertile period to be likely
to achieve pregnancy.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in seminal fluid arises from the epididymes and testes. Samples
of seminal fluid containing no spermatozoa should be assessed for ALP concentration. Low ALP
Canine reproductive physiology  77
concentration value suggests that no fluid was retrieved from the reproductive tract, implicating
that apprehension or pain is preventing complete ejaculation, or obstruction. On the other hand,
normal value (>500o IU/l) suggests that fluid was retrieved from the reproductive tract and that
spermatogenesis is not occurring.
Cytologic changes and growth of bacteria from seminal fluid are not well correlated. If pros
tatitis or infection elsewhere in the reproductive tract is suspected, microbial culture should be
 performed even if cytology is noninflammatory.
Supplemental reading
Root Kustritz MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN, et al. 2005. Relationship between inflammatory cytology of
canine seminal fluid and significant aerobic, anaerobic or mycoplasma cultures of canine seminal fluid:
95 cases (1987-2000). Theriogenology 64:1333-1339.
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. The value of canine semen evaluation for practitioners. Theriogenology
68:329-337.
Section
Canine reproductive management
22
What age is best for ovariohysterectomy of
female dogs?
General information
While studies have demonstrated the safety of ovariohysterectomy (OHE), or spay, in dogs as
young as 7 weeks of age, there are no prospective long-term studies demonstrating the optimal
age for OHE of female dogs. Non-owned dogs (stray or feral animals, humane society animals)
should be spayed prior to placement in a new home. Owned animals should be assessed on a
case-by-case basis, weighing the pros and cons. There is much in the popular literature on this
topic; veterinarians are cautioned to be aware of the number and validity of studies cited to
support statements of fact in any publication.
Pros of OHE include a decrease in incidence of mammary neoplasia when aged; decreased
 incidence of uterine disease, most notably pyometra; and decreased incidence of sexually dimor-
phic behaviors. The sexually dimorphic behavior most likely to be reduced by OHE in female
dogs is inter-female aggression, most commonly displayed during heat.
dence of 3.4%. Half of the reported cases are malignant, with spread locally and to regional lymph
nodes, lungs, and other tissues. Multiple studies over decades have documented a protective
effect of OHE; it has been reported that sexually intact female dogs have seven times the risk
of developing a mammary tumor when aged compared with spayed dogs and that female
dogs spayed prior to their frst estrus have 0.5% the risk of developing mammary neoplasia
 compared with females left intact. Prevention is preferred to treatment. Surgery is the preferred
treatment modality; it was reported in one study that 60% of dogs are euthanized at the time of
diagnosis.
Pyometra is common in aged female dogs, with a reported incidence of 15.2% in females aged
4 years, and 23 to 24% in females 10 years or older. OHE cures pyometra, with reported mortality
rates ranging from 0 to 17%.
Cons of OHE include general risks of surgery, reported in bitches with an incidence of 7 to
 27%; urinary incontinence; weight gain; predisposition to cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) injury;
and possible predisposition to several uncommon, high morbidity cancers including osteosar-
coma, transitional cell carcinoma, and hemangiosarcoma.
Urinary incontinence associated with OHE is urethral sphincter mechanism incompetence,
formerly called estrogen responsive urinary incontinence. It was demonstrated statistically in a
large retrospective study evaluating effects of gonadectomy that female dogs spayed before 3
81
82 what age is best for ovariohysterectomy of female dogs?
months of age were significantly more likely to develop this common, low morbidity disorder
than were dogs spayed after 3 months of age.
Obesity is the most common nutritional disorder in dogs and multiple retrospective studies
have demonstrated a correlation between spay and weight gain. In cats, it has been demonstrated
that gonadectomy is associated with decreased metabolic rate and it may well be that the same
is true in dogs. Weight gain is easily controlled by the owner, with appropriate diet and
exercise.
CCL injury is more common in women than in men and more commonly occurs during
specific stages of the menstrual cycle, suggesting that hormonal factors may play a role. Several
studies have demonstrated increased incidence of CCL injury in spayed or neutered dogs, com-
pared with intact dogs; obesity was not indicated as a contributing factor in these studies. Studies
have not demonstrated asynchrony in bone growth secondary to gonadectomy, or excessive
angulation of the tibial plateau as causative factors.
Transitional cell carcinoma is the most common tumor of the urinary tract in dogs, with a
reported incidence of about 1%. Two studies have demonstrated increased incidence in spayed
dogs compared with intact female dogs. Similarly, increased incidence of osteosarcoma, a highly
malignant tumor with a reported incidence of 0.2%, was reported in spayed populations com-
 pared with intact populations in two studies, one of which evaluated the disease in Rottweilers,
which have a hereditary predisposition to osteosarcoma. Hemangiosarcoma is another highly
 malignant, low-incidence tumor reported to have increased incidence in spayed dog populations
in two studies. No cause-and-effect relationship has been defined for any of these tumors.
Clinical implications
Veterinarians and clients must take into account incidence, and morbidity and mortality of
disorders associated with OHE to determine optimal age of OHE for a given dog. Breed may
also play a role. The author strongly recommends OHE after 3 months of age but before onset
 of frst estrus in all female dogs not intended for breeding.
Supplemental reading
Romagnoli S. 2008. Surgical gonadectomy in the bitch and queen: Should it be done and at what age?
 g a  tg  s
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. Determining the optimal age for gonadectomy of dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 231:1665-1675.
23
When is it best to perform ovariohysterectomy of
female dogs relative to heat?
General information
Vascularity of the ovaries and the uterus is increased when dogs are under the influence of
estrogen, as in proestrus and estrus, and during pregnancy. Vascularity is decreased during a
nonpregnant diestrus, when the bitch is under the influence of progesterone. Most bitches are
best spayed at least 2 months after standing heat, when in anestrus.
Clinical implications
   e si a   a s p e  s yo si
intra- and postoperative bleeding if surgery is performed during proestrus or estrus. Similar risks,
along with dehydration and anemia, are present if ovariohysterectomy (OHE) is performed
during pregnancy, as the heavily gravid uterus is removed surgically. The normal physiologic
changes of pregnancy may also complicate anesthesia and surgery (see Chapter 33). There are
no published studies documenting increased incidence of side effects relative to stage of preg-
nancy during which OHE is performed.
The most commonly reported complication of OHE during nonpregnant diestrus is false
 pregnancy. False pregnancy is a misnomer; the condition is more correctly termed pseudocyesis
 or false whelping. Clinical signs appear concurrent with a decrease in serum progesterone con-
centration at the end of diestrus. OHE during diestrus, with removal of the ovaries and subse-
quent decrease in progesterone, mimics this normal decline in progesterone. Clinical signs
include mammary development, lactation, mothering of inanimate objects, and possible aggres-
sion. Most clinical signs resolve without therapy. Wrapping the mammary area with an elastic
bandage minimizes licking at the glands and increases mammary pressure, which inhibits pro-
lactin production. This, coupled with cutting food and water in half for a day, may hasten resolu-
tion. Prolactin-inhibiting drugs can be used to inhibit lactation; the only such drug approved
for use in dogs is cabergoline (5 μg/kg once daily for 5 to 7 days). If a sedative is needed to quiet
an aggressive bitch, a benzodiazepine such as diazepam should be used in preference to a phe-
 nothiazine such as acepromazine, as the latter may stimulate prolactin release.
Research suggests that some breeds of dog may become more reactive or aggressive after OHE.
Anecdote suggests that these changes are more likely if bitches are spayed during diestrus; there
are no studies supporting this contention.
8
84 when is it best to perform ovariohysterectomy of female dogs relative to heat?
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 243-246.
Romagnoli S. 2008. Surgical gonadectomy in the bitch and queen: Should it be done and at what age?
Proceedings, Southern European Veterinary Conference, Barcelona, Spain.
NOII
REPROD
24
What age is best for castration of male dogs?
General information
While studies have demonstrated the safety of castration in dogs as young as 7 weeks of age,
 there are no prospective long-term studies demonstrating the optimal age for castration of male
dogs. Non-owned dogs (stray or feral animals, humane society animals) should be castrated prior
to placement in a new home. Owned animals should be assessed on a case-by-case basis, weigh-
ing the pros and cons. There is much in the popular literature on this topic; veterinarians are
cautioned to be aware of the number and validity of studies cited to support statements of fact
in any publication.
Pros of castration include a decrease in incidence of sexually dimorphic behaviors, and
decreased incidence of diseases of the prostate and testes. The sexually dimorphic behaviors best
controlled by castration are mounting, roaming, and urine marking. Aggression is often not
controlled by castration, as the underlying cause of aggression is usually not hormonal.
Testicular neoplasia is very common in dogs, with a reported incidence of 0.9%. Testicular
n sn o n iai ane p sop pe  sse an s
Prostate disease is very common in intact male dogs. By 6 years of age, 75 to 80% of intact
male dogs have histologic or clinical evidence of benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH)(see Chapter
53). BPH is usually not associated with severe clinical signs but does predispose the dog to pros-
tatitis, which may be associated with substantial morbidity (see Chapter 54). Castration is a cure
for BPH and promotes resolution of prostatitis.
Cons of castration include weight gain, predisposition to cranial cruciate ligament (CCL)
injury, and possible predisposition to several uncommon, high morbidity cancers including
prostatic adenocarcinoma, osteosarcoma, and hemangiosarcoma.
Obesity is the most common nutritional disorder in dogs and multiple retrospective studies
have demonstrated a correlation between castration and weight gain. In cats, it has been dem-
onstrated that gonadectomy is associated with decreased metabolic rate and it may well be that
  e      a  h  so i n i  a
exercise.
CCL injury is more common in women than in men and more commonly occurs during
specific stages of the menstrual cycle, suggesting that hormonal factors may play a role. Several
studies have demonstrated increased incidence of CCL injury in spayed or neutered dogs, com-
pared with intact dogs; obesity was not indicated as a contributing factor in these studies. Studies
85
86what age is best for castration of male dogs?
have not demonstrated asynchrony in bone growth secondary to gonadectomy, or excessive
angulation of the tibial plateau as causative factors.
 Prostatic adenocarcinoma is an uncommon, highly malignant tumor of castrated or intact
male dogs. Several studies have demonstrated two to four times increased incidence in castrated
males compared with age-matched intact male dogs. Similarly, increased incidence of osteosar-
coma, a highly malignant tumor with a reported incidence of 0.2%, was reported in castrated
populations compared with intact populations in two studies, one of which evaluated the disease
in Rottweilers, which have a hereditary predisposition to osteosarcoma. Hemangiosarcoma is
another highly malignant, low-incidence tumor reported to have increased incidence in castrated
dog populations in two studies. No cause-and-effect relationship has been defined for any of
these tumors.
Clinical implications
Veterinarian and clients must take into account incidence, and morbidity and mortality of dis.
 orders associated with castration to determine optimal age of castration for a given dog. Breed
may also play a role. The author strongly encourages complete evaluation of likelihood that a
male will be allowed to breed indiscriminately; if odds are high that reproduction will be con-
 trolled, there are few compelling medical reasons to castrate the animal when young.
Supplemental reading
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. Determining the optimal age for gonadectomy of dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 231:1665-1675.
NOI
REF
NIN
25
Are nonsurgical alternatives available for
sterilization or contraception of female or
male dogs?
General information
Contraception is reversible control of reproduction; sterilization is nonreversible or permanent
control of reproduction. In companion animal medicine, most often we are interested in the
latter. As of this writing, there are no nonsurgical sterilants commercially available that are
completely effective and safe for use in dogs and cats. This discussion will primarily concern
nonsurgical contraceptives.
Females
Hormones
 Progesterone
For female dogs, a synthetic form of progesterone, megestrol acetate (Ovaban TM) was commer-
cially available for many years and is still an approved estrus-suppressing drug for breeding and
nonbreeding bitches. It is not available commercially at this time but can be dispensed as a
human brand of megestrol acetate through a human pharmacy. Megestrol acetate works by
exerting negative feedback to the pituitary, preventing release of folicle stimulating hormone
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). The drug can be given in anestrus for 30 days (0.55mg/
kg [0.25 mg/lb] once daily per os) or within the first 3 days of proestrus, for 8 days (2.2 mg/kg
[1 mg/lb] once daily per os). If the drug is given in proestrus, the bitch will continue to show
physical and behavioral signs of heat for at least 5 days and may permit mounting and breeding
by the male. If the drug is administered for 3 consecutive days before breeding occurs, she most
likely will not ovulate and conceive on that cycle. After treatment in either anestrus or proestrus,
average return to proestrus is in 4 to 6 months. There is a wide range of possible duration from
treatment to next proestrus; this drug cannot be used to suppress a heat cycle and make it occur
at a time more desired by the owner. The manufacturer recommends that this drug not be used
to suppress a bitch's first heat and that it not be used to suppress more than two consecutive
heat cycles. Side effects in bitches include increased appetite and mammary development. Pro-
gestins should not be administered to bitches with a history of mammary neoplasia, pyometra,
Or diabetes mellitus.
Many other forms of progesterone are available as contraceptives in other countries. These
include injectable forms of progesterone, such as medroxyprogesterone acetate, and unique
88 Are nonsurgical alternatives available for sterilization or contraception of dogs?
countries where performance of elective ovariohysterectomy (OHE) and castration is unethical
or illegal, progestins are routinely administered as injections or via a patch, implant, or other
slow-release systems. These compounds are not available in the United States.
Androgen
A mild androgen, mibolerone (Cheque"M) is approved for use in nonbreeding bitches in the
United States. This drug is not approved for use in breeding bitches. ChequeTM is no longer
available commercially but mibolerone can be procured through compounding pharmacies.
Androgens inhibit estrus by exerting negative feedback on the pituitary. Mibolerone dose is
dependent on the weight of the dog and breed; dogs weighing 0.5 to 12 kg receive 30 μg once
daily per os, those weighing 12-23kg 60μg once daily per os, those weighing 23-45kg 120μg,
and those weighing over 45kg and German Shepherd purebred or crosses 180μg. The drug is
administered once daily per os for as long as the dog is to be kept out of heat. Therapy must be
instituted at least 30 days before the next expected proestrus to be effective. After the drug is
withdrawn, average duration to next proestrus is 70 days, with a wide range of normal. Reported
side effects include clitoral hypertrophy, musky body odor, exudation of creamy vulvar dis-
charge, increased mounting and aggressive behaviors, obesity, and epiphora.
 In the United States, testosterone is not approved for estrus suppression in bitches, although
there are reports of efficacy of testosterone conjugates as estrus-suppressing drugs in bitches.
Future fertility may be altered by administration of this strong androgen.
GnRH agonists initially induce estrus, then suppress estrus through long-term down-regulation
of FSH and LH release. Most are administered via an osmotic pump or implant. No products
using these drugs are approved for use in bitches or are commercially available in the United
States.
GnRH antagonists act by blocking release of GnRH and subsequently decreasing secretion of
FSH and LH. Use of this class of drug early in proestrus was associated with lack of ovulation
on that cycle and return to proestrus in 3 weeks. No products using these drugs are approved
 for use in bitches or are commercially available in the United States.
immunocontraception
zona pellucida (ZP) proteins, which encircle the egg, and GnRH.
 ZP proteins are highly conserved between species. This permits use of readily available pig
Ovaries as a source of antigen. At present, there is no commercially available ZP vaccine for dogs.
Research has documented decreased fertility after immunization with ZP proteins; however,
boostering of vaccine is required and some bitches will continue to exhibit physical and behav-
d o  s sn  i   o sa o ss 
owners.
GnRH is a small molecule and, as such, is not inherently antigenic. Conjugation of GnRH
with larger proteins enhances antigenicity. At present, there is no commercially available GnRH
s P pdde n mni  Si   s e ao si  
 products may be available for companion animals in the future.
Mechanical/physicalbarriers
Examples of mechanical devices that have been described in dogs include an intravaginal con-
traceptive device and an intrauterine device. The high failure rate of the intravaginal device led
Canine reproductive management 89
to its being removed from the market decades ago. Intrauterine devices may or may not be
impregnated with spermicidal compounds; these devices suffer from difficulty in placement, and
the likelihood that bitches will continue to demonstrate estrous cycling.
Males
Hormones
FSH and LH are required for normal male fertility. The negative feedback effect of progestins is
not enough to significantly impair spermatogenesis in male dogs. Similarly, administration of
s      si sie  n 
GnRH analogs have been demonstrated to induce reversible infertility by decreasing LH and
testosterone concentrations with subsequent decline in spermatogenesis. While there are reports
of use of these drugs in dogs, their use is best described in zoo animals and no products using
this class of drugs are approved for use in dogs in the United States.
Immunocontraception
Antigens used to induce antibodies against molecules or tissues of reproductive interest in male
dogs include spermatozoal antigens and GnRH. There are no reports of success with spermato-
zoal antigens in dogs. GnRH is a small molecule and, as such, is not inherently antigenic. Con-
jugation of GnRH with larger proteins enhances antigenicity. At present, there is no commercially
available GnRH vaccine for dogs. However, a vaccine for hoofstock is undergoing review for
approval and similar products may be available for companion animals in the future.
Mechanical/physica!barriers
Injection of agents into the epididymis, testes, or vasa deferentes has been described. These
compounds are irritating, causing localized inflammation and either destroying tissue locally or
creating scar tissue and impeding flow of spermatozoa and seminal fluid for ejaculation. While
several compounds have been described for this use, only one, zinc gluconate buffered with
arginine (NeutersolTM or EsterisolTM), has been approved for use in dogs in the United States.
This compound is administered in each testis, with dose dependent on testicular width. Neuter-
solTM was approved for use in dogs aged 3 to 10 months of age and was not to be used in dogs
with misshapen or retained testes. Side effects included tra nsient scrotal swelling and discomfort,
and vomiting. The majority of dogs tested either had no ejaculate or an ejaculate containing no
spermatozoa by 6 to 12 months after administration. Serum testosterone concentration in treated
dogs was half of that in untreated dogs. As of this writing, no long-term independent studies
have been published using either product.
Clinical implications
 Most pet owners are as concerned with controlling their bitch's or dog's physical and behavioral
manifestations of reproduction as they are with controlling reproduction itself. Current nonsur-
 gical methods either are not efficacious in controlling reproduction or permit continuing physi-
cal changes of heat and normal reproductive behaviors that owners consider objectionable.
Surgery (OHE or castration) is the standard for reproduction control in the United States at this
time (see Chapters 22 to 24).
Supplemental reading
Bowen RA 2008. Male contraceptive technology for nonhuman male mammals. Anirm Reprod Sci
15:139-143.
Jana K, Samanta PK. 2007. Sterilization of male stray dogs with a single intratesticular injection of calcium
chloride: A dose-dependent study. Contraception 75:390-400.
90 Are nonsurgical alternatives available for sterilization or contraception of dogs?
Kutzler M, Wood A. 2006. Non-surgical methods of contraception and sterilization. Theriogenology
66:514-525.
Walker J, Ghosh S, Pagnon J, et al. 20o7. Totally synthetic peptide-based immunocontraceptive vaccines
show activity in dogs of different breeds. Vaccine 25:7111-7119.
REPR
26
What comprises recommended pre-breeding
evaluation for bitches?
General information
The goal in breeding is always to create offspring that are superior to the dam and sire. This
requires assessment of health, infectious disease, and genetic predispositions carried by the dam.
Health assessment requires a complete physical examination and performance of a digital
vaginal examination. Vaccinations should be current and the bitch should be checked and treated
for internal and external parasites. For infectious disease, serologic testing for canine brucellosis
should be performed (see Chapter 44). The occasional stud owner will require vaginal culture
of the bitch. The vagina is not a sterile surface and to ask for a negative vaginal culture is not
appropriate. If culture is performed, it is best done when the bitch is in proestrus or estrus as
vaginal culture will permit assessment of the discharge of heat, which arises in the uterus.
Hereditary diseases of concern vary by breed. The author strongly recommends that breeders
access information from the health committee of their national breed club to learn which condi-
tions are of greatest concern in their breed and what tests are available.
Types of testing available include anatomic testing and DNA-based testing. Anatomic testing
is evaluation of a morphologic characteristic, such as degree of laxity in the hip joint ( University
of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement Program) or presence of subluxation and osteophytes in the
hip joint (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals hip radiographs). Anatomic tests may suffer from
subjectivity. DNA-based tests can be either direct tests, which identify specific mutations on the
animal's DNA predisposing them to disease or designating them a carrier, or linkage tests, which
identify DNA markers near the site of an affected gene. Direct tests are more objective but linkage
tests can be quite accurate. New DNA-based tests become available constantly and again, breed-
P  s  s           a 
breed.
Clinical implications
tests are positive (see Chapter 44). However, some authors feel that seropositive bitches are more
likely to be identified if they are tested when in proestrus or estrus.
For vaginal culture, a mixed growth of aerobic bacteria and Mycoplasma sp. is normal. A
isms are hard to grow and many laboratories will not give you an idea of quantity grown, making
91
92 what comprises recommended pre-breeding evaluation for bitches?
interpretation of culture results difficult. Bitches with no history of infertility and no signs of
reproductive tract disease who culture positive for Mycoplasma probably do not require treat-
ment (see Chapter 28).
 Breeders will come for anatomic tests, such as hip radiographs. Some tests must be performed
by a licensed specialist; for example, Canine Eye Registry Foundation examinations must be
completed by a boarded veterinary ophthalmologist. DNA-based tests are usually performed on
cheek swabs, skin biopsies, or other readily obtained samples; breeders may or may not request
assistance with sample collection or interpretation of results.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 41-46.
NOI
REP
LANINE
27
What effect does hypothyroidism have
on fertility?
General information
Hypothyroidism is the most common endocrine disorder in dogs. Most cases are due to autoim-
mune thyroiditis and the inciting cause is rarely identified; vaccination is not associated with
e () sun jo se q u aq nou os sisu shop un si ue
 as values vary with breed, stage of the estrous cycle, concurrent drug therapy, and health status.
Accurate diagnosis requires demonstration of decreased serum concentrations of free T4 and
increased concentrations of thyroid stimulating hormone.
There are reports and anecdotal evidence linking hypothyroidism with abnormal estrous
cycles (altered frequency and duration), primary anestrus, conception failure, galactorrhea, and
pregnancy loss in bitches. However, in one study of 18 bitches with experimentally induced
hypothyroidism, there was no difference between the treatment and control groups in interes-
trous interval, litter size, or gestation length. Treated bitches showed slower uterine contractions
with subsequent prolonged labor, and increased periparturient puppy mortality.
Hypothyroidism has been anecdotally associated with decreased libido, poor semen quality,
relationship between hypothyroidism and fertility in male dogs.
Because hypothyroidism is caused by autoimmune destruction of the thyroid gland with
subsequent atrophy, it is possible that concurrent autoimmune destruction of the thyroid and
gonads may be responsible for this apparent link. Several studies in male dogs suggest this con-
nection. This does not explain why some hypothyroid dogs with poor reproductive function
return to normal fertility when properly supplemented with thyroid hormone.
Clinical implications
Hypothyroidism has a hereditary component. Although mode of inheritance is not well under
stood, the increased incidence in certain breeds suggests a genetic predisposition. It may be most
valuable to identify hypothyroidism in breeding stock to help the breeder decide if that individual
should remain in the gene pool.
If a dog is believed to have poor reproductive function secondary to hypothyroidism, accurate
diagnosis and appropriate testing affer supplementation is instituted are required. Unnecessary
treatment with thyroid hormone will induce iatrogenic hypothyroidism when the drug is with-
drawn. Over-supplementation and creation of a hyperthyroid state is not beneficial to the dog's
93
94 what effect does hypothyroidism have on fertility?
general health and may be associated with reproductive dysfunction as is seen in hyperthyroid
humans.
Supplemental reading
Ferguson DC. 2007. Testing for hypothyroidism in dogs. Vet Clin North Arm 37:647-669.
 Panciera DL, Purswell BJ, Kolster KA. 2007. Effect of short-term hypothyroidism on reproduction in the
bitch. Theriogenology 68:316-321.
 Scott-Moncrieff JC, Glickman NW, Glickman LT, et al. 2006. Lack of association between repeated vaccina-
tion and thyroiditis in laboratory Beagles. J Vet Intern Med 20:818-821.
Shiel RE, Brennan SF, Omodo-Eluk AJ, et al. 2007. Thyroid hormone concentrations in young, healthy,
pretraining Greyhounds. Vet Rec 161:616-619.
Torres SMF, Feeney DA, Lekcharoensuk C, et al. 2003. Comparison of colloid, thyroid follicular epithelium,
and thyroid hormone concentrations in healthy and severely sick dogs. J Ar Vet Med Assoc
222:1079-1085.
Wood MA, Panciera DL, Berry SH, et al. 2008. Influence of isoflurane general anesthesia or anesthesia and
surgery on thyroid function tests in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. doi: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.2008.0216.x.
NOII
00
REPR
CANINE
28
What are the pros and cons of treatment with
antibiotics during heat in bitches?
General information
The owner of a bitch with a history of infertility or small litter size may ask for antibiotics to be
dispensed for administration during heat and pregnancy as an empirical treatment for disease.
Bitches with a history of pyometra must be treated with antibiotics during heat to control sec-
ondary infection. The occasional stud owner will require vaginal cultures of the bitch as part of
a pre-breeding workup. The vagina is not a sterile surface and to ask for a negative vaginal culture
is not appropriate.
The class of antibiotic used during heat, pregnancy, and lactation must be one that does not
interfere with fertilization, implantation, embryonic development, fetal growth, and normal
physiologic function of the nursing pups. Most information in the veterinary literature refers to
teratogenicity of drugs used (see Chapter 30). In general, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, and
chloramphenicol should be avoided, and fluoroquninolones should be used with caution.
Studies have documented the pros and cons of use of empirical antibiotics during heat in
bitches with a history of reproductive tract disease. Older bitches are more likely to conceive and
 to carry pregnancy if treated with antibiotics during heat. Cons include creation of resistant
bacterial strains from indiscriminate antibiotic use and possible overgrowth of normal flora,
including Mycoplasma sp., after antibiotic therapy alters the normal balance of the vaginal flora.
Clinical implications
If antibiotics are to be administered, it is always in the animal's best interest to perform culture
and sensitivity testing to guide antibiotic choice. If culture is performed, it is best done when the
bitch is in heat as vaginal culture will permit assessment of the heat discharge, which arises in
the uterus. It has been demonstrated that a larger number of organisms are cultured when
samples are collected during estrus than when samples are collected during diestrus or anestrus.
It has also been demonstrated that fewer contaminants will be present in samples collected
from the cranial vagina than from the caudal vagina. Use of a long, guarded swab decreases
contamination.
 u si ds io p q e po   e  r o
significant culture result is moderate to heavy growth of any single organism. Mycoplasma organ-
isms are hard to grow and many laboratories will not give an idea of quantity grown, making
interpretation of culture results difficult. Bitches with no history of infertility and no signs of
95
96 what are the pros and cons of treatment with antibiotics during heat in bitches?
reproductive tract disease who culture positive for Mycoplasma probably do not require
treatment.
Supplemental reading
 Bjurstrom L, Linde-Forsberg C. 1992. Long-term study of aerobic bacteria of the genital tract in breeding
bitches. Am J Vet Res 53:665-673.
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. Collection of tissue and culture samples from the canine reproductive tract.
Theriogenology 66:567-574.
NOI
REPR
NIN
29
How do I use progesterone and other measures
for breeding management?
General information
Progesterone assay
Serum progesterone concentrations begin to rise before ovulation in bitches, with a significant
rise from baseline values at about the time of peak secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) from
the pituitary. On average, serum progesterone concentration will be in the range of about 2.0 to
2.9ng/ml 24 to 48 h prior to ovulation, and will be anywhere from 4.0 to 10.0 ng/ml on ovulation
day. Blood samples submitted to commercial laboratories for progesterone assay will yield accu-
rate, quantitative results either in ng/ml or nmol/1 (ng/ml x 3.1 = nmol/1). Blood samples evalu-
ated with in-house test kits are much less quantitative, usually identifying concentrations as
either below or above 4 to 5ng/ml. Because of demonstrated variability in changes in progester-
one around the time of ovulation between and within bitches, practitioners are strongly advised
to continue to monitor progesterone concentrations until they are well within or beyond the
ovulatory range. There is no consistent single value of serum progesterone concentration associ-
ated with optimal breeding day (Table 29-1).
Luteinizinghormoneassay
LH is the hormone that stimulates ovulation. It is secreted as a single large peak, with high con-
centrations persisting for about 24 to 48 h. Serum concentrations of greater than 1 ng/ml precede
ovulation by 2 to 3 days. Commercial assays for LH are available but turnaround time is so long
as to preclude their use for breeding management. The only commercially available in-house LH
assay varies in its availability. No one has identified a consistent temperature change at the time
of maximum LH release in bitches, as has been identified in women; this may be due to the
subtlety of the effect.
Vaginal cytology
The population of vaginal epithelial cells collected by vaginal swab varies in a characteristic
manner throughout the estrous cycle (see Chapters 1 and 2). The average bitch ovulates about
48h after onset of estrus, defined cytologically as 100% cornification with greater than 50% being
anuclear squame cells. However, great variability exists between and within bitches, and vaginal
cytology alone cannot be used accurately to prospectively determine ovulation day in bitches. In
 one study, only 10 of 35 bitches (28%) would have been bred at the right time if vaginal cytology
98 How do I use progesterone and other measures for breeding management?
saupig ui suawabeuew bupaag ioy suoenuauos auaiaisabaid wnas jo asn 'l-hz aigel
Serum Progesterone Concentration (ng/ml)
Interpretation
Less than 1.0
Anestrus or early proestrus—recheck.
1.0 to 2.0
LH peak has not yet occurred—recheck
2.0 to 4.0
LH peak occurring. near ovulation—recheck.
4.0 to 10.0
Ovulation occurring.
Greater than 10.0
Ovulation has occurred.?
*Vaginal cytology must be used to deterrmine if bitch has ovulated and is stillin estrus or if bitch has
ovulated and has gone into diestrus (see Chapter 2 and Clinical Implications)
LH = luteinizing hormone.
REF
e yhnoul pama se 'sisa ym paieosse eson leuibea panenuan pue pauuela i-bz ane
vaginoscope.
had been the only measure used for breeding management. In a study of 292 estrous cycles,
ovulation day averaged 11 to 12 days after proestrus onset but ranged from 1 to 31 days.
Vaginoscopy
The appearance of the vaginal mucosa changes in a characteristic way from proestrus into estrus
(see Chapter 3). The average bitch ovulates about 48h after first appearance of the maximum
crenulation and blanching associated with onset of estrus (Fig. 29- 1). However, great variability
exists between and within bitches, and vaginoscopy alone cannot be used accurately to prospec.
tively determine ovulation day in bitches.
Canine reproductive management 99
Behavioralandphysicalchanges
The average bitch ovulates about 48 h after onset of estrus, defined behaviorally as first acceptance
of the male dog. Oftentimes, the vulva becomes less turgid and vulvar discharge of heat changes
from blood-tinged to straw-colored concurrent with onset of estrus as well. Great variability
exists between and within bitches, and neither behavioral changes of the bitch or dog, changes
in vulvar size or tone, or changes in appearance of the vulvar discharge can be used accurately
to prospectively determine ovulation day in bitches.
Miscellaneous
Uitrasound evaluation of ovaries
Reports exist documenting changes in ovarian appearance at the time of ovulation. These
cant training and very high quality ultrasound equipment, and is not commonly used in
practice.
Electrica!impedance
Resistance of electrical conductivity across the vaginal mucosa may increase coincident with
increasing estrogen concentrations. Although one may purchase equipment that accurately mea
sures electrical conductivity across the vaginal mucosa, there are no published reports demon
strating a correlation between electrical impedance measurements and occurrence of the LH peak
or ovulation in bitches.
Glucose concentration in vaginal fluid
Anecdotal reports suggest that glucose concentration rises in vaginal fluid coincident with the
rise in serum progesterone that occurs around the time of ovulation. There are no published
reports documenting this as an accurate technique for determination of ovulation day.
Ferning ofvaginal fluid
Fluid from the cranial vagina allowed to spread across a glass slide and air-dry will take on the
branched appearance of a fern, with the effect most pronounced around the time of the LH
surge. Ferning has not been demonstrated to consistently permit identification of ovulation day
in bitches.
Clinical implications
The only diagnostic test readily and consistently available to practitioners at this time for deter-
mination of ovulation day in bitches is measurement of serum progesterone concentration.
Serum progesterone should be measured until it is well into the ovulatory range. Lower values,
while indicative of significant events in the average dog, are not consistent enough in all bitches
to discourage serial progesterone assay. After ovulation occurs, serum progesterone concentra-
tions remain high for 2 months, throughout diestrus. There is great variation in how quickly
serum progesterone rises after ovulation. Vaginal cytology, which is completely cornified
throughout estrus, will abruptly become completely non-cornified on the first day of diestrus;
this change occurs with fair consistency 6 days after ovulation (see Chapter 2). Therefore, if a
bitch has a serum progesterone concentration greater than 10 ng/ml and still has cornified cytol-
Ogy, she is somewhere in that 6-day window and may even be at optimal breeding day. However,
if a bitch has a serum progesterone concentration greater than 10ng/ml and has non-cornified
cytology, she is in diestrus and cannot be bred this season.
100 How do I use progesterone and other measures for breeding management?
Serum progesterone concentration can be altered by sample handling. Practitioners are
strongly encouraged to call the laboratory to which they will be submitting samples to ask for
specific information regarding the type of tube into which blood should be collected, how soon
after blood collection the sample should be centrifuged or otherwise processed, and how serum
or plasma should be stored and shipped.
Because there is variability in serum progesterone concentrations in bitches, it is useful to
become familiar with one other technique, not to help pinpoint ovulation day but perhaps to
ensure any overt abnormalities with the reproductive cycle in that bitch are identified and
addressed in a timely manner. The author routinely uses serum progesterone concentration and
vaginal cytology; others use serum progesterone and vaginoscopy. Readers are encouraged to use
whatever technique they are most confident in interpreting.
Timing of insemination after ovulation varies with type of semen used. If only one breeding
is possible, optimal breeding day is 2 days after ovulation (4 days after the LH peak) for natural
service, fresh semen or chilled semen (see Chapter 12). Conception rate and litter size are higher
if the bitch is bred more than once; many recommend breeding 2 and 4 days after ovulation. If
frozen-thawed semen is used, optimal breeding day is later because spermatozoa viability is
reduced. Insemination is recommended 3 to 5 days after ovulation (5 to 7 days after the LH
peak).
The occasional bitch will exhibit physical and cytologic changes of proestrus with no concomi-
tant rise in progesterone, will appear to go out of heat, and then will go through a normal ovula-
tory heat about 1 month later. This is termed a split heat and was reported to occur in about
1.2% of dogs in one large study.
Supplemental reading
Arbeiter K. 1993. Anovulatory ovarian cycles in dogs. J Reprod Fertil 47:453-456.
Fay J, Mezo T, Solti L, et al. 2003. Comparison of different methods used for oestrus examination in the
bitch. Acta Vet Hung 51:385-394.
Hewitt D, England G. 2000. Assessment of optimal mating time in the bitch. In Prac 22:24-33.
Hiemstra M, Schaefers-Okkens AC, Teske E, et al. 2001. The reliability of vaginal cytology in determining
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 49-55.
Nishiyama T, Narita K, Tsumagari S, et al. 2000. Shrinkage in the horizontal dimensions of the vulva (vulvar
shrinkage) as an indicator of standing heat in the Beagle. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 36:556-560.
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successful Breeding and Health Management. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier, pp. 135-140.
Thuroczky J, Wolfling A, Tibold A, et al. 2003. Effect of anticoagulants and sampling time on results of
progesterone determination in canine blood samples. Reprod Dorm Anim 38:386-389.
frozen semen and parentage testing by microsatellite markers in superfecundency. J Vet Med Sci
65:1003-1005
30
What drugs are unsafe to use during pregnancy
in bitches?
General information
Drugs can be classified using the following designation: A: probably safe in dogs, based on the
lack of toxicity or teratogenicity identifed in other species; B: safe if used cautiously; C: poten-
tially risky and to be used only when the benefit clearly outweighs the risks; and D: contraindi-
cated in all cases. Few drug studies have been completed in bitches, requiring extrapolation from 
work in other species, most commonly humans and laboratory animals (Table 30-1).
Clinical implications
All kinds of drug use during pregnancy require careful weighing of benefits and detriments.
 Because of the lack of research in bitches and subsequent need to extrapolate from other litera-
ture, good client communication regarding extra-label use of drugs is critical.
Supplemental reading
Budsberg SC. 2009. Review of NSAIDs: COX selectivity and systemic effects beyond analgesia. Compendium
31 (Suppl 3A):10-16.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
 Saunders Co., pp. 81-86.
Landsbergen N, Pelicaan CH, Schaefers-Okkens AC. 2001. The use of veterinary durgs during pregnancy
of the dog. Tijdschr Diergeneeskd 126:716-722.
Novotny MJ, Krautmann MJ, Ehrhart JC, et al. 2000. Safety of selamectin in dogs. Vet Parasitol
91:377-391.
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successful Breeding and Health Management.St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier, pp. 21-45.
Traas AM. 2008. Surgical management of canine and feline dystocia. Theriogenology 70:337-342.
101
saypiig u! Aueubaud buunp asn oi ajesun aue shnip jeyn 7ol
Table 30-1. Safety of drugs for use in pregnancy.
Chemical Name
Safety Designation?
Comments
Antibiotics
Ampicillin 
A
Amoxicillin
A
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
A
Cephalosporins
A
Chlorarmphenicol
May decrease protein synthesis in fetus
Doxycycline
D
All tetracyclines may cause bone and teeth
 malformations in fetus.
Erythromycin
A
Fluoroquinolones
C
All drugs in this class have been associated
with cartilage damage: however, multiple
authors have reported no birth defects in pups
borm to bitches treated with fluoroguinolones.
Gentamicin
C
Aminoglycosides are associated with
ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity.
Metronidazole
C
Teratogenic in laboratory animals.
Trimethoprim-sulfa
B
Pre-anesthetics, anesthetics, sedatives
0
 Acepromazine
B
May cause fetal CNS depression
Atropine
May cause fetal tachycardia.
00
REPR
 Diazepam
Glycopyrrolate
B
NI
Isoflurane
B
Ketamine
B
May induce premature labor.
Naloxone
A
 Oxymorphone
B
Pentobarbital
C
May cause respiratory depression in fetus.
Propofol
Avoid repeated injections, as drug may
accumulate within the fetus due to inability to
clear it readily.
Sevoflurane
B
 Thiopental 
C
May cause respiratory depression in fetus.
 Parasiticides
Diethylcarbamazine
Canine reproductive management 103
Table 30-1. Continued
Chemical Name
Safety Designation?
Comments
 Fenbendazole
A
vermectin
A
Milbemycin oxime
A
Piperazine
A
 Praziquantel
A
 Pyrantel
A
Selamectin
A
Thiabendazole
B
High doses cause toxemia in ewes
Pain medications
Acetaminophen
C
 Aspirin
C
Embryotoxicity in laboratory animal species.
 possible pulmonary hypertension and bleeding
in late pregnancy.
Butorphanol
Carprofen
C
Increased gestation length and increase in
stillbirths identified in laboratory animals.
 Hunixin meglumine
lbuprofen 
Selective cyclooxygenase-2
D
In humans, ingestion of drugs of this class
inhibitors
may retard renal development in neonates.
 Endocrine steroids
Dexamethasone
C
Increased incidence of cleft palate and other
 congenital defects; may induce premature
labor. High doses at mid-gestation may cause
 pregnancy termination.
Diethylstilbestrol
D
May induce abnormal development of
reproductive system.
Prednisolone
C
Thyroxine
B
*A, probably safe in dogs. based on the lack of toxicity or teratogenicity identified in other species:
B, safe if used cautiously: C. potentially risky and to be used only when the benefit clearly outweighs
the risks; D, contraindicated in all cases.
31
Are there dietary supplements proven to improve
fertility in bitches?
General information
General nutrition requirements provided on pet food labels and promoted by the Association
of American Food Control Offcials (AAFCO) reflect minimum requirements and are not a
 reflection of optimum percentages of protein, fat, carbohydrates, and macro- and micronutri-
ents. These percentages are not described in the veterinary literature. Clients should be encour-
aged to feed their bitches with a commercial food labeled by AAFCO as nutritionally complete
 and balanced for pregnancy and lactation, or for all life stages.
Calcium supplementation is often requested by clients, with the thought that the bitch will
somehow build up calcium reserves that will be depleted during lactation. Unfortunately, calcium
 and there is no evidence to suggest that elevated concentrations in bone result from oral supple-
mentation during pregnancy. Commercial diets should have a calcium:phosphorus ratio of 1: 1
to 1.2: 1. Commercial diets are recommended during pregnancy to ensure this ratio throughout
gestation; this may be difficult for bitches fed homemade diets, which are more likely to contain
widely varying ingredients over time and are unlikely to be evaluated for nutrient content.
Prebiotics are nutritional supplements that support growth and function of intestinal micro-
flora. Probiotics contain active bacteria that can recolonize the intestinal tract and promote
recolonization of the normal mixed flora. Purchasers of probiotics are well advised to look for
products that are formulated to ensure viability through processing, storage, and passage through
the digestive system. These compounds may be useful as adjunct therapy in bitches with physi-
Fatty acid deficiency in diets fed to pregnant bitches may be associated with preterm labor,
poor placental development, and decreased litter size. Omega-3 fatty acids, as may be found in
fish oil or flaxsed preparations, are important for normal neurological development of puppies.
These compounds, provided to bitches during estrus, pregnancy, and lactation, have not been
demonstrated to enhance fertility but have been demonstrated to stimulate neurologic develop-
ment of the pups, as identified by enhanced electroretinographic responses. Because bitches show
variable ability to metabolize fatty acids based on initial nutrient source, specific recommenda-
tions for concentrations to be fed are often not provided.
Supplements described as fertility-enhancing that contain herbs, vitamins, and amino acids
are available commercially. Some of these compounds have been demonstrated to have effects
105
106 Are there dietary supplements proven to improve fertility in bitches?
in species other than the dog. Folate has been demonstrated to be important for oocyte quality
and for maturation of the conceptus, implantation and placentation, and fetal growth in humans.
Zinc may play a role in ovulation in women. Both folate and zinc have antioxidant properties
in humans, in whom it has been demonstrated that oxidative stress plays a role in subfertility
and infertility. Vitamin E also has antioxidant activities and has been shown in humans to
modulate gene expression. However, excessive vitamin E supplementation may be associated
with creation of inflammation. A human proprietary product containing chasteberry, green tea,
L-arginine, vitamins including folate, and minerals, was demonstrated to normalize cycle length
 in women with either abnormally short or long cycles and to increase conception rate (26% in
the treatment group vs. 10% in the placebo group; n = 93).
Clinical implications
General recommendations for feeding during pregnancy include feeding a commercial diet with
AAFCO approval that is labeled as nutritionally complete and balanced for pregnancy or for all
life stages. Do not supplement with calcium during pregnancy, when the bitch begins lactation,
she will not be able to take in enough calcium orally to maintain milk production and will have
to draw from supplies in the bone. Because the system may have been down-regulated, there will
be lag time before parathormone release and subsequent osteoclastic activity can increase serum
calcium levels. The bitch may actually be more likely to suffer clinical hypocalcemia during this
period than if she had not been supplemented with calcium. Pre- and probiotics may be benefi-
cial in pregnant bitches with diarrhea and are unlikely to do harm. The same can be said of some
commercial fertility-enhancing products but many contain a mix of compounds in varying and
often unsubstantiated concentrations, some of which may not be beneficial and may, in fact, be
detrimental.
Supplemental reading
Agarwal A, Gupta S, Sharma RK. 2005. Role of oxidative stress in female reproduction. Reprod Biol Endocrin
3:28-49.
Bauer JE. 2001. Evaluation of nutraceuticals, dietary supplements, and functional food ingredients for
companion animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1755-1760.
Bauer JE. 2007. Responses of dogs to dietary omega-3 fatty acids. J Am Vet Med Assoc 231: 1657-1661.
 Ebisch IMW, Thomas CMG, Peters WHM, et al. 2007. The importance of folate, zinc and antioxidants in
the pathogenesis and prevention of subfertility. Hurm Reprod Update 13: 163-174.
N
Greco DS. 2008. Nutritional supplements for pregnant and lactating bitches. Theriogenology 70:393-396.
Robinson N. 2003. Herbs for pregnant animals—-yes or no? Vet Prac News 15:28-33.
Valastyan S, Thakur V, Johnson A, et al. 2008. Novel transcriptional activities of Vitamin E: Inhibition of
cholesterol biosynthesis. Biochemistry 47:744-752.
Westphal LM, Polan ML、 Trant AS. 2006. Double-blind, placebo-controlled study of Fertilityblend: A
32
How can we prevent dystocia?
General information
 Reported incidence of dystocia in dogs is 2%. Breeds predisposed to dystocia include bulldogs
and other brachycephalic breeds, Scottish terriers, Chihuahuas, Dachshunds, and Yorkshire
terriers.
Causes of dystocia can be maternal or fetal in origin. Maternal causes include abnormal uterine
function, feto-pelvic disproportion, and pregnancy abnormalities. Examples of abnormal uterine
function are primary uterine inertia, in which propulsive uterine contractions never occur in
second-stage labor, and secondary uterine inertia, which is muscle fatigue associated with cessa-
tion of contractions after labor has been progressing normally. Feto-pelvic disproportion may
occur when fetuses are unusually large, as in small litters, or when the pelvis is unusually small
as in bitches with a history of pelvic fracture. Pregnancy abnormalities that may be a cause of
 dystocia are uncommon and include uterine rupture and uterine torsion.
The most common fetal cause of dystocia is abnormal presentation. Other causes include fetal
oversize, most commonly associated with small litter size, and abnormalities of fetal development
(fetal monsters).
Primary uterine inertia may have a hereditary component. Abnormally weak uterine contrac-
tions may also be associated with hypocalcemia. Calcium supplementation during pregnancy is
not recommended as it may be associated with down-regulation of the normal calcium regula-
tory mechanism. Instead, bitches should be fed a diet that is balanced for pregnancy and lactation
and has a calcium:phosphorus ratio of 1.0:0.8.
Fetuses grow to fill the space available to them. Smallitter size therefore predisposes bitches
to dystocia. Causes of small litter size can be addressed as a means of preventing dystocia
(Table 32-1).
 Digital vaginal examination should be a routine component of the pre- breeding examination.
 defect and possible surgical repair prior to the onset of proestrus (see Chapter 4).
Pelvimetry, measurement of distance and angles within the pelvis, can be performed on radio-
 graphs of the pelvis. Studies done in Boston terriers, Scottish terriers, and French bulldogs
demonstrated that decreased height and width of the pelvis is associated with dystocia. Pelvic
shape is heritable and varies greatly between breeds.
107
108 How can we prevent dystocia?
Table 32-1. Causes of small litter size in bitches.
Cause
Possible Solution
Improper breeding
Bitches are optimally bred 2 days after ovulation. Ovulation date is best
management
detemmined by measurement of senum progesterone concentration (see
Chapter 29).
Artificial insemination (Al)
Litters sired through natural service are larger than those produced by
artificial insemination, with a 15% decrease in size of litters sired using
fresh or chilled semen and a 25-31% decrease in size of litters sired
using frozen sermen (see Chapters 12 to 16)
Age
very young and very old dams tend to produce smaller litters. Age at
which litter size is largest varies by breed, with smaller breed bitches
leo.. aul abe jaeaib e iun sianl pazis-ewou aney oi bupua
age" for a breed is the age at which average litter size has decreased
by at least 15% from average litter size for that breed; this varies from
pazis-wnipaw ui abe jo sieaA g ol g ol spaaig abiel ul abe jo sieaA g
breeds and greater than 10 years of age in toy breeds.
Nutrition
Feeding of less than the recommended minimurn percentages of protein
(less than 22%) during pregnancy may be associated with srmaller litter
size as may deficiency in omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids
Inbreeding
Inbred bitches are more likely to carry small litters; this effect has been
demonstrated in Dachshunds and Otterhounds.
Clinical implications
Medical records should be reviewed to determine cause of prior dystocia in any bitch to be bred
so preventive measures can be taken if possible. Try to ensure optimal litter size by using serial
 measurement of serum progesterone to determine optimal breeding day; breeding bitches who
are not excessively inbred, very young, or very old; ensuring appropriate nutrition throughout
gestation; and carefully considering natural service versus artificial insemination (Al). If AI is
used, carefully consider kind of semen and site of insemination.
Digital vaginal examination and pelvimetry may be useful components of the pre-breeding
 examination in trying to determine which bitches are predisposed to dystocia. Pelvimetry will
only be a consistent and reliable technique when information about pelvic size in dogs of many
breeds is reported.
Supplemental read ing
 Bergstrom A, Fransson B, Lagerstedt A-S, et al. 2006. Primary uterine inertia in 27 bitches: aetiology and
treatment. J Small Anim Pract 47:456-460.
 Bergstrom A, Nodtvedt A, Lagerstedt A-S, et al. 2006. Incidence and breed predilection for dystocia and
risk factors for Cesarean section in a Swedish population of insured dogs. Vet Surg 35:786-791.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 105-128.
Linde-Forsberg C. 2002. Pelvimetry to diagnose dystocia in the bitch. www.vin.com/proceedings/
proceedings.plx?CID=WSAVA2002&PID=2684&Print= 1, accessed August 23, 2008.
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. Decreased litter size in the bitch. Proceedings, Minnesota Veterinary Medical
Association, Minneapolis, MN.
33
What are the normal physiologic and physical
changes in bitches pre-partum?
General information
Estrogen concentrations are high during estrus, or heat, causing vulvar swelling and exudation
of serosanguinous to straw-colored discharge, which originates in the uterus and drains through
the vagina (see Chapter 20). Progesterone concentrations are high for the 2 months following
estrus, regardless of pregna ncy status. High serum progesterone is associated with closure of the
cervix and lack of uterine contractility. Despite this, some normal bitches pass small volumes of
 s   a n     s
stimulates mammary development. As progesterone concentrations decline and prolactin con-
centrations rise very late in gestation, lactation begins. There is great variability in the ability to
express milk from the mammary glands prior to parturition, with some bitches not having sig-
nificant milk until after whelping.
Physiologic changes associated with pregnancy in bitches include normocytic, normochromic
anemia, and hyperproteinemia. The normocytic, normochromic anemia of pregnancy is most
likely due to an increase in plasma volume. Packed cell volume in late gestation varies from 24
to 35%; there may be a positive correlation between degree of anemia and number of fetuses.
Plasma protein concentrations increase during pregnancy, with a decrease in total protein and
albumin at the time of whelping. Other physiologic parameters reported to be altered in pregnant
bitches are described in Table 33-1.
Glucose homeostasis is altered during pregnancy. Insulin resistance and decreased ability to
synthesize glucose by gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis lead to a relative increase in serum
glucose concentrations and decreased ability to move glucose into cells. At its most extreme, this
will be manifested as gestational diabetes. Subsequent lipolysis may manifest as ketosis and
 pregnancy toxemia (see Chapter 46).
Clinical implications
Passage of vulvar discharge during pregnancy can be normal. Microscopic examination of any
discharge passed is strongly recommended to permit early diagnosis of pregnancy loss associated
with inflammatory discharge (see Chapters 45 and 46). Bitches presenting as ill while pregnant
should be worked up as any other dog, with knowledge of normal physiologic changes guiding
interpretation of physical examination and blood-work results.
109
110 what are the normal physiologic and physical changes in bitches pre-partum?
Table 33-1. Norrmal physiologic changes during pregnancy in bitche5.
Physiologic Change
Increase/Decrease
Packed cell volume
Decreased—normocytic, nomochromic
 Plasma protein
Increased during gestation, decreased in late pregnancy
Albumin
 Decreased in late pregnancy
Serum calcium
May be decreased in late pregnancy coincident with
decreased albumin
Cardiac output
Increased
Blood volume/plasma volume
Increased
Hemoglobin concentration
Decreased
 Oxygen consumption
Increased
Gastric ermptying time
Increased
Glomerular filtation rate
Increased
 Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine
Decreased
Supplemental reading
 Johnson CA. 2008. Glucose homeostasis during canine pregnancy: Insulin resistance, ketosis and hypogly.
cemia.Theriogenology 70:1418-1423.
NO
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 66-72.
Ryan SD, Wagner AE. 2006. Cesarean section in dogs: Physiology and perioperative considerations.
00
Compendium 28:34-42.
REPR
LANINE
34
How can I terminate pregnancy in bitches?
General information
When contacted by a bitch owner about mismating, one should first ascertain likelihood that
the bitch was bred and became pregnant. Oftentimes, the breeding was not witnessed. If a breed-
ing was witnessed, the bitch should be seen for vaginal cytology and drawing of blood for mea-
surement of progesterone, to determine proximity to ovulation date (see Chapters 2 and 29).
Lack of spermatozoa on vaginal cytology is not definitive proof that the bitch was not bred. Be
aware that spermatozoa can live in the bitch's reproductive tract for up to 7 days, so if the bitch
 is identifed to be in proestrus or estrus and periovulatory, she may become pregnant.
In surveys of bitches presented for pregnancy termination, 30 and 38% of the bitches were
not pregnant. For this reason, and because recommended protocols work well at and after mid-
 gestation, pregnancy diagnosis is recommended before any therapy is instituted (see Chapter 5).
For posible termination protocols, see Table 34-1. Drugs may be used in combination at the
low end of the dose range to minimize side effects; for example, a prostaglandin may be combined
with a prolactin inhibitor. No medical pregnancy termination protocol is reported to be 100%
effective and no drugs are approved for pregnancy termination in bitches in the United States.
Clinical implications
Knowledge of stage of pregnancy best permits the veterinarian to tell the owner what to expect;
for this reason, the author prefers ultrasound as a pregnancy diagnostic technique. If pregnancy
 is terminated before 40 days, virtually all evidence of pregnancy will be resorbed. From 40 to 50
days, fluid and tissue will be passed through the vulva. After 50 days, recognizable fetal tissues
will be passed. Affer 55 days, pups may be born alive and should be euthanized upon passage.
No one has demonstrated detriment to the bitch with pregnancy termination later in gestation
 but most veterinarians and owners will not perform termination late in pregnancy for aesthetic
reasons.
When called with a question about mismating by an owner, the author uses the scheme out-
lined in Table 34-2.
111
112 How can I terminate pregnancy in bitches?
Drug
Regimen
Side Effects
Notes
 Estrogens—-suppress movement of eggs, affect implantation
Estradiol
44 μg/kg intrarmuscular
1. Bone marrow
For treatment to be safe and
cypionate
one time
toxicity—aplastic
effective, bitch must have
("mismate
anemia,
ovulated (serum progesterone
shot")
thrombocytopenia,
>4 to 10ng/ml) and must still be
leukopenia
in estrus (100% vaginal
2. Pyometra (see
cormification). Bitches treated in
Chapter 47)
 diestrus may develop pyometra.
There is no wisdom to treating
with this drug within 3 days of
mismating.
Prostaglandins-lyse corpora lutea (CL); decrease progesterone, cause uterine contractions
Prostaglandin
50 to 250μg/kg
1. Ptyalisrn, vomiting.
Bitches will not respond to
FZalpha
subcutaneously twice to
diarrhea
prostaglandin administered
(Lutalyse TM)a
three times daily for 4
2. Early return to
earlier than the 5th day after
days or until pregnancy
estrus
diestrus onset. Prostaglandin
is terminated, identified
must be adrministered at least
 by lack of fetal heartbeat
twice daily to effect lysis of the
or recognizable amniotic
CL. Lower doses can be used
vesicles by ultrasound or
later in gestation and are
passage of fetuses
associated with decreased
severity of side effects. Side
N
effects usually occur and
0
subside within 5-60 min of drug
administration and lessen in
severity with the series of
injections.
REF
Cloprostenol
2.5 μg/kg subcutaneously
A5 above
The author finds diarrhea to be
three times at 48-h
more severe and less predictable
N
intervals
in onset than with prostaglandin
FZalpha.
 Prolactin inhibitors—decrease function of CL (decrease progesterone)
Bromocriptine
15 to 30μg/kg twice
Vomiting. anorexia
Bromocriptine is available in the
daily per os after
United States as a 2.5 mg tablet
mid-gestation
(ParlodelIM).
Cabergoline
5 μg/kg once daily per o5
(DostinexIM)
 after rmid-gestation until
 pregnancy is temminated
as described above
Canine reproductive management 113
Table 34-1. Continued
Drug
Regimen
Side Effects
Notes
Progesterone receptor blockers
Aglepristone
10mg/kg subcutaneously
May cause early
Not available in the United
(AlizineIM)
 on 2 consecutive days
return to estrus
States.
after day 30
 Mifepristone
2.5mg/kg twice daily per
Available for human use only in
 os after mid-gestation
the United States
for 4.5 days
Corticosteroids
Dexamethasone
0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg two to
1. Polyuria/polydipsia
Reported success rate is 80%
three times daily at a
while receiving the
Pups that survive the protocol
decreasing dose for 10
medication
are reported to show no
days after mid-gestation
2. Tany black vulvar
adverse effects from exposure
discharge
to high levels of corticosteroids 
during development.
The author has had good success with the following scheme: (1) diagnose pregnancy by ultrasound.
verifying that bitch is at mid-gestation; (2) treat with prostaglandin F2alpha, 250 pg/kg subcutaneously
twice daily for 4 days; (3) draw blood at time of last injection to verify progesterone has fallen to less
than 1 ng/ml; and (4) repeat ultrasound in 1 week to verify pregnancy loss
Table 34-2. Pregnancy termination management scheme
1a. Breeding was witnessed.
2
1b. Breeding was not witnessed.
E
2a. The bitch was bred within the last 7 days.
E
2b. The bitch was bred more than 7 days ago.
4
3.
 The bitch should be seen for determination of likelihood of breeding having occurred. Vaginal
cytology should be performed to determine stage of the estrous cycle (see Chapter 2). If the
 bitch is in proestrus or estrus, blood should be drawn to determine proximity to ovulation 
(see Chapter 29). If it is considered likely that she may have conceived.
Ovariohysterectomy can be performed at any time. If the owner does not desire the bitch to be
sterilized, pregnancy diagnosis should be performed at mid-gestation (see Chapter 5). The only
medical pregnancy termination therapy available that is effective around the time of conception
aas) bnup siu jo asn puawwosan jou saop joyine aun :uabonsa s! Aoueubaid Ajuea Aan u! pue
Table 34-1). The most commonly available medical therapy for pregnancy available in the
United States at this time is prostaglandin FZalpha (LutalyseiM); please note that no drug is not
approved for this use in bitches in the United State5.
114 How can I terminate pregnancy in bitches?
Supplemental reading
Corrada Y, Garcia P, De la Sota PE, et al. 2005. Decrease of body temperature after aglepristone treatment
in bitches. Anirm Reprod Sci 87:295-299.
Corrada Y, Rodriguez R, Tortora M, et al. 2006. A combination of oral cabergoline and double cloprostenol
injections to produce third-quarter gestation termination in the bitch. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
42:366-370.
Eilts BE. 2002. Pregnancy termination in the bitch and queen. Clin Tech Small Ani Pract 17:116-123.
Galac S, Kooistra HS, Butinar J, et al. 2000. Termination of mid-gestation pregnancy in bitches with agle-
Gobello C, Castex G, Corrada Y, et al. 2002. Use of prostaglandins and bromocriptine mesylate for preg-
nancy termination in bitches. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1017-1019.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 179-188.
Root Kustritz MV. 2006.The Dog Breeders Guide to Successful Breeding and Health Management. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier, pp. 170-173.
Shafer-Somi S, Aksoy OA, Beceriklisoy HB, et al. 2007. Repeated induction of abortion in bitches and the
effect on plasma concentrations of relaxin, progesterone and estradiol-17beta. Theriogenology
68:889-895.
NOII
100
REPR
CANINE
35
Should bitches be spayed at the time of removal
of a mammary mass?
General information
Mammary neoplasia is the most common tumor type in female dogs. Malignant tumors (adeno-
carcinoma) and benign tumors (fibroadenomas or mixed mammary tumors) occur with equal
frequency. In humans, genetics and estrogen are causative factors. In bitches, no consistent breed
predisposition has been reported. Similarly, not all canine mammary tumors contain estrogen
receptors. However, early ovariohysterectomy (OHE) is associated with decreased incidence of
mammary neoplasia in aged bitches. The protective effect of OHE is greatest if surgery is per-
formed before the bitch goes through estrus, with a decreasing benefit with each heat cycle.
Surgery is the treatment of choice for mammary neoplasia. Concurrent OHE is often recom-
mended. Arguments are that decreased exposure to estrogen and progesterone with subsequent
heat cycles may prevent recurrence of neoplasia, and that performing both surgeries at once
minimizes total number of anesthetic episodes in the bitch's life. Studies evaluating the beneficial
effect of OHE at the time of surgical removal of mammary tumors have differed in results, with
some showing increased survival time in bitches undergoing concurrent OHE and other studies
Clinical implications
There is no overwhelming evidence to support concurrent OHE and mammary tumor removal
as a method of decreasing mammary tumor recurrence and prolonging survival time. However,
incidence of other conditions of aged bitches, specifically pyometra, is decreased by OHE. The
greatest benefit may be minimizing the number of anesthetic episodes for a given bitch. If OHE
and mammary tumor removal are performed at the same time, OHE should be performed first
to prevent seeding of the abdomen with tumor cells.
Supplemental reading
Chang S-C, Chang C-C, Chang T-J, et al. 2005. Prognostic factors associated with survival two years after
surgery in dogs with malignant tumors: 79 cases (1998-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1625-1629.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 246-253.
 Osipov NE, Lagova ND, Ponomarkov VI. 1972. Spontaneous mammary gland tumors of dogs as a model
Smith FO. 2006. Canine pyometra. Theriogenology 66:610-612.
Sorenmo KJ, Shofer FS, Goldschmidt MH, et al. 2000. Effect of spaying and timing of spaying on survival
of dogs with mammary carcinoma. J Vet Intern Med 14:266-270.
115
36
Are there dietary supplements proven to improve
semen quality in male dogs?
General information
Compounds commonly described as nutritional supplements that enhance semen quality in dogs
are those containing glucosamine, most commonly in preparations for joint health, and those
containing amino acids, specifically L-carnitine. While carnitine is secreted in the canine epi-
didymis, the site of maturation of spermatozoa, the author is unaware of any published studies
documenting supplementation with carnitine to enhance motility of spermatozoa or any other
quality measure. Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation has been demonstrated to improve motil-
ity of frozen-thawed spermatozoa in stallions and to improve motility and sperm concentration
in the boar. Similar studies have not been performed in dogs. Treatment of subfertile men with
an antioxidant preparation has been associated with increased linear velocity of spermatozoa and
increased pregnancy rate, compared with a placebo group. In rats, consumption of pomegranate
juice, which contains vitamin C and several antioxidant compounds, was associated with
improved semen quality. Vitamin, mineral, and herbal therapies marketed for enhancement of
libido or semen quality have not been proven to be of benefit in dogs; however, no scientific
studies have been reported.
Semen quality, specifically number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate, is improved by collection
of semen in the presence of an estrous teaser bitch. In the absence of a teaser, the smooth muscle-
contracting drug, prostaglandin F2alpha (Lutalyse"M), given at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg subcutane-
ously 10 to 15min before semen collection is attempted, has been demonstrated to increase
number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate. Mild side effects may be observed, including salivation
and panting. Similarly, gonadotropin releasing hormone may be given at a dose of 1 to 2 μg/kg
subcutaneously 60 min before semen is collected; this presumably works by increasing serum
testosterone concentrations and may be best used in apprehensive or shy males.
Clinical implications
 Use of nutritional supplements for subfertile dogs is not supported by the veterinary literature.
Veterinarians and their clients must weigh potential benefits against any known risks before using
these compounds.
Supplemental reading
Comhaire FH, El Garem Y, Mahmoud A, et al. 2005. Combined conventional/antioxidant “Astaxanthin"
treatment for male infertility: A double blind, randomized trial. Asian J Androl 7:257-262.
117
118 Are there dietary supplements proven to improve semen quality in male dogs?
Hess M. 2006. Documented and anecdotal effects of certain pharmaceutical agents used to enhance semen
quality in the dog. Theriogenology 66:613-617.
Turk G, Sonmez M, Aydin M, et al. 2008. Effects of pomegranate juice consumption on sperm quality,
spermatogenic cell density, antioxidant activity and testosterone level in male rats. Clin Nutr
27:289-296.
NOIJ
REPR
3NINVT
37
Can I locate retained testes without surgery?
General information
Cryptorchidism is a common condition in dogs, with a reported incidence of 1.2 to 6.8%. One
or both testes may be retained; in unilateral cryptorchids, the right testis is the one most com-
monly retained. Testes are more commonly retained in the inguinal area than in the abdomen.
 Retained testes are usually small and atrophic, and are more likely to undergo neoplastic change
when the dog is aged than are descended testes.
The small size of retained testes makes them difficult to identify by palpation or diagnostic
imaging. There are no reports of successful identification of non-neoplastic retained testes using
radiography. Ultrasonography may be used, especially to confrm that a palpable inguinal mass
is a retained testis and not a superficial inguinal lymph node. Although testicular tissue has a
and may be difficult to identify unless torsion of the spermatic cord or neoplasia has caused
testicular enlargement. Pathology of the testis may distort architecture of the tissue, causing a
mixed echogenicity. Because location of retained testes is variable, ultrasonography is not com-
monly used to differentiate bilaterally cryptorchid dogs from castrated dogs.
Clinical implications
  sn    si    
dogs may be achieved by (1) palpation of the prostate—the prostate atrophies within weeks of
surgery in castrated males and shows normal age-related hypertrophy in males with testes; or by
 gonadotropin releasing hormone intramuscularly and draw blood for testosterone assay 60 min
Although it may be possible to identify retained testicular tissue using ultrasound, surgical
exploration and castration must be recommended to remove that male from the breeding pool.
Decision tree analysis has demonstrated that the life span of cryptorchid dogs left intact does not
vary significantly from dogs castrated at 1 year of age. However, unilateral cryptorchids are fertile,
and this is a hereditary disorder. In one study evaluating genetic counseling for dog breeders,
breeders voiced general disinterest in putting long-term breed or population concerns above
short-term personal concerns regarding choice of stud dog in their kennel. It has also been
demonstrated that choosing sires and dams to increase litter size may increase incidence of
119
120 Can I locate retained testes without surgery?
cryptorchidism in a given kennel. Veterinarians should stress the need for castration of all crypt-
orchid dogs, whether unilateral or bilateral.
Supplemental reading
Birchard SJ, Nappier M. 2008. Cryptorchidism. Compendium 30:325-336.
 Davidson EB, Reaugh HF, Bahr RJ. 2006. What is your diagnosis: Cryptorchidism in a dog. J Arm Vet Med
Assoc 228:203-204.
Gubbels EDJ, Scholten J, Janss L, et al. 2008. Relationship of cryptorchidism with sex ratios and litter sizes
in 12 dog breeds. Anim Reprod Sci. doi:10.1016/j.anireprosci.2008.07.004.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 313-317.
Ortega-Pacheco A, Rodriguez-Buenfl JC, Segura-Correa JC, et al. 2006. Pathological conditions of the
reproductive organs of male stray dogs in the tropics: Prevalence, risk factors, morphological findings
and testosterone concentrations. Reprod Dom Anim 41:429-437.
Peters MAJ, Van Sluijs FJ. 2002. Decision analysis tree for deciding whether to remove an undescended
testis from a young dog. Vet Rec 150:408-411.
Aq wnoid Suasuo-aua e jo as a rooz 'e ia f yaong u uA '5TT ssue av ua ue
Dutch breeders for four hereditary health problems in boxer dogs. Prev Vet Med 63:39-50.
Yates D, Hayes G, Heffernan M, et al. 2003. Incidence of cryptorchidism in dogs and cats. Vet Rec
152:502-504.
NOI
00
REPR
CANINE
38
Is there a medical therapy to cause testes to
descend into the scrotum after 8 weeks of age?
General information
Normal testicular descent occurs in three phases. Abdominal translocation is downward migra-
tion and maintenance of the testis near the internal inguinal ring as the abdominal cavity elon-
 gates. The testis and epididymis on each side are attached to the gubernaculum, which mediates
movement by growth and subsequent dehydration and shrinking of this gelatinous connective
tissue. Physical presence of the testis is necessary at this stage, suggesting testicular weight, and
secretion of testosterone and other secretory factors is important for this part of the process to
Occur. Transinguinal migration is movement of the epididymis and testis through the abdominal
wall, and is mediated by intra-abdominal pressure. Because the inguinal canal does not close
until 6 months of age in dogs, on average, transinguinal migration of testes is possible until the
said age and dogs should not be definitely diagnosed as cryptorchid until they are older than 6
months. Inguinoscrotal migration is movement of the epididymis and testis into the scrotum.
Testosterone is not necessary for this final stage, although it may play a role in the development
of supportive structures guiding testicular movement.
Many factors play a role in testicular descent. Genetic factors most certainly play a role. In
dogs, mode of heritability is undefined but testicular descent is most likely multi-genetic. The
trait can be carried by bitches or dogs. Epigenetic factors (alterations in gene expression) and
environmental factors also play a role.
Retained testes are significantly more likely to become neoplastic than are descended testes.
Because of this predisposition to neoplasia and the heritable component of pathogenesis, bilateral
castration is strongly recommended. Cryptorchid dogs cannot be shown in conformation dog
shows sanctioned by the American Kennel Club. Administration of drugs or performance of
surgery to cause testicular descent may permit showing of a dog with a heritable defect. The only
ethically defensible argument for such treatment is to cause descent of the testes into the scrotum
to allow castration through a pre-scrotal incision, rather than to require a more invasive abdomi
nal exploration.
Compounds that have been reported to cause testicular descent in dogs include gonadotropin
releasing hormone (50 to 750 μg one to six times in dogs aged 2 to 4 months, success rate 26.6%
of 301 dogs), and human chorionic gonadotropin (100 to 1000 IU intramuscularly four times in
a 2-week period in dogs less than 16 weeks of age, success rate 84% of 25 dogs, or 300 to 1000 IU
three to four times in dogs of an unspecified age, success rate 75%).
121
122  Is there a medical therapy to cause testicular descent?
Clinical implications
No single compound has been demonstrated consistently to cause testicular descent in dogs.
Artificially inducing testicular descent is an ethical concern, as it may fraudulently increase the
value of a dog with a heritable defect.
Supplemental reading
Amann RP, Veeramachaneni DNR. 2007. Cryptorchidism in common eutherian mammals. Reproduction
133:541-561.
Berkow R (ed.). 1982. The Merck Manual. Rahway, NJ: Merck and Co., Inc., p. 1609.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. 1996. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 697-710.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 313-317.
NOII
00
REPR
CANINE
Section V
Canine disease
39
How do I diagnose and treat dystocia?
Etiology
Dystocia, abnormal whelping, is best defined by comparison with normal whelping. Normal
whelping occurs in three stages. Stage I of labor is the long stage during which the cervix dilates.
 The bitch acts restless, may show nesting behavior, pants, is often inappetent, and may vomit.
 She may be very clingy or very reclusive. Duration is 12 to 24 h. Stage II is active contractions
and passage of the fetuses. A small volume of clear, tan, or slightly blood-tinged fluid may be
passed before any pups are born. Once active contractions are seen, a pup should be born within
4h; if the bitch is pushing hard constantly, a pup should be passed within 30 min. No more than
2h should be allowed to pass between pups. Pups may be passed within the amniotic sac or the
sac may rupture as the pup passes through the birth canal. At birth, the bitch should tear open
the sac, if present, and vigorously lick the pup to stimulate respiration. Stage II is passage of the
placentas. Stages II and IHl often alternate. Placentas should be passed within about 15min of
passage of a pup. The normal canine placenta is green in color due to pigmentation in the mar-
ginal hematomas on the edge of the placenta. The bitch may try to eat the placentas; this is an
atavistic behavior that serves to keep the den clean to avoid attraction of predators (the placentas
have no nutritional or therapeutic value).
Maternal causes of dystocia include uterine inertia, inadequate size of the birth canal, and
abnormality of the pregnancy. Uterine inertia can be primary (no propulsive uterine contrac-
tions) or secondary (muscle fatigue after unproductive uterine contractions). Primary uterine
inertia may be associated with hypocalcemia and may have a hereditary component. Low endog-
enous serum oxytocin concentrations may be a cause of primary uterine inertia in bitches with
normal serum calcium concentration and may exacerbate the condition in bitches with low
serum calcium concentrations. Secondary uterine inertia usually occurs in the presence of an
obstruction preventing passage of a pup into the birth canal. Inadequate size of the birth canal
may occur in bitches with previous pelvic fracture or a mass in the birth canal. The most com-
monly described abnormality of pregnancy associated with dystocia in bitches is uterine torsion.
Fetal causes of dystocia include fetal oversize and abnormalities of presentation, posture, and
position. Fetal oversize may be absolute (normal birth canal, oversize pup) as in small litters or
in bitches with gestational diabetes mellitus, or relative (part of pup too big to fit through normal
birth canal) as in pups with hydrocephalus. Presentation is defined by which part of the pup first
enters the birth canal. Cranial presentation (muzzle and extended forelimbs presenting to the
125
126  How do I diagnose and treat dystocia?
birth canal) and caudal presentation (tail and extended rearlimbs presenting) are normal. Exam-
ples of abnormal presentations include breech (tail and flexed limbs presenting) and transverse
(spine presenting). Position is defined by disposition of the extremities relative to the body. An
example of abnormal position is neck flexed to the side.
Other disorders associated with dystocia are prolonged gestation (more than 64 days from
ovulation or 71 days from a single breeding); drop in rectal temperature of greater than 1 F more
than 24h ago; and abnormal vulvar discharge (green discharge prior to the birth of any pups is
indicative of placental separation).
Clinical signs
Bitches in labor may look tired but should not appear systemically ill. Disorientation, vomiting.
or aggression are all abnormal during active labor in bitches. Normal vulvar discharge may be
clear, tan, or slightly blood-tinged. It should not be purulent or frankly hemorrhagic, and should
not be green if no pups have been passed.
Diagnosis
History findings suggestive of dystocia are prolonged time limits (longer than 24h of stage I
labor; more than 4h since onset of stage II labor or more than 30 min since onset of active,
repetitive contractions; more than 2h between pups; more than 24 h since body temperature fell
 by full 1 °F, indicative of decline in serum progesterone concentrations), overtly abnormal pre-
sentation of a pup, or appearance of systemic ilness or abnormal vulvar discharge from the bitch.
A brief but complete physical examination should be performed. A digital vaginal examination
will not permit assessment of cervical dilation, as the canine vagina is too long for human fingers
to reach the cervix. Circular constrictions palpated on digital vaginal examination are rings of
vaginal constriction. A pup may be palpable in the birth canal.
Radiographs permit assessment of number and size of pups remaining in the uterus, and give
some indication of presentation and posture (Fig. 39-1). Viability cannot be determined
5
15
NIN
Figure 39-1: Pregnancy radiograph. Note head of pup in the birth canal (star).
Canine disease 127
accurately from radiography alone; signs of fetal death (gas within and around the fetus, collapse
 of the skull and axial skeleton) may not appear for up to 24 h after fetal death. Abdominal ultra-
sound is best used to determine viability by assessment of fetal heart rate. Normal fetal heart rate
should be about twice that of the bitch. Fetal heart rate less than 170bpm is indicative of fetal
distress.
External parturition monitors are available for use in bitches. These devices measure changes
in intra-abdominal pressure and permit interpretation of uterine contractility (see Resources).
Treatment
 Manipulation of pups with abnormal presentation or position is difficult in dogs due to size
restrictions. It is easy to dislocate joints and pull skin off pups while attempting manipulation.
Instruments should not be used.
Oxytocin therapy is appropriate if radiographs have demonstrated normal size and likelihood
that the pups can pass through the birth canal. Doses of 2 to 5IU can be given intramuscularly
at 20- to 30-min intervals for no more than three doses. Doses of greater than 5IU cause uterine
tetany, not propulsive uterine contractions. Repeated doses do not promote continuing uterine
contractions because the uterus becomes refractory to oxytocin therapy as receptors fill on the
myometrium and do not readily disociate. Suggested initial doses are 0.25 IU for dogs weighing
less than 111b (5kg), 0.5 to 1.0IU for dogs weighing 11 to 221b (5 to 10kg), 1 to 31U for dogs
weighing 22 to 661b (10 to 30kg), and 3 to 5IU for dogs weighing more than 661b (30kg).
Oxytocin increases frequency of uterine contractions; calcium increases strength of uterine con-
tractions. Some bitches that do not respond to oxytocin therapy alone respond well to oxytocin
and calcium given concurrently.
Table 39-1. Should the bitch be treated medically or surgically?
This scheme should be abandoned and Cesarean section perfommed if green vulvar discharge is evident
prior to the birth of any pups, if fetal heart rate (by ultrasound) is less than 170bprm, or if the bitch
appears systemically ill.
Key for dystocia management:
1a. The puppy is present in the birth canal and can be manipulated for delivery ..
2
1b. The puppy is not present in the birth canal or cannot be manipulated for delivery.
3
other pups are present in utero...
E
 2b. Attempt delivery with lubrication and gentle traction. If the pup cannot be delivered.
4
3a. Fetal heart rate is less than 150 bpm
4
 3b. Fetal heart rate is 150bpm or more.
5
4. Perform Cesarean section.
5a. Abdominal radiographs have been taken...
6
5b. Abdominal radiographs have not been taken
7
6a. Pups are too large to pass or are malpositioned
4
6b. Pups are not too large to pass and are not malpositioned..
8
7.
Take abdominal radiographs and go to....
6
Ba. Four or fewer pups are present...
6
Sb. More than four pups are present...
9.
 Oxytocin therapy may be attempted as follows: Give 2 to 5IU intrarmuscularly (IM); watch
for effect for 20 min. If no effect is seen, give 2 to 5IU oxytocin IM plus a 5-ml bolus of
10% calcium gluconate subcutaneously and watch for effect for 20 min. If no effect seen..
128 How do I diagnose and treat dystocia?
Bitches with pups in distress, that are carrying pups too large to pass through the birth canal,
or that are nonresponsive to oxytocin therapy should undergo Cesarean section (see Chapter 17
and 18; Table 39-1). In one study, 63.8% of bitches with dystocia underwent Cesarean section
as therapy.
Supplemental reading
Bergstrom A, Frannson B, Lagerstedt A-S, et al. 2006. Primary uterine inertia in 27 bitches: Aetiology and
treatment. J Small Anim Pract 47:456-460.
 Bergstrom A, Nodtvedt A, Lagerstedt A-S, et al. 2006. Incidence and breed predilection for dystocia and
risk factors for Cesarean section in a Swedish population of insured dogs. Vet Surg 35:786-791.
Davidson AP. Uterine and fetal monitoring in the bitch. 2001. Vet Clin North Am 31:305-313.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 108-124.
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. Use lower doses of oxytocin for dystocia. Vet Med 102: 163.
5
DISEA:
40
How do I diagnose and treat eclampsia
(hypocalcemia)?
Etiology
Eclampsia in dogs is more properly termed hypocalcemia, as it is a constellation of clinical signs
associated with decreased calcium concentrations in serum and presumably at the cellular level.
The condition in dogs should not be confused with pre-eclampsia in pregnant women, which is
a disorder associated with high blood pressure and proteinuria.
 Hypocalcemia develops as the fetuses mineralize and to an even greater extent when the bitch
lactates. Lactation is a huge drain on body calcium stores. Bitches cannot take in enough calcium
through the gastrointestinal tract to support milk production and so must draw calcium stores
from the bone through the action of parathyroid hormone. Inadequate calcium in the extracel-
lular compartment and subsequent decrease in membrane-bound calcium leads to spontaneous
and repeated depolarization of muscle, or tetany.
down-regulation of parathyroid hormone. Diets balanced for calcium and phosphorus with
ratios of 1: 1 to 1.2: 1 and that meet American Association of Feed Control Officials standards
for gestation, lactation, and growth, or for all stages of life, are recommended during
pregnancy.
Clinical signs
Clinical eclampsia is by far most common in small- breed bitches nursing large litters in their
 second or third week of lactation. However, any breed can be affected and clinical signs of hypo-
calcemia may occur during parturition (see Chapter 39). Inadequate maintenance of total body
calcium is manifested initially by restlessness, muscle weakness or tremors, facial pruritus, and
neglect of the pups. As the condition advances, tachycardia or bradycardia, and dilation of the
 pupils may be seen. End-stage eclampsia is characterized by convulsions and subsequent
hyperthermia.
Diagnosis
Decreased total blood calcium (less than 7 mg/100 ml) or significantly decreased ionized calcium
(less than 0.8 mmol/l) is diagnostic for hypocalcemia. Ionized calcium is the biologically active
fraction of total calcium and its value cannot be extrapolated from direct or adjusted total
calcium measurement. Hypomagnesemia and hyperkalemia may also be present.
129
130 How do I diagnose and treat eclampsia (hypocalcemia)?
If calcium measurement is not readily available in practice, treatment may be instituted based
on signalment, history, and clinical signs. Body temperature should be evaluated in all dogs
presenting with seizures.
Treatment
d u  oon  o (r n e ana ao se r
sentation. Seizures should be controlled as for any cause, with administration of diazepam
intravenously or other sedative or anesthetic agents.
Hypocalcemia is treated with intravenous calcium gluconate (10%) to effect. Most common
doses described are 0.22 to 0.44 ml/kg or a bolus of 5 to 10 ml. The heart should be ausculted or
an electrocardiogram strip monitored while calcium is administered intravenously, and therapy
stopped as clinical signs resolve or if any abnormality of heart rate or rhythm is noted. Because
calcium is irritating, caution should be taken to be aware of concentration of calcium
administered.
After initial clinical signs have resolved, treatment with a depot of calcium intramuscularly or
subcutaneously allows gradual absorption of calcium until oral calcium can be given. Oral
calcium gluconate or calcium carbonate must be administered with vitamin D to ensure gastro-
intestinal absorption; doses are 1 to 3g and 10,000 to 25,000 IU, respectively.
Oral therapy should continue until pups are weaned. Recurrence in the same lactation is not
uncommon; if clinical eclampsia recurs in a given lactation, pups should be removed and
hand-fed.
Supplemental reading
Aroch I, Srebro H, Shpigel NY. 1999. Serum electrolyte concentration in bitches with eclampsia. Vet Rec
145:318-320.
Drobatz KJ, Casey KK. 2000. Eclanmpsia in dogs: 31 cases (1995-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:216-219.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 141-143.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ. 2005. Prediction of serum ionized calcium concentration by use of serum total
calcium concentration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:1330-1336.
15
上
51
NIN
41
What are the causes of prolonged vulvar
discharge after whelping in bitches?
Etiology
 Normal postpartum discharge in bitches, termed lochia, is mucoid in character, varies in color
 from blood-tinged to green or brown, is odorless, and decreases in volume over time, with
complete resolution by 3 weeks after whelping on average. Postpartum vulvar discharge may be
considered abnormal due to character or duration of exudation.
Postpartum purulent discharge occurs most commonly as a manifestation of metritis. Metritis
is a simple uterine infection, usually due to ascending infection with a microorganism from the
vaginal flora after some insult to the uterus such as dystocia or retained feti or placentas.
Hemorrhagic discharge is associated with subinvolution of placental sites (SIPS), as is excessive
duration of vulvar discharge after whelping. Subinvolution of placental sites is, as the name
implies, a disorder associated with slow or abnormal healing of the endometrium after loss of
the endotheliochorial placenta at parturition. Trophoblast-like cells in the uterus continue to
invade the endometrium and prevent normal thrombus formation in endometrial blood vessels.
Young bitches whelping their first litter are the ones most commonly diagnosed with SIPS; this
may be because people choose not to breed affected bitches a second time.
Clinical signs
 Metritis is characterized by exudation of purulent vulvar discharge, fever associated with inap-
petance and neglect of pups, and other clinical signs of systemic disease. The occasional bitch
will present in hypovolemic or septic shock. SIPS is characterized by prolonged exudation of
bloody vulvar discharge that is not inflammatory in nature when examined microscopically.
Bitches with SIPS show no clinical signs of systemic disease.
Diagnosis
Metritis is diagnosed by cytology and culture of the vulvar discharge. Remember that the vagina
 s e yo   n i si    e s n s
Abdominal radiographs or ultrasound may permit determination of an underlying cause of
 ongoing inflammation, such as retained fetal material or fluid in the uterus. Complete blood
count may reveal a neutrophilia. Hypoglycemia may be present in septicemic bitches.
SIPS is a rule-out diagnosis. Bitches with persistent vulvar discharge postpartum should be
tested for brucellosis (see Chapter 44) and evaluated for metritis. Definitive diagnosis requires
131
132What are the causes of prolonged vulvar discharge after whelping in bitches?
histopathology of the placental sites and so is usually reserved for bitches treated with ovario-
hysterectomy (OHE). Other rule-outs to consider when evaluating a bitch for persistent post-
partum hemorrhagic vulvar discharge are coagulopathy (congenital, such as VonWillebrand's
disease, or acquired, such as anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity), trauma, and vaginal
neoplasia.
Treatment
Most bitches with metritis have a simple infection and recover well with antibiotic therapy guided
by culture and sensitivity. Empiric therapy can be instituted with ampicillin (22 mg/kg per os
twice daily) or amoxicillin-clavulanate ( 14 mg/kg per os twice daily). Bitches with severe systemic
disease may require fluid replacement and intravenous antibiotic therapy. Evacuation of the
uterus may be attempted if significant fluid or fetal remnants are present. Oxytocin rarely is
effective at inducing uterine contractions beyond the first several days postpartum. Prostaglandin
F2alpha (LutalyserM) is effective at inducing uterine contractions at any time postpartum (50 to
250 μg/kg subcutaneously once daily to effect). Doses at the high end of the dose range are associ-
 ated with more severe side effects. Side effects of prostaglandin F2alpha therapy in dogs are
referable to contraction of the gastrointestinal tract and include hypersalivation, vomiting, and
diarrhea. Signs appear within minutes of injection and subside within 60 min. Care should be
taken when considering administration of any drug to cause uterine contractions, as the infected
uterus may be friable. The very occasional ill bitch may become shocky when treated with pros-
taglandin F2alpha; it is strongly recommended that bitches be treated in the hospital and observed
for a time after the drug is administered.
There is no specific medical therapy for SIPS. Most bitches do well with observation and
periodic assessment of complete blood count for anemia and evaluation of the uterus to ensure
that infection has not developed. Discharge resolves in most bitches before the subsequent pro-
estrus. There are reports in the literature of the use of uterine contracting agents, such as oxytocin
or ergonovine derivatives. These may cause pooling of blood within the uterus and predispose
to infection and so are not recommended by this author Therapy with progestogens has been
reported with the idea that stimulation of the endometrium will hasten sloughing of residual
trophoblast-like cells. Success with such therapy has not been consistent. Bitches with severe SIPS
or that are not intended for further breeding should undergo OHE.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 129-131, 139-141.
5
51
NIN
42
What is the best treatment for puppy vaginitis?
Should the dog be allowed to go through one
heat cycle?
Etiology
 Puppy or juvenile vaginitis is most commonly an incidental finding during physical examination
of prepuberal female dogs. The vulvar lips are glued together with a sticky, odorless, clear to
white discharge. Puppy vaginitis may consist of inflammation due to urinary tract disease or
abnormal vaginal anatomy with secondary infection. Often, puppy vaginitis is idiopathic.
Clinical signs
Most dogs present with small amount of mucoid, odorless vulvar discharge. Discharge may be
caught at the vulvar lips or in the perivulvar hair. Occasionally, owners will describe seeing a
string of discharge hanging from the vulva when the bitch urinates. Some bitches exhibit vulvar
licking. Owners should be questioned about any evidence of urinary incontinence.
Diagnosis
Evaluation of the urinary tract and vagina should be performed concurrently to permit localiza-
tion of the primary disease process, if possible. Diagnostic tests should include urinalysis and
urine culture on samples collected by cystocentesis; digital vaginal examination and vaginoscopy,
which may require sedation in dogs experiencing pain or dogs with a small vaginal vault; and
microscopic examination of vulvar discharge. Diagnosis of vaginitis requires demonstration of
inflammation in the vaginal vault. Normal vaginal mucosa should have the color of normal oral
mucosa; inflamed mucosa varies from dark pink to dark red (see Chapter 3, Figs. 3-3 and 3-4).
The vulvar discharge of dogs with juvenile vaginitis is mucoid with scattered inflammatory cells
(Fig. 42-1).
 Positive urine culture and inflammatory urine sediment are suggestive of underlying or con-
current urinary tract infection. Vaginal strictures or septa are often palpable on digital vaginal
 a ia  o  pi e po sssd d so e sn 
underlying cause for vaginitis may not be identified in some cases.
Treatment
ulvar area with baby wipes or a nonalcohol-based otic cleanser may be beneficial. For severely
affected dogs, treatment options are as follows.
- Appropriate antibiotic therapy, based on culture and sensitivity of a vaginal specimen. If
empirical antibiotic therapy is required, oral amoxicillin-clavulanate has been demonstrated
effective against 91 to 100% of bacteria commonly involved in vaginitis in female dogs.
133
134  What is the best treatment for puppy vaginitis?
Figure 42-1: Vaginal cytology from a prepuberal dog with vaginitis
- Correction of underlying causes of inflammation, if identified. Urinary tract infections should
be treated with appropriate antibiotics, based on urine culture and sensitivity, and recurrent
urinary tract infections investigated by radiography or cystoscopy to look for uroliths or other
inciting causes of persistent disease. Vaginal anatomic anomalies should be defined by vaginog-
raphy before surgical repair is attempted. Surgery is rarely performed in female dogs before they
reach mature size.
- Treatment of possible subclinical urinary incontinence with secondary urine pooling and
irritation of the vaginal mucosa. The drug used is phenylpropanolamine (1.0 to 1.5mg/kg per
os two to three times daily). Estrogen drugs, for example diethylstilbestrol, should not be used
in prepuberal dogs as they may hasten physeal closure.
- Douching, or flushing of the vaginal vault, has not been demonstrated as an effective therapy
for vaginitis in dogs.
 Dogs with clinical signs of atopy (pruritus, alopecia, licking at the paws, recurrent otitis) may
 benefit from therapy for atopy (diphenhydramine at 2 to 4 mg/kg per os three times daily, or
hydroxyzine at 1 to 2mg/kg per os two to three times daily; with either drug, taper dose if treat-
ment is effective or if the side effect of sedation is severe).
There is no science to guide the answer regarding suitability of permitting a female dog to go
through one heat cycle before ovariohysterectomy (OHE) as a posible cure for puppy vaginitis.
Anecdotal reports suggest that some bitches with persistent prepuberal vaginitis resolve their
disease after going through one heat cycle. Whether this is due to the hormonal changes of estrus
altering the vaginal epithelium or just to maturity of the dog and her immune function is not
known. This decision must be made on a case-by-case basis, remembering that the primary
 benefit of prepuberal OHE is a substantial decrease in predisposition to mammary neoplasia
when aged (see Chapter 22).
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., p. 235.
Root Kustritz MV. 2008. Vaginitis in dogs: A simple approach to a complex condition. Vet Med
103:562-567.
43
What is the best treatment for chronic vaginitis in
a spayed female dog?
Etiology
 Infection with one or more species of the normal bacterial flora overlies a primary cause of
 inflammation. The most common underlying causes of inflammation in dogs with vaginitis are
urinary tract infection and vaginal anomalies.
Clinical signs
Vaginitis in spayed female dogs is usually evidenced by mucoid to mucopurulent vulvar dis-
charge. Discharge is rarely sanguinous; bloody vulvar discharge is more often associated with
estrus or ovarian remnant syndrome, coagulopathy, trauma, neoplasia of the genitourinary tract
s   sa m  so  e sd o 
vulvar licking and urinary incontinence. Clitoral hypertrophy may develop secondary to vulvar
licking (Fig. 43-1).
Diagnosis
Evaluation of the urinary tract and vagina should be performed concurrently to permit localiza-
tion of the primary disease process, if possible. Diagnostic tests should include urinalysis and
urine culture on samples collected by cystocentesis; digital vaginal examination and vaginoscopy,
which may require sedation in dogs experiencing pain or dogs with a small vaginal vault; and
microscopic examination of vulvar discharge. Vaginal cytology in affected dogs reveals non-
cornified epithelial cells, mucoid debris, and polymorphonuclear cells (Fig. 43-2). Diagnosis of
vaginitis requires demonstration of inflammation in the vaginal vault. Normal vaginal mucosa
should have the color of normal oral mucosa; inflamed mucosa varies from dark pink to dark
red (see Chapter 3, Figs. 3-3 and 3-4).
Positive urine culture and inflammatory urine sediment are suggestive of underlying or con-
current urinary tract infection. Vaginal strictures or septa are often palpable on digital vaginal
examination as a blockage prohibiting passage of a gloved finger into the vaginal vault. An
underlying cause for vaginitis may not be identified in some cases.
Differentials for mucopurulent vulvar discharge in bitches include onset of diestrus (see
Chapter 2), Brucella canis infection (see Chapter 44), metritis (see Chapter 41), and pyometra
(see Chapter 47).
135
136 what is the best treatment for chronic vaginitis in a spayed female dog?
Figure 43-1: Clitoral hypertrophy.
5
i y bop peds pe ue woy Aoo jeui -it ana
上
15
Treatment
Treatment consists of:
· Appropriate antibiotic therapy, based on culture and sensitivity of a vaginal specimen
 If empirical antibiotic therapy is required, oral amoxicillin-clavulanate has been demonstrated
effective against 91 to 100% of bacteria commonly involved in vaginitis in female dogs.
· Correction of underlying causes of inflammation, if identified
 Urinary tract infections should be treated with appropriate antibiotics, based on urine culture
and sensitivity, and recurrent urinary tract infections investigated by radiography or cystoscopy
Canine disease 137
to look for uroliths or other inciting causes of persistent disease. Vaginal anatomic anomalies
 should be defined by vaginography before surgical repair is attempted.
· Treatment of possible subclinical urinary incontinence with secondary urine pooling and
irritation of the vaginal mucosa
 Drugs used include diethylstilbestrol (0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg per os once daily for 5 days [maximum
dose = 1 mg], tapering to every 4 to 7 days) or phenylpropanolamine (1.0 to 1.5 mg/kg per 0s
two to three times daily).
· Glucocorticoid therapy may be attempted in bitches with no history of urinary incontinence.
Specific dose regimens have not been established.
· Douching, or flushing of the vaginal vault, has not been demonstrated as an effective therapy
for vaginitis in adult spayed female dogs.
- Dogs with clinical signs of atopy (pruritus, alopecia, licking at the paws, recurrent otitis) may
 p s a so rd   on 7 ie  oe o   n
hydroxyzine at 1 to 2mg/kg per os two to three times daily; with either drug, taper dose if treat-
ment is effective or if the side effect of sedation is severe).
Supplemental reading
Crawford JT, Adams WM. 2002. Influence of vestibulovaginal stenosis, pelvic bladder, and recessed vulva
on response to treatment for clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease in dogs: 38 cases (1990-1999).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:995.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., p. 235.
Root Kustritz MV. 2008. Theriogenology question of the month: Diestrual discharge in a bitch. J Arm Vet
Med Assoc 232:841842.
Root Kustritz MV. 2008. Vaginitis in dogs: A simple approach to a complex condition. Vet Med
103:562-567.
Wang KY, Sami VF, Chew DJ, et al. 2006. Vestibular, vaginal, and urethral relations in spayed dogs with
and without lower urinary tract signs. J Vet Intern Med 20:1065-1073.
44
How do I test for and treat canine brucellosis?
Etiology
Canine brucellosis is most often due to infection with Brucella canis. Infection with other Brucella
 sp. may occur but is uncommon. Transmission is by ingestion or sexual contact, with organisms
 shed in all body fluids. Canine brucellosis is a reemerging disease, perhaps due to increased
movement of dogs between states and countries.
Clinical signs
Many bitches and dogs carrying brucellosis are asymptomatic or present for infertility. Classical
clinical signs in infected bitches are late-term pregnancy loss, birth of stilborn pups, and persis-
tent purulent vulvar discharge. Classical clinical signs in male dogs are epididymitis and orchitis
with subsequent poor semen quality. Infection of other tissues may occur and be evidenced as
uveitis, meningitis, or diskospondylitis.
Diagnosis
Culture
Culture of the organism is the testing modality that identifies disease soonest after infection, and
is definitive. However, culture is difficult as contaminants often overgrow Brucella and there is
a risk of infection of laboratory workers since brucellosis is a zoonotic disease.
Serologictesting
Serologic testing is performed more commonly than culture. Serologic tests may identify anti-
bodies raised against Brucella antigens or may identify portions of the Brucella organism itself.
Because of variations in specificity and sensitivity of available tests, more than one test may be
required for definitive diagnosis (Table 44-1).
Aggiutinationtests
Agglutination tests identify antibodies raised against cell surface proteins of Brucella. Since
Brucella shares cell surface proteins with many common bacteria, including Staph, Strep, and
Bordetella, false positive results are common with this type of test. Agglutination tests do not
become positive until about 8 to 12 weeks after infection. The rapid slide or rapid card agglutina-
tion test is easy to run in-house using instructions included in the kit (see Resources; Fig. 44-1).
139
140 How do I test for and treat canine brucellosis?
Table 44-1. Diagnostic testing sequence for canine brucellosis.
Diagnostic Test
Negative Test
Positive Test Result
Interpretation
Result
 Rapid slide agglutination
X
The dog is not actively infected
testing (RSAT)
with Brucella canis.
X
RSAT results often yield false
positives. Testing with tests other
than an agglutination test should
be performed.
Agarose gel
X
The dog is not actively infected
immunodiffusion (AGID)
with B. canis.
test
X
AGID test results for cytoplasmic
antigens are specific and positive
results indicate active infection.
CanineBrucellosis
AntibodyTestKit
D-TecCB
Figure 44-1: Rapid slide agglutination test for canine brucellosis (reprinted with permission from Root Kustritz
MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successfut Breeoing and Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier)
5
The tube agglutination test used at commercial laboratories provides a titer instead of a yes-no
上
answer. Serologic titers of less than 1:100 are considered negative, of 1:100 to 1: 200 suspects,
15
and greater than 1 :200 indicative of active infection. Agglutination tests are good screening tests.
All negative results can be considered true negatives. All positive results should be reevaluated
using a different kind of test.
Other testing modalities
Agarose gel immunodiffusion (AGID) testing is considered the gold standard by the Centers for
 Disease Control and Prevention. This technique tests for antibodies against both cell wall anti-
 gens, which are shared with other bacterial species, and cytoplasmic antigens, which are unique
to Brucella sp. This test becomes positive about 12 weeks after infection and remains positive
Canine disease 141
even after the animal becomes abacteremic, making it valuable for its accuracy and its ability to
identify chronic infection. Positive test results are considered true positives. The AGID test for
canine brucellosis is available at Cornell University and at the University of Georgia (see
Resources).
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests are described in the literature, again iden-
tifying antibodies against either cell wall or cytoplasmic antigens. While sensitivity and specificity
of these tests are very good, no ELISA tests are commercially available as of this writing.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing identifies minute amounts of Brucella proteins. It is
a remarkably specific and very sensitive test. Current research has evaluated only naturally
infected dogs so time from infection until the test becomes positive is not reported. As of this
writing, there are no commercially available PCR tests for canine brucellosis in the United States.
Treatment
 Infected animals are intermittently bacteremic and B. canis organisms may be sequestered inside
cells. Most therapies described use a combination of a tetracycline and a streptomycin. Because
streptomycin is not readily available, some protocols recommend use of a combination of a
tetracycline and an aminoglycoside; all dogs to be subjected to this regimen must first be checked
for normal renal function. Therapy with enrofloxacin as a sole agent has also been described.
Any antibiotic therapy will cause a decrease in bacteremia and subsequent decrease in antibody
titers. However, recrudescence of disease is common and infected dogs must be regularly tested
and retreated throughout their lives. Because the disease is difficult, if not impossible, to eradicate
Table 44-2. Management of Brucelia canis positive animals
Dogs housed in kennels
The kennel should be closed, with no dogs in or
out. All male and female dogs housed in the
kennel, including dogs not actively used for
breeding. should be screened with the rapid slide
agglutination testing. All positives should be
iechecked with the agarose gel immunodiffusion
(AGID). All negatives should be housed away from
any suspect or positive animals. Once a dog ha5
tested negative for 3 months in a row, it should be
housed in a specific area for negative animals. All
tue positives, identified by AGiD testing. should be
euthanized. Once all remaining animals in the
months, the kennel can be opened.
 Dogs housed in homes
Individual positive dogs should be spayed or
castrated and housed away from all other dogs on
the premises, or provided a home with no other
dogs. The infected dogs should not have access to
young children, elderly people, or
immunocompromised people. Testing should be
performed every 3 to 6 months and antibiotic
therapy used as necessary to minimize bacterial
142 How do I test for and treat canine brucellosis?
from an individual dog, spreads within kenneled dogs, and has zoonotic potential, euthanasia
of positive animals should be considered, especially in kennel situations or in homes where the
 positive animal would be housed with other dogs or exposed to people more likely to become
infected (young children, aged adults, immunocompromised children or adults; Table 44-2).
Supplemental reading
Allen A, Ngeleka M, Parker K. 2008. Brucellosis in kennels in western Canada. Can Vet J 49:625 [letter].
Hollett RB. 2006. Canine brucellosis: Outbreaks and compliance. Theriogenology 66:575-587.
Keid LB, Soares RM, Vasconcellos SA, et al. 2007. A polymerase chain reaction for detection of Brucella
canis in semen of naturally infected dogs. Theriogenology 67:1203-1210.
Keid LB, Soares RM, Vasconcellos SA, et al. 2007. A polymerase chain reaction for detection of Brucella
canis in vaginal swabs of naturally infected bitches. Theriogenology 68:1260-1270.
Keid LB,Soares RM, Vasconcellos SA, et al. 2009. Comparison of agar gel immunodiffusion test, rapid slide
agglutination test, microbiological culture and PCR for the diagnosis of canine brucellosis. Res Vet Sci
86:22-26.
Wanke MM. 2004. Canine brucellosis. Anim Reprod Sci 82-83:195-207.
5
EA
1510
45
What are the causes of vulvar discharge
during pregnancy?
Etiology
Vulvar discharge during pregnancy may arise from the urinary tract or the reproductive tract.
Urinary tract conditions that may occur during pregnancy include cystitis and urolithiasis and,
rarely, neoplasia. Reproductive tract conditions associated with vulvar discharge during preg-
nancy include brucellosis (see Chapter 44), pregnancy loss (see Chapter 46) and, rarely, pyometra
(see Chapter 47). Vaginitis is not commonly described to occur during pregnancy in bitches and
 neoplasia of the genitourinary tract is most common in bitches beyond breeding age.
Clinical signs
Character of vulvar discharge guides diagnostics and treatment. A small volume of clear, odorless
discharge may be normal, especially late in pregnancy. Urinary tract disease is usually associated
with dysuria and hematuria. Bitches infected with Brucella canis may present with no other signs;
classically, infected bitches abort affter 45 days of gestation. Pregnancy loss may be associated
with passage of dark, red to brown, odorless discharge or passage of visible fetal tissues. Pyometra
is associated with passage of purulent discharge that may be blood-tinged.
Diagnosis
Urinary tract disease is diagnosed as in any animal; urine samples should not be collected
by cystocentesis without ultrasound guidance to ensure that the uterus is not penetrated. Diag-
nostic tests include urinalysis and urine culture, radiography, and possibly urethroscopy and
cystoscopy.
Serologic testing for brucellosis is recommended on any bitch exhibiting vulvar discharge
during pregnancy (see Chapter 44). Causes of pregnancy loss and appropriate diagnostics are
discussed in Chapter 46; drawing of blood for measurement of progesterone in serum and per-
formance of a complete blood count (CBC), and collection of a sample of vulvar discharge for
aerobic culture are minimum requirements. Pyometra is characterized by presence of purulent
vulvar discharge, uterine enlargement defined by ultrasound, and signs of systemic disease
including leukocytosis. Pyometra and pregnancy can occur concurrently.
Treatment
Treatment is dependent on cause. If all diagnostic tests are normal (negative serologic test for
canine brucellosis, normal serum progesterone concentration, normal CBC, nonsignificant
143
aerobic culture results) and the pups appear viable on ultrasound (fetal heart rate greater than
170bpm), observation is recommended. Empirical antibiotic therapy will prevent ascension of
vaginal flora through the open cervix and subsequent secondary infection. For treatment of
brucellosis and other causes of pregnancy loss, and for pyometra, see the appropriate chapters.
Supplemental reading
 Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co.,pp. 225-228.
DISEA:
3NINT
46
What diagnostic tests can be performed to
identify the cause of pregnancy loss?
Etiology
 Pregnancy loss can occur due to infectious or noninfectious causes. Infectious causes include
bacterial infection with Brucella canis or other bacterial species, canine herpesvirus infection and
other viral diseases, and protozoal infection with Toxoplasma gondii and perhaps other protozoal
species. Noninfectious causes include hypoluteoidism, gestational diabetes mellitus, pregnancy
toxemia, developmental defects, and uterine disease.
Clinical signs
 Pregnancy loss is associated with vulvar discharge and may or may not be associated with signs
of systemic disease. Oftentimes, pregnancy loss is the presenting complaint. Signs that may be
seen with specific infections are described under Diagnosis.
Diagnosis
When presented with a pregnant dog that appears to be losing the pregnancy based on presence
of vulvar discharge or systemic signs of disease, a complete physical examination, abdominal
ultrasound, drawing of blood for measurement of concentration of progesterone in serum and
complete blood count, and collection of a sample of vulvar discharge for aerobic culture should
be performed. If fetal heart rate is less than 200 bpm, fetal distress is present and the fetuses
should be closely monitored for viability. If fetal heart rate consistently falls to less than 150 to
170bpm, fetal death is imminent and pregnancy loss should be allwed to continue or the pups
removed via hysterotomy or hysterectomy.
If fetal tissues or aborted pups are available for diagnosis, tissues should be harvested as soon
after death as possible and the tissues not frozen prior to examination. Fresh samples should be
refrigerated and submitted to a diagnostic laboratory and fixed samples should be submitted as
well. Tissues that should be submitted include liver, kidney, adrenal, small and large intestine,
lung, heart, thymus, brain, fetal membranes, and fetal stomach content or fetal fluids. Swabs
from the bitch's vagina should be submitted in transport media.
Infectious causes
Bacteria
B. canis is classically associated with late-term abortion and persistent purulent vulvar discharge.
Testing is described in Chapter 44.
145
146 what diagnostic tests can be performed to identify the cause of pregnancy loss?
Other bacteria reportedly associated with pregnancy loss in bitches are Salmonella sp., Cam-
pylobacter sp., Streptococcus sp., Listeria monocytogenes, and leptospires. Clinical signs that may
be present in bitches with salmonellosis include diarrhea, vomiting, fever, and depression. Dogs
with leptospirosis may present with concurrent abortion, meningitis, and uveitis. Many bitches
whose pregnancy loss is caused by bacterial infections present with vulvar discharge as the only
clinical sign of disease. Samples to be collected for bacterial culture include vulvar discharge;
passed fetal tissues; and stomach contents of aborted pups, which contain amniotic fluid and
therefore accurately reflect the intrauterine environment.
Viruses
The most common viral infection associated with pregnancy loss in bitches is canine herpesvirus
(CHV). Nonpregnant adult dogs exposed to the virus demonstrate few clinical signs, with small
vesicles on mucosal surfaces and slight vulvar and nasal discharge. Exposed bitches develop
enough memory T cells to permit them to respond immunologically to subsequent challenges.
Bitches considered to be at greatest risk are those who were first exposed to the virus during the
last 3 weeks of gestation. In these bitches, placentitis may develop and the bitch will lose pups
or give birth to a mixed litter of mummified, macerated, stillborn, and apparently normal pups.
Serologic testing is available but no commercially available test has excellent specificity and
sensitivity. Because CHV is not a very antigenic virus, active infection must be identifed by
assessment of acute and convalescent titers. Carriers cannot be identified by measurement of
antibody titers. Polymerase chain reaction tests, which identify portions of the CHV proteins,
have proven disappointing as a screening or diagnostic tool. Definitive diagnosis requires dem-
onstration of the pathognomonic signs of vasculitis in abdominal organs or virus isolation from
infected pups (see Chapter 96, Fig. 96-1).
Protozoa
T. gondi is the most common protozoal infection associated with pregnancy loss in dogs. Sys-
temic signs of disease are always present and include depression, diarrhea, ocular and nasal
 discharge, and anorexia. Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of cysts of the organism in
fetal tissues.
Other protozoa reportedly associated with pregnancy loss in bitches are Neospora caninum
 and Leishmania sp. The dog is the definitive host of N. caninum and reported seroprevalence is
q nom uso a a shop iso ii siede in shs ss u  se qi 
clinically affected.
Noninfectious causes
5
Hypoluteoidism
 Progesterone is required throughout pregnancy in all species. In bitches, all progesterone secre-
tion arises from the corpora lutea (CLs) on the ovaries. Premature lysis of the CLs is associated
with decreased serum progesterone and pregnancy loss. Progesterone concentrations rise imme-
diately after ovulation, peak at mid-gestation, and gradually fall through the last month of
pregnancy. If serum progesterone falls to less than 1 to 2ng/ml for more than 24 h, pregnancy
will not be maintained. If on initial assay serum progesterone is between 5 and 10ng/ml, the
author will retest in 1 to 2 days; if at any point serum progesterone falls to less than 5 ng/ml,
 pa se a ns a snd  p q s d m s
abdominal ultrasound. There is no value in supplementing progesterone early in gestation or if
the pups are not viable. In early pregnancy, progesterone may masculinize female fetuses and in
Canine disease 147
the presence of nonviable fetuses, pregnancy loss should be allowed to commence, regardless of
cause.
Gestationa! diabetes mellitus
Pregnancy and associated elevated serum progesterone concentrations are associated with insulin
resistance and decreased ability of bitches to generate glucose from gluconeogenesis and glyco
genolysis, predisposing them to diabetes mellitus. Diagnosis requires demonstration of hyper
glycemia and glucosuria.
Pregnancy toxemia
 Bitches late in pregnancy carrying large litters that become inappetent will rely on lipolysis to
meet energy needs. Breakdown products of fat metabolism, including ketones, are released into
the circulation and contribute to anorexia, worsening the condition. Diagnosis requires demon-
stration of ketonuria.
Developmental abnormalities
Older bitches, with aged ova, may be more likely to have small litters due to DNA abnormalities
reflected as developmental defects noncompatible with life. Teratogenic drugs may also induce
abnormalities that are incompatible with life; the latter is more commonly associated with loss
 of an entire litter while the former is more commonly reflected as loss of individual pups.
Uterine disease
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) and chronic uterine infection may be associated with
 pregnancy loss. In bitches with severe uterine changes, chemical abnormalities may alter the
function of spermatozoa. CEH may alter uterine motility and interfere with movement of the
fertilized ova, and implantation or placentation of the embryos. Severe uterine abnormalities
may be visible on ultrasound (see Chapter 47, Fig. 47-2). Definitive diagnosis requires uterine
biopsy.
Treatment
Bacterial infections with organisms other than B. canis are treated with appropriate antibiotics,
based on culture and sensitivity, and acknowledging danger of some drugs during pregnancy if
live pups are present (see Chapter 30). B. canis is not readily cleared even with antibiotic therapy
and euthanasia may be the best solution, especially in kennel situations (see Chapter 44).
Canine herpesvirus is not treatable in adult animals and there is limited information about
treatment in infected pups (see Chapter 96). A vaccine is available in Europe; it is reported to
improve fertility in endemically infected kennels.
Treatment for protozoal infection with T. gondi is usually not effective at preventing preg-
nancy loss.
Hypoluteoidism is treated with supplementation with progesterone. Injectable progesterone
in oil can be assayed in serum to ensure adequate serum concentrations are being reached.
However, daily injections may be necessary and since it is a depot preparation, it is difficult to
assess speed with which the compound is absorbed and distributed. Oral forms of progesterone
available include synthetic and natural compounds. Synthetic compounds cannot be assayed in
serum but are readily absorbed and excreted, permitting greater control of administration.
terone ( Prometrium; see Resources) is administered at a dose of 10 mg/kg two to four times daily
per os until day 60 to 62 after the luteinizing hormone surge (day 58 to 60 after ovulation),
148 what diagnostic tests can be performed to identify the cause of pregnancy loss?
or until the day of planned Cesarean section. Serum progesterone concentrations should be
Bq ae suooo s aenbape ansua o Adeia hunp sp e o 7 Aaaa passasse
maintained.
 In bitches affected with gestational diabetes mellitus, prognosis for the pregnancy is poor, with
increased puppy mortality. Glycemic control with insulin therapy is diffcult to achieve; preg-
nancy termination may be preferred. In one survey of 13 cases of gestational diabetes mellitus
in bitches, diabetes mellitus persisted after completion of pregnancy in four (30.8%).
Pregnancy toxemia therapy requires movement of the bitch from a negative to a positive
 energy balance. This may be affected by force-feeding or parenteral nutrition. Most commonly,
 pregnancy is terminated to permit the bitch to normalize metabolism without the burden of the
fetuses.
Supplemental reading
Fall T, Kreuger SJ, Juberget A, et al. 2008. Gestational diabetes mellitus in 13 dogs. J Vet Intern Med
22:1296-1300.
Givens MD, Marley MSD. 2008. Infectious causes of embryonic and fetal mortality. Theriogenology
70:270-285.
 Johnson CA 2008. Glucose homeostasis during canine pregnancy: Insulin resistance, ketosis, and hypogly-
cemia.Theriogenology 70:1418-1423.
Johnson CA. 2008. High-risk pregnancy and hypoluteoidism in the bitch. Theriogenology 1424-1430.
 Pretzer SD. 2008. Bacterial and protozoal causes of pregnancy loss in the bitch and queen. Theriogenology
70:320-326
 Root Kustritz MV. 2005. Pregnancy diagnosis and abnormalities of pregnancy in the dog. Theriogenology
64:755-765.
 Rube A, Corrada Y, Arias D, et al. 2007. Progesterone insufficiency in bitches in early and late diestrous.
Vet Rec 160:524-525.
Schlafer DH. 2008. Canine and feline abortion diagnostics. Theriogenology 70:327-331.
Verstegen J, Dhaliwal G, Verstegen-Onclin K. 2008. Canine and feline pregnancy loss due to viral and non-
infectious causes: A review. Theriogenofogy 70:304-319.
15
51
NIN
47
How do I diagnose and treat pyometra in bitches?
Etiology
 Pyometra is a two-step process. The first pathologic change is cystic endometrial hyperplasia
(CEH), a thickening of the uterine lining that occurs secondary to repeated estrous cycling. The
unique estrous cycle of the bitch, with high serum estrogen followed by prolonged elevation in
progesterone after every cycle, promotes hyperreactivity of the endometrium and gradual cystic
hyperplasia. By 9 years of age, two-thirds of bitches have discernible CEH. Development of CEH
is a continuum and it is not completely understood why some bitches develop pyometra with
minimal CEH while other bitches with severe CEH do not develop pyometra.
The second pathologic change is infection. Infection invariably is due to an organism that is
 part of the normal vaginal flora. Escherichia coli is the most common isolate. Studies have dem-
onstrated that it is the bitch's own subtype of E. coli that is associated with infection; she does
not become infected because of exposure to a male. Pyometra is most common in bitches that
have never been pregnant, suggesting that pregnancy may have some sort of protective effect,
presumably at the level of the endometrium.
The most likely sequence is as follows: (1) the bitch cycles repeatedly, with increasing CEH
a    q   d    a m (  
into the uterus; (3) the altered endometrium does not readily permit expulsion of all organisms
before the end of estrus; (4) the bitch goes into diestrus, during which the cervix closes, trapping
bacteria; secretion of endometrial glands is increased, nourishing those bacteria; and the endo-
metrium becomes hyperreactive, exacerbating the hyperplasia; and (5) infection develops with
creation of a pool of purulent intrauterine fluid. It is not known what factors determine patency
of the cervix.
Renal disease is a common sequel to pyometra. Endotoxins released from the cell wall of
Gram-negative bacteria inhibit normal renal tubular function. These changes are reversible if
infection is controlled quickly enough. Another reported disorder that may be associated with
pyometra is peritonitis; in one study, 6 of 11 intact females with secondary peritonitis had pyo-
metra as the primary disease condition.
Clinical signs
Pyometra is most common in older, nulliparous bitches who have been in heat within the last
4 to 12 weeks. Clinical signs vary with cervical patency.
149
150 How do I diagnose and treat pyometra in bitches?
Figure 47-1: Lateral abdominal radiograph from bitch with pyometra.
 Bitches presenting with open-cervix pyometra have yellow-green to pink or red-tinged, thick,
 odoriferous vulvar discharge. Other signs include depression, inappetence, and vomiting.
Affected dogs may be febrile or may be hypothermic. Dogs with secondary renal disease will be
polyuric with subsequent polydipsia (PU/PD).
 Bitches presenting with closed-cervix pyometra do not have vulvar discharge. Systemic signs
of disease are as with open-cervix pyometra (depression, anorexia, vomiting, PU/PD, hyper- or
hypothermia) but usually are more severe. Abdominal distension is evident.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of pyometra requires demonstration of excessive fluid in the uterus and either purulent
vulvar discharge (open-cervix) or systemic response indicative of infection (closed-cervix).
Uterine enlargement can be identified by abdominal palpation; care should be taken in manipu-
lating the friable uterus Imaging is less directly traumatic to the uterus. Radiography can be used
to identify uterine enlargement but cannot differentiate disease from pregnancy in animals who
were bred (Fig. 47-1). Ultrasonography is preferred because it permits the operator to see within
the uterus to identify free fluid (Fig. 47-2). Pregnancy is readily identifiable using ultrasound by
24 to 25 days after ovulation, permitting definitive differentiation from disease. Ultrasound
cannot be used to determine if intrauterine fluid is purulent.
 Cytology of vulvar exudate reveals full fields of degenerative polymorphonuclear cels (PMNs),
bacteria, and non-cornified epithelial cells (Fig. 47-3). A sample of this discharge should be
submitted for aerobic culture and sensitivity.
Blood should be drawn for a complete blood count and serum chemistry profile. Approxi-
mately 77% of dogs present with a leukocytosis with a left shift. The number of PMNs present
a q a       a  a a 
on serum chemistry profle include azotemia and hyperproteinemia.
 Urine should not be collected by cystocentesis without ultrasound guidance. Free-catch urine
may be contaminated with vulvar discharge. Changes evident on urinalysis include decreased
urine specific gravity and proteinuria.
Canine disease 151
LUTERINEHORN
ra
Fgure 47-2: Ultrasonogram from bitch with pyometra. Line delineates thickened uterine wal
5
Hgure 47-3: Cytology of vulvar discharge from a bitch with pyometra
CANINE
Treatment
Ovariohysterectomy (OHE) is the best treatment for pyometra in all cases. Surgical removal of
the infected uterus immediately clears endotoxins from the body, with return to normal white
count and lymphocyte activity by 7 days after surgery. CEH is not reversible so no medical
o  d g   ru   n   
152 How do I diagnose and treat pyometra in bitches?
Table 47-1. Medical treatment of canine pyometra
1. Assess uterine size in a repeatable manner (palpation, radiography, ultrasonography)
2. Collect a specimen of vulvar discharge for aerobic culture and sensitivity testing. Begin ermpirical
therapy with ampicillin or amoxicillin. Change antibiotic if necessary based on culture and sensitivity
results.
'jubuz ueun ssal si auoaisabaid winias j 'wnas ui auonasaboid jo juawainseaw jog poolq mea e
buz ueun laeaii si auoasaboid wnas j aaoaga aa m upuebeisaid ym Adeay Aiep auo
twice daily therapy with prostaglandin will be required to lyse the corpora lutea and decrease serum
progesterone concentration, permitting more effective uterine contractions.
4. Administer prostaglandin Fzalpha (0.1 to 0.25mg/kg subcutaneously once or twice daily). Treat until
uterine size nears normal (palpation, radiographs) or until no free intrauterine fluid is visible
(ultrasound)
5. Send the bitch home on antibiotics. Antibiotic therapy should continue for 1 month or until there
has been no visible vulvar discharge for at least 1 week
ades e 'snnsaoid xau aun ui Aiee aoho juanbasans Aaa pe enaod o pasodsipaid s! yoig aul 9
should be collected from the cranial vagina with a guarded swab and antibiotic therapy instituted
The bitch should be bred at that first cycle after medical therapy for pyometra and should be spayed
as 5oon as her breeding life is over. Bitches that cannot be bred on a given cycle should be treated
with an appropriate antibiotic as long as the cervix is open, evidenced by vulvar discharge
(urine protein:creatinine ratio greater than 10) is associated with increased likelihood of end-
stage renal failure in the dog's future.
Medical therapy may be considered if the bitch meets the following criteria: (1) the cervix is
open; (2) azotemia is absent or mild enough to be attributed to dehydration or other pre-renal
causes; (3) the bitch is still of breeding age (generally less than 6 years of age); and (4) the bitch
is a valuable part of a breeding program. Medical therapy is not recommended in cases of closed-
cervix pyometra. Treatment with drugs that cause or permit uterine contractions may help push
purulent fluid against the internal cervical os with subsequent relaxation but these drugs may
also promote movement of fluid through the uterine tubes and into the abdomen, or cause
uterine rupture, with subsequent peritonitis.
Medical therapy with antibiotics and prostaglandin F2alpha is described here (Table 47-1).
Combined therapy using a synthetic prostaglandin (cloprostenol; 5 μg/kg every third day subcu-
taneously [SQ]), prolactin inhibitor (cabergoline; 5 pg/kg once daily per os), and antibiotics was
described as successful in treating either open- or closed-cervix pyometra in 19 of 22 bitches.
n aaodiod e ssd o dosa piin  e po as an siden aissod r
catheter through the cervix and promote drainage; use of the drug aglepristone (AlazinerM), a
progesterone receptor blocker (10 mg/kg SQ days 1,2, 8, and 14 with concurrent antibiotic
therapy); acupuncture; and herbal therapy. These therapies are not well described in the veteri-
nary literature or are not available in the United States.
Supplemental reading
Bartoskova A, Vitasek R, Leva L, et al. 2007. Hysterectomy leads to fast improvement of haemotological
and immunological parameters in bitches with pyometra. J Small Anirm Pract 48:564-568.
Culp WTN, Zeldis TE, Reese MS, et al. 2009. Primary bacterial peritonitis in dogs and cats: 24 cases
(1990-2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 234:906-913.
Egenvall A, Hagman R, Bonnett BN, et al. 2001. Breed risk of pyometra in insured dogs in Sweden. J Vet
Intern Med 15:530-538.
Canine disease 153
England GCW, Freeman SL, Russo M. 2007. Treatment of spontaneous pyometra in 22 bitches with a
combination of cabergoline and cloprostenol. Vet Rec 160:293-296.
Fieni F. 2006. Clinical evaluation of the use of aglepristone, with or without cloprostenol, to treat cystic
endometrial hyperplasia-pyometra complex in bitches. Theriogenology 66: 1550-1556.
Gurbulak K, Pancarci M, Ekici H, et al. 2005. Use of aglepristone and aglepristone + intrauterine antibiotic
for the treatment of pyometra in bitches. Acta Vet Hung 53:249-255.
Hagman R, Kindahl H, Lagerstedt A-S. 2006. Pyometra in bitches induces elevated plasma endotoxin and
prostaglandin F2alpha metabolite levels. Acta Vet Scand 47:55-68.
 Hagman R, Kuhn I. 2002. Escherichia coli strains isolated from the uterus and urinary bladder of bitches
suffering from pyometra: Comparison by restriction enzyme digestion and pulsed-field gel electropho-
resis. Vet Microbiol 84:143-153.
Heiene R, Kristiansen V, Teige J, et al. 2007. Renal histomorphology in dogs with pyometra and control
dogs, and long-term clinical outcome with respect to signs of kidney disease. Acta Vet Scand 49:13-21.
intended for treatment of uterine infection-induced infertility. Theriogenology 66:1783-1786.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 206-224.
Jurka P Max A, Hawrynska K, et al. 2008. Age-related pregnancy results and further examination of bitches
after aglepristone treatment of pyometra. Reprod Dom Anim doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2008.01288.x.
ai s a aan ry ian s- o ' ia - o -  - 
in dogs. www.mondialvet99.com/WSAVA/cc/oraux/acupuncture/tchi_tchou.htm, accessed May 9, 2000.
Niskanen M, Thrusfield MV. 1998. Associations between age, parity, hormonal therapy and breed, and
pyometra in Finnish dogs. Vet Rec 143:493-498.
Salgado B, Paramo R, Sumano H. 2007. Successful treatment of canine open cervix pyometra with yun-
nan-pai-yao, a Chinese herbal preparation. Vet Res Commun 31:405-412.
Schlafer DH, Gifford AT. 2008. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia, pseudo-placental endometrial hyperplasia,
and other cystic conditions of the canine and feline uterus. Theriogenology 70:349-358.
Verstegen J, Dhaliwal G, Verstegen-Onclin K. 2008. Mucometra, cystic endometrial hyperplasia, and pyo-
 metra in the bitch: Advances in treatment and assessment of future reproductive success. Theriogenology
70:364-374.
48
What are the causes of agalactia in bitches and
how is it best treated?
Etiology
Agalactia is lack of milk production or secretion. Reported causes of lack of milk production
include inadequate nutrition, stress, progestogen therapy and subsequent inadequate prolactin
secretion, endotoxemia, and systemic illness. The nutritional needs of lactating bitches are
extreme, with reported increases in total energy intake during peak lactation 3.7 times that of
pre-partum in Labrador retrievers and 2.6 times that of pre-partum in miniature Schnauzers.
Lack of milk letdown is due to inadequate oxytocin secretion. Treatment with repeated low
doses of oxytocin intramuscularly or with human oxytocin nasal preparations often immediately
Clinical signs
Agalactia is evidenced by inability to express milk from the mammary glands, even after oxytocin
 injection has stimulated milk let-down.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis is by inspection.
Treatment
 If an underlying cause can be identifed, it should be treated. However, a cause such as malnutri-
tion in the bitch often cannot be remedied in a timely enough manner to permit milk production.
Treatment with the dopamine antagonist, domperidone, may stimulate prolactin secretion and
lactation. This is not an approved use of this drug in any species. Acupuncture has been described
as an effective therapy for agalactia in several species, including dogs.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 138-139.
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successful Breeding and Health Managerment. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier, pp. 230-231.
Scantlebury M, Butterwick R, Speakman JR. 20o0. Energetics of lactation in domestic dog (Canis familiaris)
breeds of two sizes. Comp Biochem Phys Part A 125:19-210.
155
49
How do I treat mastitis in a nursing bitch?
Etiology
 Mastitis is most commonly seen postpartum in the actively nursing bitch. Occasional bitches
isms and skin flora are the bacteria most commonly associated with the disease and include
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus sp., and Streptococcus sp.
Clinical signs
The infected gland is engorged, reddened, hot, and painful to the bitch upon manipulation (Fig.
49-1). More than one gland may be affected. Fluid expressed from the multiple teat openings
varies from apparently normal milk to purulent to clear or blood-tinged serous fluid (Fig. 49-2).
The bitch may be febrile with inappetence and lethargy, and may neglect the pups. Localized
abscesses may develop with gangrene of tissue (Fig. 49-3). Occasionally, the bitch will undergo
septic shock.
Diagnosis
Mastitis is diagnosed by inspection. Cytology of fluid expressed from the mammary gland reveals
bacteria and inflammatory cells. Expressed fluid from the affected gland(s) should be submitted
for culture and sensitivity. Gangrenous tissue is black.
Treatment
Antibiotics likely to achieve therapeutic levels in the mammary gland are those that are lipid-
soluble and are therefore also likely to be excreted into milk. Caution must be taken if using
antibiotics with potential negative side effects on neonates (see Chapter 91). Pups should be
allowed to nurse unless gangrenous mastitis is present; organisms implicated in septicemia in
pups are rarely those cultured from milk. The affected gland(s) should be covered to prevent
excoriation of the friable tissue by puppy nails. Common empirical choices are cephalexin (2.5
to 7.5mg/lb [5 to 15mg/kg] per os three times daily) and amoxicillin-clavulanate (Clavamox;
7mg/lb [14 mg/kg] per os two to three times daily). Abscessed areas should be incised, gangre-
nous tissue debrided, and drains placed.
 Pain management in lactating bitches is complicated by the ready movement of most analge-
sics into milk and the lack of research documenting potential effects on nursing puppies.
157
158 How do I treat mastitis in a nursing bitch?
Figure 49-1: Mastitis in a lactating
bitch.
Figure 49-2: Abnormal fluid
expressed from the mammary gland
of a bitch with mastitis (photo
courtesy of Dr. Cathy Gartley).
5
51
Figure 49-3: Gangrenous mastitis in
a bitch (photo courtesy of Dr. Cathy
Gartley).
Canine disease 159
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics may exacerbate postpartum hemorrhage or may
inhibit renal maturation in neonates. Those with a long half-life (naproxen, piroxicam, miloxi-
cam) may accumulate in neonates. Opioids also pass readily into milk but can be reversed in
neonates if signs of overdosing become apparent (lethargy, failure to nurse).
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 131-138.
 Mathews KA. 2008. Pain management for the pregnant, lactating, and neonatal to pediatric cat and dog.
Vet Clin North Am 38:1291-1308.
Shafer-Somi S, Spergser J, Breitenfellner J, et al. 2003. Bacteriological status of canine milk and septicemia
in neonatal puppies—A retrospective study. J Vet Med B 50:343-346.
N
50
What are the causes of persistent estrus (heat)
in dogs?
Etiology
The most common causes of true persistent estrus in bitches are follicular ovarian cysts and
Ovarian tumors. Persistent estrus is caused by continuing secretion of estrogen. Estrogen produc-
tion through the adrenal gland is posible but has not been reported as a pathologic phenomenon
in bitches. Exogenous estrogen administration, either as a “mismating shot" (see Chapter 34) or
through dermal absorption of topical products applied to the owner, is another possible cause.
Clinical signs
 Remember that proestrus can last as long as 17 days and estrus as long as 2l days. This means
that a normal bitch could exhibit signs of estrus for 4 to 6 weeks. True persistent estrus is defined
as physical and behavioral signs of proestrus and estrus, and presence of cornified vaginal cytol-
ogy, for at least 6 weeks (see Chapters 2 and 20). Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia may be evident,
especially if exposure to estrogen has been very prolonged. Abdominal distension and ascites
may be evident in bitches with granulosa cell tumor.
Diagnosis
Follicular ovarian cysts most commonly develop at the expected time of estrus. The cysts are
visible by abdominal ultrasonography and are usually not large enough to distort the ovary (Fig.
50-1). The most common ovarian tumor type that is functional, secreting estrogen, is granulosa
cell tumor. Clinical signs may arise at any time, not necessarily at the expected time of estrus.
Oftentimes, the ovary is so enlarged as to be palpable per abdomen as a cranial abdominal mass.
Ultrasonographically, ovarian tumors are more likely to be appear mottled and septate. Differ-
entiation of follicular ovarian cysts and ovarian tumors may also be made by response to treat-
ment. Similarly, diagnosis of exogenous estrogen as a source may be made by careful history
taking and response to withdrawal of potential inciting agents. With any prolonged estrogen
exposure, bone marrow suppression may occur, evidenced by non-regenerative anemia, leuko-
penia, and thrombocytopenia.
Treatment
Ovarian follicular cysts are treated by induction of ovulation, either with gonadotropin releasing
hormone ([Cystorelin] 50 μg/dog intramuscularly [IM]) or human chorionic gonadotropin
161
162 what are the causes of persistent estrus (heat) in dogs?
PRS2
Figure 50-1: Ultrasonogram of a follicular cyst in a bitch.
CANINE DISEASI
Figure 50-2: Gross appearance of a follicular cyst in a bitch.
(1000 IU, half intravenously, half IM or 22 IU/kg IM once daily for 3 days), or by ovariohyster-
ectomy (OHE) (Fig. 50-2). OHE may be the preferred therapy as dogs induced to ovulate after
 persistent estrogen exposure may be predisposed to pyometra (see Chapter 47). Granulosa cell
tumors are treated by OHE. Because metastasis and local invasion are uncommon, OHE is
usually curative. Blood dyscrasias are treated with appropriate blood products.
Canine disease163
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., p. 193.
Meyers-Wallen VN. 2007. Unusual and abnormal canine estrous cycles. Theriogenology 68:1205-1210.
from a topically applied human product. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 233:235-237.
CANINE DISEASE
51
What are the causes of lack of cycling (persistent
anestrus) in dogs?
Etiology
Two forms of anestrus are described in bitches. Secondary anestrus is lack of estrous cycling
within 1 year of a previous cycle. Causes include silent heat, systemic disease, possibly including
hypothyroidism (see Chapter 27), poor body condition or excessive athleticism, administration
 of estrus-suppressing drugs, and luteal ovarian cysts. Primary anestrus is lack of any apparent
estrous cycling in bitches 2 years of age or older. Causes are as for secondary anestrus and may
also include chromosomal abnormalities and previous ovariohysterectomy (OHE).
Clinical signs
Regular observation of bitches is recommended, especially for those housed outside or in a sepa-
rate facility. Periodic exposure to an intact male dog may aid the owner in identifying bitches in
heat. Silent heat is, by definition, not apparent clinically. The ovaries go through the normal
sequence of follicular development and ovulation but no overt physical or behavioral changes
are observed. Animals with reproductive dysfunction associated with hypothyroidism rarely have
classic clinical signs of hypothyroidism, such as bilaterally symmetrical alopecia and lethargy
Poor body condition or tremendous conditioning due to athleticism is obvious on physical
examination.
Diagnosis
The owner should be questioned regarding where the bitch is housed and how he or she has
tried to identify signs of heat. Other history questions may include diet and work schedule of
the bitch, medications given, and if there is any possibility of the bitch having been spayed. Previ-
ous OHE may be identified by demonstration of a scar on the ventral midline or by demonstra-
fion of elevated concentrations of luteinizing hormone in the blood. Systemic disease may be
identified by serum chemistry profle and complete blood count. Hypothyroidism is best diag-
nosed by demonstration of decreased free thyroxine and increased thyroid stimulating hormone
(see Chapter 27). Blood should be drawn for assay of progesterone in serum; progesterone con-
centration of greater than 2ng/ml may indicate either that a silent heat occurred within the last
2 months (the bitch is in diestrus) or that a luteal ovarian cyst is present. Luteal cysts are usually
not visible ultrasonographically; persistence of elevation in serum progesterone for more than 2
months is diagnostic. Chromosomal abnormalities can be identified by karyotyping, which is
available at Texas A&M University (see Supplemental Reading).
165
166 what are the causes of lack of cycling in dogs?
Treatment
If there is no clear evidence of systemic disease or another cause of lack of cycling, bitches can
be put on a good plane of nutrition, retired for a time from showing or working, and housed
with other cycling bitches, who may pull them into heat through pheromone exposure (the
dormitory effect). Hypothyroidism is a treatable condition but one may wish to talk to the owner
about the possibility of heritability of the condition (see Chapter 27). Luteal ovarian cysts may
250 μg/kg twice daily for 4 days or until serum progesterone declines to less than 1 ng/ml). Side
effects include panting, hypersalivation, vomiting, and defecation. These side effects usually
subside within 30 to 60 min of treatment. Luteal cysts also can be treated by OHE.
Chromosomal abnormalities reportedly associated with persistent anestrus in bitches include
 78,XO; 79,XXX; 79,XXY; and dogs with multiple cell lines. Some bitches with these karyotypes
 may demonstrate intermittent estrous cycling but all are considered infertile.
In the absence of any defined cause, medical induction of estrus may be attempted. There are
no drugs approved for this purpose in bitches in the United States. No drug described can accu-
rately induce estrus on a given date or with complete consistency. Reported regimens are
described in Table 51-1.
Table 51-1. Reported estrus induction protocols in dogs.
Drug
Dosing
Reported
Reported
Comments
Regimen
Percentage
 Pregnancy
Entering Proestrus
Rate (%)
Diethylstilbestrol
5mg once daily
100
100
Reported studies had low
for 6 to 9 days.
numbers of animals. May
until proestrus
induce split heat (signs of
induced
proestrus, no ovulation,
return to proestrus with
an ovulatory heat about 1
month later).
 Bromocriptine
20μg/kg twice
71 to 100
83
Drug must be procured
daily per os for
through a human
21 days
pharmacy. Readily induces
5
vomiting in dogs.
5
Cabergoline
5μg/kg once
80 to 100
86 to 93
Available as a veterinary
daily per 05
drug (DostinexIM). Does
until proestrus 
not induce vomiting.
induced (30
 Anecdotal reports suggest
(nwixeu Aep
lower percentage of
bitches entering proestrus.
Gonadotropin
Variable success reported
releasing hormone
with subcutaneous or
and analogues
injectable applications.
Canine disease167
Supplemental reading
Cirit U, Bacinoglu S, Cangul IT, et al. 2007. The effects of a low dose of cabergoline on induction of estrus
and pregnancy rates in anestrous bitches. Anirm Reprod Sci 101:134-144.
Kutzler MA. 2007. Estrus induction and synchronization in canids and felids. Theriogenology 68:354-374.
Lyle SK. 2007. Disorders of sexual development in the dog and cat. Theriogenology 68:338-343.
CANINE DISEASE
52
What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of
a bitch?
Etiology
 The most common cause of apparent infertility in bitches is improper breeding management
(see Chapter 29). Other causes include poor semen quality of the male (see Chapter 21), repro-
ductive tract infection including brucellosis (see Chapter 44), systemic disease possibly including
uterine pathology, anovulatory cycles, impatency of the reproductive tract, and advanced age of
the bitch.
Clinical signs
 Bitches with infertility may present for failure to stand to be bred, apparent conception failure
or known pregnancy loss. Because there is no early pregnancy test for dogs (see Chapter 5)
conception failure and early pregnancy loss cannot be differentiated. Bitches with infection of
the reproductive tract or uterine pathology often exhibit no specific clinical signs. Bitches with
infertility associated with hypothyroidism rarely show the classical signs of bilaterally symmetri-
cal alopecia and lethargy.
Diagnosis
An accurate history must be taken of any past breeding attempts to determine if the bitch was
bred on or near optimal breeding day (see Chapter 29). Reproductive tract infection is best
identified by culture of the anterior vagina when the bitch is in estrus (see Chapter 28). Brucel-
losis serology should be performed (see Chapter 44). Hypothyroidism is best diagnosed by
demonstration of decreased free thyroxine and increased thyroid stimulating hormone in serum
(see Chapter 27). Behavioral causes are identified by observation of breeding attempts and by
digital vaginal examination and vaginoscopy to identify vaginal anatomic anomalies (Table
52-1).
Uterine pathology may or may not be visible ultrasonographically (see Chapter 47, Fig. 47-2).
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) may be visible as fluffy thickening of the endometrium
and presumably interferes with fertility by altering movement of spermatozoa from the cervix
to the uterine tubes and interfering with normal implantation and placentation of conceptuses.
 Uterine pathology is often diagnosed at histopathology. Samples are most commonly retrieved
 at the time of ovariohysterectomy; uterine biopsy requires laparatomy and hysterotomy and is
rarely performed.
169
170 what is the diagnostic approach for infertility of a bitch?
Table 52-1. Diagnostic key for infertility of bitches
1a. The bitch is cycling.
2
1b. The bitch is not cycling.
3
2a. The estrous cydle is normal in length
4
2b. The estrous cycle is not normal in length.
5
3a. The bitch has never been in heat.
6
3b. The bitch has been in heat earlier in her life.
.7
4a. The male has normal semen quality.
.8
4b. The male does not have normal semen quality.
.9
 5a. The estrous cycle is abnormally short
10
 5b. The estrous cycle is abnormally long.
11
6a. The bitch is at least 24 months of age.
12
 6b. The bitch is less than 24 months of age.
.13
7.
The bitch has secondary anestrus (see above)
8a. The bitch is being bred at the right time.
14
8b. The bitch is not being bred at the right time
15
9. See Chapter 56 for a discussion of abnormal sermen quality in male dogs.
10. Short intervals between estrous cycles are nomal in some breeds, most notably the German
shepherd dog and Rotweiler. Other causes of abnormally short cycles include uterine disease and
split heat.
11. Long intervals between estrous cycles may be normal in some breeds, most notably the Basenji
which cycles annually in the fall in the northern herisphere, and in some lines of dogs. Other
causes of abnormally long interestrous intervals include systeric disease and hypothyroidism
12. The bitch has primary anestrus.
13. The bitch may be immature. Try housing her with cycling bitches, improving her plane of nutrition,
and retiring her from showing or working for a time
14. Possible causes of infertility include reproductive tract infection, hypothyroidism, brucellosis,
15. Inappropriate breeding management is the most cormmon cause of apparent infertility in bitches
(see Chapter 29)
Impatency of the reproductive tract may be identifiable with hysterography, performed as
vaginography when the bitch is in estrus and the cervix open (see Chapter 4). More commonly,
 abnormalities of the tract are identified during laparatomy. Anovulatory cycles are defined as the
cycles in which serum progesterone never rises to the ovulatory range of 4 to 10ng/ml. In one
large survey of bitches, anovulatory cycles were reported to occur in 1% of cycles. Forty-five
 percent of bitches in that study had a normal, ovulatory cycle following the anovulatory cycle.
Treatment
 Ensure the bitch stands to be bred or is inseminated on optimal breeding day, identified using
assay of progesterone in serum and adjunct measures (see Chapter 29). Evaluate semen quality
of the male if possible or ask for a record of success in recent breedings. Some bitches and males
are not compatible genetically; if a bitch has consistently failed to produce pups with one male,
recommend use of a male from different lines. Hypothyroidism may be treated but it is most
important to educate the owner about potential heritability of the condition in their breed
(see Chapter 27). Reproductive tract infection should be treated with appropriate antibiotics,
based on culture and sensitivity (see Chapter 28). Some veterinarians recommend surgical
Canine disease 171
 insemination for bitches with CEH. At the time of surgery, the uterus is run through the gloved
hands of the surgeon and cysts reduced. There are no studies documenting benefit or detriment
of this practice on conception rate or general health of the bitch.
Supplemental reading
Grundy SA, Feldman E, Davidson A. 2002. Evaluation of infertility in the bitch. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
17:108-115.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 257-273.
DISEASI
N
53
How do I treat benign prostatic hypertrophy?
Etiology
Benign prostatic hypertrophy and hyperplasia (BPH) is an age-related phenomenon in male dogs
and humans. Testosterone is metabolized to dihydrotestosterone, which is the active compound
that stimulates increase in the glandular and connective tissue portions of the prostate. With
increasing age, as testosterone secretion slows and relative estrogen secretion increases, prosta-
tomegaly occurs even more quickly, such that the majority of dogs aged 5 to 6 years or more
have significant BPH.
Clinical signs
Many dogs with BPH are asymptomatic. The classic clinical sign of BPH is dripping of bloody
fluid from the prepuce unassociated with urination. Signs may worsen if the male dog is exposed
to a bitch in heat. Other signs are referable to increased size and vascularity of the prostate and
include hematuria (as bloody prostatic fluid drains into the urinary bladder), hemospermia,
passage of ribbon-shaped stools, and rectal tenesmus. Systemic signs of disease are uncommon
in the absence of secondary prostatitis (see Chapter 54).
Diagnosis
The prostate encircles the urethra at the neck of the urinary bladder. It is palpable per rectum
until it becomes large enough to pull the bladder forward into the abdomen; eventually it may
be palpable per abdomen. The prostate is symmetrical with a distinct median raphe. In dogs with
 BPH, the prostate remains symmetrical as it increases in size. The dog does not show evidence
Rectal palpation is not a very accurate diagnostic procedure; in one study, BPH was not identi-
fied by rectal palpation in 44.8% of affected dogs.
Ultrasonography reveals a uniformly enlarged prostate (Fig. 53- 1). Fine-needle aspirate may
be performed with ultrasound guidance for collection of samples for cytology or culture (see
Chapter 9). Ejaculated prostatic fluid also may be submitted for cytology and culture. In either
instance, culture is used to rule out prostatitis (see Chapter 54).
In humans, assay of proteins in serum, for example, prostate specific antigen, can be used to
diagnose prostate disease and monitor treatment. These proteins are produced in dogs but are
not consistently reflective of health of the prostate gland.
173
174 How do I treat benign prostatic hypertrophy?
3-12>
PROSTATESAGL
Figure 53-1: Sonogram of canine prostate with benign prostatic hypertrophy
Treatment
 Castration is the best treatment for BPH because this is an androgen-mediated disorder and all
significant androgen secretions arise from the testes. No medical therapy is as effective as castra-
tion for minimizing clinical signs of BPH. Significant reduction in prostate size occurs within 3
weeksofcastration.
For valuable breeding dogs or others that cannot be castrated, several medical therapies are
available. Treatment with estrogen compounds has been described historically but is not recom-
mended. Therapy with progestins has also been described (megestrol acetate, 0.5 mg/kg per os
 once daily for 4 to 8 weeks; medroxyprogesterone acetate, 3 to 4 mg/kg subcutaneously at
intervals of 10 weeks or longer). Semen quality is not affected negatively by treatment with
progestins.
The preferred medical therapy is with the human drug finasteride (ProscarTM—5mg tablet;
PropeciarM1 mg tablet; dose regimen is 5 mg once a day per os for dogs weighing 5 to 50 kg).
Finasteride prevents conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, decreasing prostate size
while retaining normal libido and spermatogenesis. No side effects have been reported with use
of this drug in dogs. Semen volume decreases as prostate size decreases but conception rates and
semen quality do not vary. In human medicine, there is a concern about birth defects; this is not
 a concern in veterinary medicine since male dogs do not breed bitches once they are pregnant.
Saw palmetto and many other human drugs available for treatment of BPH are not useful in
dogs.
Supplemental reading
Barsanti JA, Finco DR, Mahaffey MM, et al. 2ooo. Effects of an extract of Serenoa repens on dogs with
hyperplasia of the prostate gland. Am J Vet Res 61:880-885.
Freitag T, Jerram RM, Walker AM, et al. 2007. Surgical managerment of common canine prostatic condi-
tions. Compendium 29:656-672.
Jia G, Heverhagen J, Henry H, et al. 2006. Pharmacokinetic parameters as a potential predictor of response
to pharmacotherapy in benign prostatic hyperplasia: A preclinical trial using dynamic contrast-enhanced
MRI. Magn Reson Irmaging 24:721-725.
Canine disease175
Mukaratirwas S, Chitura T. 2007. Canine subclinical prostatic disease: Histological prevalence and validity
of digital rectal examination as a screening test. J S Afr Vet Assoc 78:66-68.
Sirinarumitr K, Sirinarumitr T Johnston SD, et al. 2002. Finasteride-induced prostatic involution by apop-
Smith J. 2008. Canine prostatic disease: A review of anatomy, pathology diagnosis, and treatment.
Theriogenology 70:375-383.
CANINEDISEASE
54
How do I treat prostatitis?
Etiology
 Prostatitis is inflammation of the prostate gland. Usually this occurs secondary to bacterial infec-
tion; Mycoplasma canis and blastomycosis have also been reported as causative. Causative bacte-
 rial organisms are those of the normal urethral flora. The normal canine prostate is built to
withstand infection. Infection occurs secondary to prostatic or urinary tract disease. Benign
prostatic hypertrophy is the most common underlying problem in intact dogs (see Chapter 53).
Prostatic neoplasia, most commonly adenocarcinoma, is the most common underlying problem
 in castrated dogs.
Clinical signs
Acute prostatitis is associated with clinical signs typical of any acute infection. The dog may be
febrile,lethargic, and inappetent. The dog may cry out when ejaculating or refuse to breed. Signs
of benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) may also be present, including dripping of bloody fluid
from the prepuce unassociated with urination, hemospermia, passing of ribbon-shaped stools
and rectal tenesmus. Dogs with prostatic adenocarcinoma usually have metastatic disease by the
time prostate disease is evident. Signs may include cachexia, muscle atrophy, respiratory distress,
lymphadenopathy, and ataxia.
Chronic prostatitis is associated with fewer systemic signs. Generally, the clinical manifestation
 is as for the underlying problem. The dog may present for the complaint of infertility or poor
semen quality.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of prostatitis requires demonstration of growth of bacteria from the prostate. Prostatic
fluid, collected by ejaculation (see Chapter 6) or prostatic tissue, collected by fine-needle aspirate
or biopsy (see Chapter 9) may be submitted for culture and sensitivity. Rectal palpation may be
used to determine prostate size and presence of pain upon palpation but is inaccurate for diag-
nosis; in one study, rectal palpation was used to identify prostatitis in only 23.6% of affected
dogs. Ultrasound should be used to guide sample collection. On ultrasound, the infected prostate
appears motled and may have scattered mineralization (Fig. 54-1). Prostatic neoplasia may
appear more whorled in appearance. The two conditions cannot be definitively differentiated by
177
178 How do I treat prostatitis?
10V4-S
PROSTATELONG
10.0MHz
Small-A
Gain=-11dB
Storeinprog
Figure 54-1: Ultrasonogram of canine prostatitis
the potentially infected prostate. Diagnosis of the underlying disorder is best made by prostatic
biopsy, especially if index of suspicion for prostatic neoplasia is high.
Treatment
In acute prostatitis, the prostatic capsule is disrupted and any antibiotic deemed suitable by
culture and sensitivity will penetrate the prostatic tissue. In chronic prostatitis, the capsule is
intact and only lipophilic antibiotics that are not highly protein bound are likely to penetrate
the tissue well. Antibiotics most efficacious for treatment of chronic prostatitis include fluoro
quinolones, trimethoprim-sulfa, and chloramphenicol. Long-term use of trimethoprim-sulfa
drugs may be associated with anemia and keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Treatment with the antibi
otic chosen should last for 4 to 6 weeks. Reculture prostatic tissue or fluid 1 week and again 1
month after therapy and retreat if necessary. Concurrent treatment for BPH with finasteride or
treated palliatively.
Supplemental reading
Freitag T, Jerram RM, Walker AM, et al. 2007. Surgical management of common canine prostatic condi-
tions. Compendium 29:656-672.
LAbee-Lund TM, Heiene R, Fris NF, et al. 2003. Mycoplasma canis and urogenital disease in dogs in
5
Norway. Vet Rec 153:231-235.
 Mukaratirwa S, Chitura T. 2007. Canine subclinical prostatic disease: Histological prevalence and validity
of digital rectal examination as a screening test. J S Afr Vet Assoc 78:66-68.
Smith J. 2008. Canine prostatic disease: A review of anatomy, pathology, diagnosis, and treatment.
N
Theriogenology 70:375-383.
Wagenlehner FME, Weidner W, Sorgel F,et al. 2005. The role of antibiotics in chronic bacterial prostatitis.
Int J Antirmicrob Agents 26: 1-7.
55
What is the best treatment for recurrent
paraphimosis (extrusion of the penis from
the prepuce) in neutered male dogs?
Etiology
Paraphimosis occurs most commonly in older, castrated toy breeds, although it may occur in
any breed. Underlying ca uses are medical (balanoposthitis [infection of the penile and preputial
 mucosal, foreign object, neurologic disease) or behavioral. Erection of the penis is not hormon-
ally mediated but is instead neurologic and so can occur in dogs regardless of intact status. Any
iritation of the penile mucosa or of the nerves mediating erection and protrusion of the penis
may cause drying of the penis and inability of the dog to retract the penis completely into the
prepuce.
Balanoposthitis is a secondary infection with the normal preputial flora. Underlying causes
include foreign objects, prostate disease, and atopic dermatitis.
Behavioral causes of paraphimosis include unintended positive reinforcement and sequencing.
Many owners very vigorously scold the dog for extruding or licking at the penis; dogs may see
this increased attention as a positive reinforcement. Similarly, dogs may learn a sequence of
events (go out to urinate, lick at the penis, get a treat) and exhibit the behavior for a reward.
Clinical signs
Paraphimosis is extrusion of the non-erect penis from the prepuce. This should be differentiated
from priapism, which is persistent erection of the penis and which is associated with systemic
effects and eventual nonviability of penile tissue. In dogs with paraphimosis, the exposed portion
of the penis dries and reddens, especially if chronically exposed. The dog does not usually feel
pain when the area is examined. If balanoposthitis is present, creamy, yellowish discharge overlies
the penis when extruded and the penile and preputial mucosa is erythematous. Neurologic
disease may be associated with other neurologic signs.
Diagnosis
Extrusion of the penis and inspection of the prepuce are diagnostic for balanoposthitis and pres-
ence of foreign objects. A sample of preputial discharge should be submitted for culture and
sensitivity. Rectal examination of the prostate should be performed. In castrated dogs, the pros-
tate should barely be palpable. Prostatomegaly in a castrated dog is highly suspicious of prostatic
neoplasia, and carries a poor prognosis. The dog should be evaluated for atopic dermatitis. A
complete neurological examination should be performed. Owners should be questioned about
179
180 what is the best treatment for recurrent paraphimosis in neutered male dogs?
the frequency with which the problem occurs and about any possible sequencing leading to or
reinforcing this behavior.
Treatment
 Balanoposthitis is treated with appropriate antibiotic therapy, based on culture and sensitivity,
and treatment of the underlying cause, if identified. Behavioral causes should be addressed by
teaching the owner not to overreact when disciplining the dog for the behavior and to try to
break up sequences leading to the behavior. It may be beneficial to leave a leash on the dog when
in the house so when he starts licking, the owner can just gently drag his head away from that
area and distract him.
If no cause can be identified, some dogs respond to therapy with progestins, which have anti-
 inflammatory and antianxiety properties. Examples include megestrol acetate (0.5 mg/kg per os
 once daily for a maximum of 30 days) and medroxyprogesterone acetate (2.5 mg/kg subcutane-
ously every 5 months with a maximum of two treatments). Side effects of progestins in male
dogs are polyphagia, diabetes mellitus, and possibly mammary neoplasia.
Some dogs self-traumatize to a large extent. These dogs may be best treated with antipsychotic
drugs or tranquilizers. Surgical replacement and fixation of the penis has been described, with
 suturing of the dorsal penile epithelium to the apposing preputial surface.
Supplemental reading
Root Kustritz MV. 2009. Intermittent erection of the penis in castrated male dogs. In Kirks Current Veteri-
nary Therapy XIV (Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, and Kirk RW, eds.), p. 1053. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier.
Somerville ME,Anderson SM. 2001. Phallopexy for treatment of paraphimosis in the dog. J Arm Anim Hosp
Assoc 37:397-400.
15
51
NIN
56
What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of
a male dog?
Etiology
 Infertility may be due to problems with the bitch (see Chapter 52) or the male. Causes of infertil.
ity described in male dogs include inability to breed and poor semen quality. Causes of inability
to breed include poor libido and pain, as may be seen in dogs with prostate disease. Causes of
poor semen quality include pre-testicular causes, such as systemic disease including hypothyroid-
ism (see Chapter 27) and immotile cilia syndrome; testicular causes including testicular atrophy,
testicular neoplasia, and brucellosis (see Chapter 44); and post-testicular causes including sper-
matocele and retrograde ejaculation.
Clinical signs
Poor libido is manifested by a male dog expressing no interest in mounting an estrous bitch.
Pain may be evidenced in the same way or may be seen as mounting followed by quick dismount
Or even crying out as the dog ejaculates. Prostate disease may be evidenced by dripping of bloody
fluid from the prepuce unassociated with urination, hematuria, hemospermia (blood in the
ejaculate), presence of ribbon-shaped feces, or pain when ejaculating (see Chapters 53 and 54).
 Immotile cilia syndrome, also termed ciliary dyskinesia, includes lack of motility in the respira-
  sop pro ssas Annsa  Aq piaa An i os pe penn 
may not exhibit classic signs of bilaterally symmetrical alopecia and lethargy. Testicular atrophy
is self-evident and may also be seen as a component of testicular neoplasia, especially if the
contralateral testis is enlarged. Brucellosis is described in Chapter 44.
Diagnosis
Poor libido may be due to pain or may be behavioral in origin. Sources of pain include the caudal
spine, rear limbs, and prostate. Arthritis or other causes of bone pain are visible radiographically.
Diagnosis of prostate disease is described in Chapters 53 and 54. Definitive diagnosis of immotile
cilia syndrome requires electron microscopy of immotile spermatozoa or cells retrieved from the
respiratory tract. Behavioral causes include frequent disciplining when having shown mounting
behavior in the past, or recollection of pain when collected or bred in the past (Table 56-1).
Poor semen quality may be defined as aspermia (lack of an ejaculate), azoospermia (ejacula-
fion of seminal fluid containing no spermatozoa), oligozoospermia (ejaculation of an abnormally
low number of spermatozoa), teratozoospermia (ejaculation of an abnormally low percentage
181
182 What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of a male dog?
Table 56-1. Diagnostic key for infertility in male dogs.
1a. The dog is capable of breeding bitches naturally (normal mount and erection).
2
1b. The dog is not capable of breeding bitches naturally.....
.3
 2a. Semen quality is normal.
.4
 2b. Semen quality is not normal.
5
3.
Possible causes include psychological constraints, pain in the rear limbs or
spine, prostate disease, and abnormalities of the penis
 4a. The bitch is at the correct stage of her estrous cycle for breeding...
6
4b. The bitch is not at the correct stage of her estrous cycle for breeding.
 5a. Possible causes for abnormal sernen quality are brucellosis, hypothyroidism, testicular atrophy.
testicular neoplasia, infection of the reproductive tract, prostate disease, retrograde ejaculation, and
immotile cilia syndrome.
 6b. Possible causes include prostate disease, brucellosis, testicular neoplasia, and genetic incompatibility
with the chosen female
7.
 Improper breeding management is the most common cause of apparent infertility in bitches (see
Chapters 29 and 52)
-   no )   s s  
centage of progressively motile spermatozoa). These abnormalities often occur together.
Aspermia is often due to pain. Sources of pain include the caudal spine, rear limbs, and pros-
tate. Arthritis or other causes of bone pain are visible radiographically. Diagnosis of prostate
disease is described in Chapters 53 and 54.
Azoospermia may be due to pain or apprehension, such that the dog does not provide a com-
 plete ejaculate, may be indicative of lack of spermatogenesis, or may be due to obstruction of
the ductus deferens preventing movement of spermatozoa from the epididymis through the
urethra. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is secreted into seminal fluid from the epididymes and
testes. Measurement of ALP in seminal fluid can be used to assess if a complete ejaculate was
provided. If concentration of ALP in azoospermic seminal fluid is greater than 500oIU/l, a
complete ejaculate was obtained and the dog is not making spermatozoa. If concentration is
lower than 50oo IU/l, a complete ejaculate was not obtained. Semen collection should be
attempted again with all distractions removed (see Chapter 6) and diagnostics performed as
above to identify sources of pain. Blockages along the spermatic cord, such as spermatocele, may
be identified by a skilled ultrasonographer.
Oligozoospermia may be due to incomplete ejaculation, retrograde ejaculation, or reproduc-
tive tract disease. Some reports suggest that dogs with hypothyroidism may have abnormally low
sperm numbers; hypothyroidism is best diagnosed by demonstration of abnormally low free
thyroxine and abnormally high thyroid stimulating hormone (see Chapter 27). Retrograde ejacu-
lation is diagnosed by collection of a urine sample by cystocentesis immediately after ejaculation
and demonstration of a greater number of spermatozoa in the urine than in the seminal fluid.
Testicular changes that may be evident on palpation include increase in testicular size, most often
due to neoplasia, and decreased testicular size, most often due to atrophy. The three common
types of testicular neoplasia are seminoma, interstitial (Leydig) cell tumor, and Sertoli cell tumor,
all three tumor types. Some testicular tumors are not palpable and are best identified by ultra-
  a    m s   o  
Canine disease 183
contralateral testis, elevated body temperature due to fever or heat stroke, or direct increase in
tfion of prostate disease (see Chapters 53 and 54) or brucellosis (see Chapter 44).
Teratozoospermia and asthenozoospermia often occur together and are usually due to the
same causes as oligozoospermia. Asthenozoospermia in the presence of a large number of nor-
mally shaped spermatozoa may be indicative of contaminated equipment; another semen sample
should be collected using clean equipment and meticulous care should be taken not to expose
the semen to soap or other toxic substances.
Treatment
Poor libido due to pain should be treated by management of the underlying cause, if possible.
Undefined causes of poor libido may be treated by administration of gonadotropin releasing
hormone (1 to 2μg/kg intramuscularly 60 min before semen collection or breeding). The author
has had some success with apprehensive dogs by spraying her lab coat with dog-appeasing
pheromone several minutes before collection.
Treatment for prostate disease is discussed in Chapters 53 and 54, for brucellosis in Chapter
44, and for hypothyroidism in Chapter 27. Castration cures most cases of testicular neoplasia.
Retrograde ejaculation may be treated with sympathomimetic agents, which promote closure
of the bladder neck during ejaculation. Examples include phenylpropanolamine (3 mg/kg per os
twice daily) and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (3 to 5mg/kg per os three times daily or 3 and
1 h before semen collection or attempted breeding). If no specific cause of oligozoospermia is
identified, number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate may be increased by administration of pros-
taglandin F2alpha (Lutalyse M, 0.1 mg/kg subcutaneously 15 min prior to collection). Side effects
 are mild and include salivation and panting lasting 10 to 20 min.
Supplemental reading
 Hess M. 2006. Documented and anecdotal effects of certain pharmaceutical agents used to enhance semen
quality in the dog. Theriogenology 66:613-617.
Memon MA. 2007. Common causes of male dog infertility. Theriogenology 68:322-328.
Romagnoli S, Majolino G. 2009. Aspermia/oligozoospermia caused by retrograde ejaculation in the dog.
In Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV (Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, and Kirk RW, eds.), pp. 1049-1053.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier.
Section V
Feline techniques
57
What is the technique for collection of a vaginal
cytology specimen?
Anatomy
 The feline vagina is short and horizontal, with a significant narrowing less than 1 cm within the
vulvar lips.
Pre-procedure considerations
The vagina is not sterile. A non-sterile cotton-tipped applicator, moistened with saline or water,
 is used. Smaller diameter swabs may be used, but the operator must be careful of their flexible
shaft.
Procedure
Estrous queens readily tolerate the vaginal swab procedure. Anestrous queens do not tolerate the
procedure and must be restrained. Insert the moistened swab between the vulvar lips to the depth
of the cotton. Roll the swab within the vagina, remove it, and roll it several times on a clean glass
slide. Allow the slide to air-dry and stain for interpretation (see Chapter 58).
Post-care and complications
 No complications are reported.
Supplemental reading
Watson PF, Glover TE. 1993. Vaginal anatomy of the domestic cat (Felis catus) in relation to copulation
and artificial insemination. J Reprod Fert 47(Suppl):355-359.
Zambelli D, Cunto M. 2005. Vaginal and cervical modifications during the estrus cycle in the domestic cat.
Theriogenology 64:679-684.
187
58
How do I interpret vaginal cytology?
Anatomy
 Not applicable.
Pre-procedure considerations
 Not applicable.
Procedure
Breeding management
The healthy epithelial cells that line the vagina at all times are termed non-cornified and include
the parabasal and intermediate cells (Fig. 58-1). Under the influence of estrogen, these cells are
Hgure 58-1: Non-cornified vaginal epithelial cells from a queen.
189
190 How do I interpret vaginal cytology?
00
N
Figure 58-2: Cornified vaginal epithelial cells from a queen
stimulated to divide. As the cells divide and the vaginal lining thickens, those cells nearest the
lumen become non-viable and lose the characteristic appearance of a healthy cell monolayer.
The misshapen, clumped cells are termed cornified (Fig. 58-2). Cornified vaginal cytology in
queens varies from that in bitches in that the cornified cells are less likely to clump together and
rarely appear anuclear.
Diagnosis of disease
Spayed female cats and queens not in proestrus or estrus will have non-cornified epithelial cells.
Presence of cornified cells at any other time suggests estrogen influence. Possible disorders associ-
ated with abnormally cornified cytology include ovarian remnant syndrome, ovarian cystic
disease, ovarian tumor, or ingestion or absorption of estrogen, usually from a human pharma-
ceutical source. Pathologic discharge usually is mucopurulent and is associated with uterine
disease (see Chapter 80) or pregnancy loss (see Chapter 79).
Post-care and complications
Not applicable.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 396-405.
59
What techniques are available for pregnancy
diagnosis and when are they best used?
Anatomy
The uterine body lies in the caudal abdomen and is the only discrete tissue mass between the
colon and the urinary bladder. The uterine horns are tortuous and lie cranially among the small
intestines.
Pre-procedure considerations
 Pregnancy diagnosis in cats is easy. Because of the small size of queens, there may be a greater
risk of harm to the embryo or fetus with manipulation of the amniotic sac or conceptus. The
 uterine horns are tortuous and lie among the smallintestines. The stage at which pregnancy can
 be diagnosed varies with the technique used. There are few reasons to see potentially pregnant
cats outside this window, and, in fact, this may expose them to disease or otherwise potentially
harm the pregnancy.
Procedure
 Diagnostic tests valuable for pregnancy diagnosis in queens and the time they are best used are
listed in Table 59-1. There is no early pregnancy test for cats, and human early pregnancy tests
 do not work in cats because they assay a hormone produced only by humans, human chorionic
gonadotropin.
Post-care and complications
There are no reported detriments to the queen or kitten with any of these diagnostic techniques
if performed at the proper time with technical skill and use of well-maintained equipment.
Supplemental reading
Harris LA, Steinetz BG, Bond JB, et al. 2008. Refinement of a conmercial bench-top relaxin assay for
pregnancy diagnosis using urine from domestic and nondomestic felids. J Zoo Wildl Med 39:10-179.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 414-430.
191
192 What techniques are available for pregnancy diagnosis?
Table 59-1. Pregnancy diagnostic techniques in the queen.
Technique
Time When
Comments
Litter Size?
Viability?
Best Used
Abdominal
21-35 days
Prior to 21 days. the
Palpation is a
Palpation cannot be
palpation 
 of pregnancy
 individual amniotic
poor indicator of
used to assess viability
vesidles are difficult to
Itter size.
of kittens. At term,
feel, and after 35 days.
kitten rmovement may
they enlarge and
be visible or palpable.
become confluent, again
but lack of moverment
making them difficult to
 not invariably
N
feel as individual entities.
255ociated with kitten
Care should be taken
death.
not to squeeze the
armniotic vesicles but
rather to let therm "blip"
through the fingers.
Palpation is difficult in
obese and tense queens.
Transabdominal
Beyond 16
At 16 days. the amniotic
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is the
ultrasonography
days of
vesidles are visible a5
b a poor
best indicator of
pregnancy
black balls with a
indicator of litter
viability. Beyond
comma-shaped tissue
size unless the
assessment of
 mass within them.
Iitter is very
movement, heart rate
Beyond 16 to 25 days,
small and the
can be assessed; heart
 beating hearts can be
kittens are
late of less than 150
seen.
widely spaced in
to 170bpm is
the abdomen.
indicative of fetal
stress.
Abdominal
Beyond 38
Mineralization of fetuses
Radiography is
If kittens have been
radiographs
to 40 days
must be present.
the best
dead for at least 1 day.
 of pregnancy
Radiographs are most
indicator of litter 
signs of fetal death
useful very late in
size. Miscounts
may be visible on
 pregnancy. when not
are most
ladiographs, including
only can pregnancy be
 common in very
 gas within and around
diagnosed, but litter 
large litters.
the kittens, and
size, size of individual
collapse of the skull or
kittens, and some notion
axial skeleton.
of viability also may be
elucidated.
Relaxin assay
Beyond 28
The only in-house assay
 days of
that is commercially
 pregnancy
 available is marketed for
dogs. This test can be
used to assay relaxin in
cat serum or in cat urine
that is diluted 1: 1 with
nonpregnant cat serum
60
What are the techniques for semen collection
from male cats?
Anatomy
Intact male cats have a penis covered with cornified spines, two testes, which should descend
into the scrotum shortly after birth, a prostate, and bulbourethral glands.
Pre-procedure considerations
Manual ejaculation requires training and may not be possible for all cats, especially those who
will be seen only occasionally in practice. Electroejaculation requires general anesthesia; pre-
anesthetic physical examination and bloodwork should be performed.
Procedure
 Manual ejaculation is as in the dog. A tiny artificial vagina may be created using a 2-ml rubber
pipette bulb and a 3 × 44 mm test tube. The cat is trained by stimulation in the presence of an
estrous queen. The collecting instrument is placed over the penis as the cat ejaculates. This
technique requires training of the operator and the cat, and is not possible in all cats. Normal
breeding behaviors of male cats are aggressive and operators should exercise great caution.
Electroejaculation requires the use of a probe specifically sized for domestic cats, and a rheostat
allowing the application of stimuli varying from 0 to 5V (Fig. 60-1). Stimuli are applied in an
increasing sequence with rest periods between, and a collecting device placed over or beneath
the penis of the recumbent cat to catch the ejaculate.
Miscellaneous techniques that permit evaluation of whether spermatozoa are being ejaculated
or not, but do not provide a volume of semen for evaluation, are cystocentesis of the tom after
natural service and collection of a vaginal swab from the queen after natural service. Lack of
spermatozoa with either technique is not conclusive evidence that ejaculation did not occur or
that the tom ejaculated fluid containing no spermatozoa; presence of spermatozoa with either
technique confirms that the male is producing and ejaculating some spermatozoa.
Post-care and complications
Recovery from anesthesia is as for any procedure. The most common side effects reported for
electroejaculation impact semen quality only and do not affect the health of the cat. Semen
quality may be decreased when sermen is collected by electroejaculation as overstimulation of the
accessory sex glands increases ejaculation of sperm-free fractions of the ejaculate, and as
193
194 What are the techniques for semen collection from male cats?
00
NITE
Poanften
Figure 60-1: Electroejaculation equipment for domestic cats (photo courtesy of Marie Kustritz)
retrograde movement of spermatozoa into the urinary bladder may occur. The latter effect may
 be more significant if xylazine is used as an anesthetic agent. Concentration of spermatozoa in
the ejaculate has been demonstrated to be increased when medetomidine was compared with
ketamine for induction of anesthesia.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 508-522.
Zambelli D, Cunto M, Prati F, Merlo B. 2007. Effects of ketamine or medetomidine administration on
quality of electroejaculated sperm and on sperm flow in the domestic cat. Theriogenology 68:796-803.
61
What is the technique for semen evaluation
in cats?
Anatomy
Not applicable.
Pre-procedure considerations
Cold shock is not as significant a problem in cats as it is in other species. Equipment and samples
can be maintained at room temperature for evaluation.
Procedure
Color
 Color is assessed visually. Normal semen is moderately milky white. Abnormal colors that may
Volume
Volume varies in cats from 0.01 to 0.7 ml. Volume is not correlated with quality. Record volume
collected before any samples are removed for evaluation; this value will be needed later to cal-
culate the total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate.
Motility
Motility should be assessed soon after semen collection. Place one drop of semen on a glass slide.
You may or may not use a cover slip. Subjectively assess the percentage of spermatozoa that are
moving forward. Normal is 70% or greater. Some people also assess the speed of movement of
the spermatozoa; there are no reported correlations between speed of motility and fertility in
that cat or with use of that particular sample.
Concentration/total number
Make a 1: 100 dilution of semen by diluting 1 part semen (0.1 ml) with 9 parts formal-buffered
saline (0.9 ml) to make a 1: 10 dilution and than mixing 1 part of that initial dilution with 9 parts
formal-buffered saline. This also can be done using the white blood cell Unopette system. Use
the enclosed piercing device to make a hole in the top of the diluent container. Remove the
piercing device to reveal the pipette. Fill the pipette by capillary action. Squeeze the diluent
container and insert the pipette, letting go of everything at once so the semen is sucked from the
195
196 What is the technique for semen evaluation in cats?
pipette into the diluent. Remove the pipette and turn it around, reseating the hub to form a
dispenser.
With either technique, semen is counted using a hemacytometer. Place the glass cover slip
over the central area of the hemacytometer. Dispense diluted semen such that capillary action
carries it across the central area. Fill each side of the hemacytometer separately. Allow the hema-
cytometer to sit for about 5 min after filling, to allow spermatozoa to settle.
The hemacytometer grid consists of nine large squares. Using the 10x objective, one of these
large squares will fll the microscope field. Count all the spermatozoa visible in one of the nine
large squares. This yields the concentration in millions per milliliter.
Total number of spermatozoa in the sample does not vary with technique and is the valued
number in semen evaluation. Volume (milliliter per ejaculate) multiplied by concentration
(spermatozoa per milliliter) yields total number (spermatozoa per ejaculate). Normal ranges
from 3.5 to 61 million spermatozoa per ejaculate.
Morphology
Morphology, or shape, of spermatozoa is not specificall associated with fertility in cats as in
other species. However, a higher percentage of morphologically normal spermatozoa is desirable
as poor morphology often is associated with poor motility and, presumably, with decreased
 ability of those spermatozoa to reach the uterine tube and fertilize ova.
Morphology can be assessed in wet mounts using phase-contrast microscopy if it is available.
Head defects may be more difficult to see with this technique, and it is not available to most
 practitioners. It may be more difficult to see other abnormalities, most notably cytoplasmic
droplets, on stained samples.
Place one drop of semen at one end of a glass slide and smear it out as for a blood smear.
Let it air-dry and stain with a triple stain, leaving it in each of the three solutions (fixative
safranin, and crystal violet) for 5min. Rinse and allow to air-dry before evaluating under oil
immersion.
Another technique is to place one drop of semen at one end of a glass slide and place a drop
n x n  do z n  s sd e h hi n nxu s -  o
and draw it out into a thick smear. Allow to air-dry and evaluate under oil immersion.
Morphology can be broken down into normal spermatozoa, those with primary defects, and
those with secondary defects. Primary defects occur during spermatogenesis and include any-
thing doubled, any abnormality of the shape of the head, proximal cytoplasmic droplets, and
bending of the midpiece. Secondary defects occur during sample preparation or are an indication
of infection and include detached heads, distal cytoplasmic droplets, and bent tails. The average
percentage of morphologically normal spermatozoa in one report was 44%; other sources cite
values nearer 71%. The significance of specific primary or secondary defects is not known in
cats, although a preponderance of primary defects may carry a worse prognosis than a prepon-
derance of secondary defects, simply because the underlying cause is less likely to be something
collection to the next in cats, suggesting that multiple evaluations be performed before a cat is
declared subfertile or infertile.
Use ofautomatedsemen evaluationsystems
Many facilities that do much semen evaluation, especially those that freeze semen, use an auto-
mated system for semen evaluation. These are commonly called computer-assisted sperm analy-
sis (CASA) systems. CASA systems must be specifically calibrated for cat semen, which is more
dilute than that of other species.
Feline techniques 197
Post-care and complications
 Not applicable.
Supplemental reading
Axner E, Linde-Forsberg C. 2007. Sperm morphology in the domestic cat and its relation with fertility: A
retrospective study. Reprod Dom Anim 42:282-291.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
E5
 Saunders Co., pp. 508-520.
TECHNIOU
FELINE
62
What is the technique for vaginal insemination?
Anatomy
 The feline vagina is small and horizontal, with a significant narrowing les than 1 cm within the
vulvar lips.
Pre-procedure considerations
Ovulation must be induced before insemination is performed. Administer 100 to 250 IU human
chorionic gonadotropin intramuscularly to the estrous queen days 2 to 4 after onset of behavioral
estrus. Insemination usually is performed 12 to 24 h later.
Vaginal insemination is used with fresh semen. Frozen-thawed semen must be inseminated
directly into the uterus (see Chapter 63).
Procedure
Total insemination volume should be about 0.1 ml. Semen collected may need to be suspended
in an extender to achieve this volume. Place the queen under general anesthesia. Insert either a
a 1-ml syringe containing the semen sample and dispense it into the vagina.
Post-care and complications
 Post-care is as for any procedure requiring general anesthesia.
Supplemental reading
Chatdarong K, Axner E, Manee-In S, et al. 2007. Pregnancy in the domestic cat after vaginal or transcervical
 insemination with fresh or frozen semen. Theriogenology 68:1326-1333.
Tanaka A, Takagi Y, Nakagawa K, et al. 2000. Artifcial intravaginal insemination using fresh semen in cats.
J Vet Med Sci 62: 1163-1167.
Villaverde AISB, Melo CM, Martin I, et al. 2008. Comparison of efficiency between two artificial insemina
tion methods using frozen-thawed semen in domestic cat (Felis catus). Artifical insemination in domestic
cats. Anim Reprod Sei doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2008.10.008.
199
63
What is the technique for surgical insemination?
Anatomy
The uterus of the queen has a small body and long, torturous horns. Semen can be deposited
anywhere within the lumen of either horn.
Pre-procedure considerations
Surgical insemination is used to introduce semen directly into the uterus, bypassing the vagina
and cervix. It most commonly is used with frozen-thawed semen. Ovulation must be induced
before insemination is performed. Administer 100 to 250 1U human chorionic gonadotropin
intramuscularly to the estrous queen days 2 to 4 after onset of behavioral estrus. Insemination
usually is performed 12 to 24h later.
Procedure
 Place the animal under general anesthesia and shave and prepare the abdomen for sterile surgery.
Make a ventral midline incision and exteriorize the uterus. Pass a 25-gauge needle or catheter
 into the lumen of the uterine body.
If frozen semen is being used, semen should be thawed using the instructions provided by the
person who froze that semen. Semen should be thawed as close to the moment of insemination
as possible to minimize the time the thawed semen is held at room temperature.
Draw the semen up into a sterile syringe. Introduce the semen through the catheter; it should
flow freely into the uterine lumen. Even small volumes distend the uterine body and both horns.
Muscle fasciculations of the uterus may be evident affter the semen is introduced. Withdraw the
needle or catheter, and blot the hole with gauze until hemostasis is achieved. Replace the uterus
in the abdomen and close in a routine manner.
Post-care and complications
 Incision care is as for any abdominal incision.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 406-413.
201
64
What is the technique for anesthesia for
Cesarean section?
Anatomy
Anatomic changes of pregnancy are reflected in physiologic changes, as described below.
Pre-procedure considerations
Physiologic changes of pregnancy that impact anesthesia include an increase in plasma volume
 and decrease in hematocrit, increased oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production,
increased cardiac output, decreased blood pressure due to vasodilation and hypotension due to
mechanical compression from the gravid uterus, and slowed gastrointestinal (GI) motility. These
changes necessitate addressing hydration to maintain normal blood pressure during surgery, and
use of a well-fitted, cuffed endotracheal tube to counter aspiration of GI contents.
Once a decision has been made to perform Cesarean section, time is of the essence. An intra-
venous catheter should be placed and fluid therapy instituted. The surgical site should be clipped
and prepped as much as possible before any anesthetic agents are introduced. Equipment for
neonatal resuscitation should be assembled, including oxygen and small masks or endotracheal
tubes, hemostats to clamp off the umbilical cords, suction apparatuses to remove fluid from the
oral and nasal cavities, warm towels, and appropriate medications (see below).
Procedure
Considerations of anesthesia
Maternal stability under anesthesia should be monitored by assessment of heart rate and rhythm.
blood pressure, and oxygenation status (pulse oximetry), if possible. Maintaining maternal blood
pressure is an important component in maintaining placental blood flow and supporting the
s e pe  ae  a a are a  s
Choosing appropriate anesthetic agents
Remember that most anesthetic agents exert their effect because they are soluble in fat and move
readily into tissue. That means that most will very readily cross the placenta and that anything
given to the dam is also being given to the kittens. Choose drugs that cause minimal cardiovas-
cular depression, or that are easily reversed. Short-acting drugs will have less of an effect on the
fetuses as they are more rapidly cleared; longer acting drugs can be added for the sake of the dam
after the kittens are delivered.
203
204 what is the technique for anesthesia for Cesarean section?
Pregnant animals have an increased pain threshold due to release of endogenous endorphins.
When considering anesthetic agents, generally this translates to a reduction in inhala nt anesthesia
requirements and reduced need for opioids to achieved desired analgesia. Sample protocols are
outlined in Table 64-1.
Table 64-1. Sarmple anesthetic protocols for feline Cesarean section.
Protocol 1—If the queen is healthy
●Pretreat with glycopyrrolate
N
113
● Induce anesthesia with diazeparm and ketarmine
● Bolus ketamine intravenously (Iv) as needed for intubation and maintenance on isoflurane or
● Use 0.5-1% lidocaine without epinephrine along incision line—Do not exceed total dose of 10 mg/kg
of lidocaine
Protocol 2—f the queen is depressed (this protocol may cause excitation in healthy queens)
● Butophanol or oxymorphone
● Add ketamine or thiopental for inducation; intubate and maintain on isoflurane
● Sedation in kittens can be reversed with naloxone (for opioids) or flumazenil (for diazepam)
Protocol 3
Protocol 4
● Diazepam (intramuscularly) and etomidate (Iv): intubate and maintain on isoflurane or sevoflurane
Table 64-2. Kitten resuscitation.
1. Keep the kitten wamm. Dry by vigorously nubbing the kitten with a warm, dry towel. Clear the mouth
and nose of fluid by suction
2. If opioids were given to the dam, reverse with naloxone (one drop from a 25-gauze needle.
sublingually). If benzodiazepines were given to the dam, reverse with flumazenil
uln! aeld 'uay ayn bup ysuy buio io buyow pue wdaol iseal ne buyieaig s! aneuoau ayt n E
a warm area (warm air circulating pad or radiant heat), and clarmp or tie off the umbilicus. If the
kitten is not breathing at least 10bpm, and is also not moving or crying. provide oxygen for 30-40 5
and continue tactile stimulation by rubbing.
 4. If the kitten does not begin to breathe spontaneously, attermpt to stimulate respiration with
placement and rotation of a 25-gauge needle into the nasal philtrum (GV 26 or Jen Chung
acupuncture site). If that does not work, consider administration of doxapram sublingually.
 5. If there is no discernible heart rate, begin gentle chest compressions (1 to 2 per second).
lapisuoo jeag yeay pue bununeaig snoaueiuods apia jou op suoissaidwos isaup pue uoneuabixo y 9
snouaaeul jo uoensiumpe pue (on laidey aas) latayie snoassoeui ue jo juawaneid buin
10% dextro5e solution (2-4 rml/kg a5 a slow bolus) or 5odium bicarbonate (1 rml/kg of the 1 IU/ml
concentration)
7. If there is no response by 30 rmin, the kitten is declared dead.
Feline techniques  205
Post-care and complications
The queen is recovered from anesthesia and extubated in a routine fashion.
selection of anesthetic agents, as described above, and (2) implementation of a sequence of steps
to be taken by all personnel resuscitating kittens (Table 64-2).
Supplemental reading
Pascoe PJ, Moon PF. 2001. Periparturient and neonatal anesthesia. Vet Clin NA 31:315-341.
no
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia (Tranquilli W], Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds.), pp. 955-967. Ames,
IA: Blackwell Publishing.
Skarda RT. 1999. Anesthesia case of the month: Dystocia in a queen. J Amer Vet Med Assoc 214:37-39.
ELINE
Traas A. 2008. Resuscitation of canine and feline neonates. Theriogenology 70:343-348.
Tranquilli WJ. 1992. Anesthesia for Cesarean section in the cat. Vet Clin NA 22:484-486.
65
What is the technique for Cesarean section?
Anatomy
The ovaries lie caudal to the kidneys and each is encased in an ovarian bursa. The primary blood
supply is the ovarian artery. The body of the uterus lies within the pelvis; the uterine horns lie
 in the abdomen. The uterus and ovaries are suspended and attached to the body wall by the
broad ligament. The primary uterine blood supply is the bilateral uterine arteries, which arise
from the vaginal arteries caudally and lie along the uterine body with small branches supplying
the uterine horns over their length.
Pre-procedure considerations
Cesarean section (C-section) is indicated if obstructive dystocia is present, if the queen is exhibit-
ing primary or secondary uterine inertia, if medical therapy for dystocia has been unproductive,
or if fetal heart rate is less than 170bpm (see Chapter 78). Concurrent ovariohysterectomy (OHE)
should be offered to the owner. The primary advantage is that the queen will not have to undergo
another anesthetic episode for OHE in the future. The disadvantages are an increased risk of
hemorrhage and hypovolemia. Milk production will not be altered by concurrent OHE.
The queen should be prepared for surgery to the greatest extent possible before any anesthetic
medications are administered. Details of anesthesia are presented in Chapter 64.
Procedure
The queen is shaved and prepped for sterile surgery. Both ventral midline and flank approaches
have been described; the former is more common. Make an incision from just cranial to the
 pubis to the umbilicus. The abdominal musculature is stretched thin; use caution when incising
the linea alba.
Exteriorize the gravid uterus and pack it off with saline-moistened laparatomy sponges (Fig-
65- 1). Make an incision in a relatively avascular area of the uterus in one horn near the uterine
body. All kittens can be milked from both horns to this single incision readily. If there are a large
number of kittens, an incision may be made in each uterine horn. If a kitten is stuck in the pelvic
canal, an incision should be made in the uterine body.
The kiten is removed, still encased within its amniotic sac, and handed off to waiting person-
nel for resuscitation (see Chapter 64). The placenta and other fetal tissues should be removed
with the kitten if they come readily. If the placenta still is tightly adhered to the endometrium,
207
208 What is the technique for Cesarean section?
00
N
Figure 65-1: Exteriorized gravid cat uterus.
it may minimize bleeding if it is left in place and allowed to detach and pass with post-partum
lochia.
When all kittens have been removed, palpate the entire uterus and into the pelvic canal to
make sure no kittens have been missed. If the queen is not to be spayed, close the uterus with
absorbable suture in an inverting pattern, in one or two layers. If the queen is to be spayed, the
uterus is roughly closed in a continuous pattern to minimize leaking of uterine contents into the
abdomen during manipulation, and routine OHE is performed. Flush and inspect the abdomen.
Close the abdominal layers routinely. Non-absorbable suture may be used to ensure closure and
healing of the thinned linea alba.
En-bloc OHE has been described as a means of performing concurrent OHE and C-section.
The ovarian arteries and uterine arteries and body are clamped and the gravid uterus removed.
The uterus is handed off to an assistant, who quickly opens the uterus and removes all the kittens
for resuscitation. The surgeon returns to the queen to ligate the ovarian and uterine vessels and
complete the OHE. The advantage of this technique is minimal transfer of anesthetic agents to
the kittens and decreased possibility of abdominal contamination with uterine contents. The
disadvantage is possibility of fetal stress secondary to loss of uterine and placental blood flow.
There are few studies documenting success rates with this technique compared with standard
C-section.
Post-care and complications
Little is known about pharmacokinetics of pain medications in lactating queens. Opioids enter
milk, but total dose ingested by any given kitten is low, so this may be the preferred drug class
for this indication.
 Necessity of C-section to relieve dystocia at one parturition is not indicative of a requirement
for C-sections at future queenings. For most queens that require more than one C-section it is
because there is a common underlying cause for dystocia in both cases or because they are of a
breed that is predisposed to dystocia.
Supplemental reading
Traas AM. 2008. Surgical management of canine and feline dystocia. Theriogenology 70:337-342.
Section Vi
Feline reproductive physiology
66
What is the normal age for puberty onset in
queens and toms?
General information
Puberty is defned in queens as first estrus and in males as acquisition of normal semen quality
 and ability to exhibit normal breeding behaviors. Puberty onset is dependent on age, body
weight, breed, and season of the year.
Most queens first exhibit estrus between 4 and 12 months of age, when they reach a body
weight of 2.3 to 2.5 kg (5.1 to 5.51b). Queens are seasonally polyestrous (see Chapter 67) and will
 not undergo puberal estrus when they reach an appropriate age or body weight if it is not also
the correct time of the year. In the northern hemisphere, queens do not cycle when day length
is decreasing (September through December), with that effect more marked as you move away
 from the equator. Breed also plays a role; in general, Burmese queens enter puberty earlier than
other breeds, and long-haired breeds and Manx queens enter puberty later than other breeds.
Toms undergo puberty at 8 to 10 months of age on average, although there is evidence of
spermatogenesis in many cats when younger. Season plays less of a role in puberty onset for male
cats.
Clinical implications
Puberty onset in queens may be hastened by maintaining the queen in an environment with
increased lighting, mimicking long day length. Conversely, cats housed in an environment with
 no exposure to natural light and minimal supplemental lighting may enter puberty later than
expected.
Supplemental reading
Axner E. 2008. Updates on reproductive physiology genital diseases, and artificial insemination in the
domestic cat. Reprod Dom Anirm 43: 144-149.
Griffn B. 2001. Prolific cats: The estrous cycle. Compendium 23:1049-1056.
211
67
What are the normal parameters for the estrous
(heat) cycle in queens?
General information
The heat or estrous cycle consists of five stages. These are proestrus, estrus, post-estrus, diestrus,
and anestrus. Queens are polyestrous and seasonal, meaning they cycle continuously unless that
cycle is broken by pregnancy, disease, or season. In the northern hemisphere, queens do not 
cycle when day length is decreasing, usually September through December. This effect is more
 marked as you move further away from the equator.
Proestrus is the stage where the queen is undergoing follicular development and starts to
attract male cats. Queens, unlike bitches, do not exhibit vulvar swelling and exudation of vulvar
discharge. Proestrus rarely is seen in queens; when the owner first notes that the queen is in heat,
she usually is in estrus.
Estrus, or standing heat, is the stage where the queen allows the male to mount and breed her.
Physical signs are minimal compared with those seen in the bitch. In one study of 187 estrous
cycles, scant transparent vulvar discharge was observed 54.1% of the time. Behavioral signs of
estrus in queens include monotonous yowling and assumption of the lordosis posture, where
the forelimbs are pressed to the ground, the hindlimbs straightened, the back arched, and the
tail held to one side (Fig. 67-1). Some queens also are more affectionate when in estrus. Queens
bred three or more times during estrus usually are induced to ovulate. Length of estrus varies
from 2 to 19 days, with an average duration of 6 to 8 days. Studies disagree as to whether induc-
tion of ovulation shortens duration of estrus in queens.
Post-estrus is the stage after an estrus during which the queen was not induced to ovulate.
 Follicles regress and new follicles emerge such that the queen is again in estrus in about 8 to 10
days.
Diestrus is the stage after ovulation has been induced, during which the queen is under
the influence of progesterone. Successfully bred queens are pregnant during this stage. Queens
that were induced to ovulate but are not pregnant will maintain the corpora lutea (CL) and
progesterone production for an average of 40 days before lysing those CLs and returning to
estrus.
Anestrus is the stage of reproductive quiescence. There are no specific physical or behavioral
changes. Seasonal anestrus in queens lasts about 3 months, during the time of the year when day
length is decreasing.
213
214 what are the normal parameters for the estrous (heat) cycle in queens?
Figure 67-1: Queen in estrus exhibiting lordosis.
+
Clinical implications
Duration of stages of the estrous cycle may be irregular in queens aged less than 1 year or more
than 10 years. Induction of ovulation and maintenance of CLs during diestrus can be used as an
estrus-suppressing regimen in queens (see Chapter 72).
Supplemental reading
Griffin B.2001.Prolifc cats: The estrous cycle. Compendium 23:1049-1056.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 396-405.
 Pereira da Silva TF, Machado da Silva LD, Uchoa DC, et al. 2006. Sexual characteristics of domestic queens
kept in a natural equatorial photoperiod. Theriogenology 66: 1476-1481.
 Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PNS. 1995. Estrous length, pregnancy rate, gestation and parturition lengths,
litter size, and juvenile mortality in the domestic cat. J Aer Anir Hosp Assoc 31:429-433.
68
What are the normal parameters for semen
quality in cats?
General information
Semen collection and semen evaluation are described in Chapters 60 and 61, respectively. Semen
evaluation in cats includes assessment of color, volume, percentage progressively motile sperma-
tozoa, concentration and total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate, and percentage morpho-
 logicall normal spermatozoa (Table 68-1).
Clinical implications
Clear semen is indicative of lack of spermatozoa in the sample. Yellow color is urine
contamination.
Volume varies with collection technique and is not a reflection of capabilities of the cat.
Volume must be noted, however, as it is concentration multiplied by volume that yields total
number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate.
Morphologic defects can be classified as primary (occurring during spermatogenesis) or sec-
ondary (occuring during storage in the epididymis or as an artifact of sample preparation).
Examples of primary morphologic defects are double heads, double midpieces, double tails, bent
midpieces, and proximal cytoplasmic droplets. Examples of secondary defects are bent tails
detached heads, and distal cytoplasmic droplets. Effect of a preponderance of any given defect
on fertility is not well defined in cats. If most defects are primary, this suggests that a problem
lies within the testis and prognosis for return to normal semen quality is worse than if most
defects are secondary.
Table 68-1. Normal semen parameters in cats.
 Parameter
Normal
Color
Moderately milky or opalescent
Volume
0.01 to 0.7 ml
Percentage progressively motile spermatozoa
70% or greater
Total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate
3.5 to 60 million
Percentage morphologically normal spermatozoa
44 to 71%
215
216what are the normal parameters for semen quality in cats?
Total number of spermatozoa in the ejaculate varies with the cat and with the collection tech-
nique (see Chapters 60 and 61).
Supplemental reading
retrospective study.ReprodDomAnim 42:282-291.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 508-520.
NOIL
NEEE
Section Vll
Feline reproductive management
69
What age is best for ovariohysterectomy of
female cats?
General information
Although studies have demonstrated safety of ovariohysterectomy (OHE), or spay, in cats as
young as 7 weeks of age, there are no prospective long-term studies demonstrating the optimal
age for OHE of female cats. Non-owned cats (stray or feral animals, humane society animals)
should be spayed prior to placement in a new home. There is much in the popular literature on
this topic; veterinarians are cautioned to be aware of the number and validity of studies cited to
support statements of fact in any publication.
Advantages of OHE include decreased incidence of mammary neoplasia in aged cats; decreased
incidence of uterine disease, most notably pyometra; and decreased incidence of sexually dimor-
phic behaviors.
Mammary neoplasia is the third most common tumor type in female cats. Greater than 90%
of reported cases are malignant, with spread locally and to regional lymph nodes, lungs, and
other tissues. Multiple studies over decades have documented a protective effect of OHE; it has
been reported that sexually intact female cats have seven times the risk of developing a mammary
tumor when aged compared with spayed cats. Surgery is the preferred treatment modality.
Pyometra is common in aged female cats; there is a significant likelihood that cats will have
uterine disease by 5 years of age. OHE is curative of pyometra, with a reported mortality rate
of 8%.
The most significant disadvantage of OHE in cats is obesity. Some studies suggest a predisposi
fion to diabetes mellitus, especially in Burmese cats; this may be associated with obesity. Obesity
is the most common nutritional disorder in cats, and multiple retrospective studies have dem-
onstrated a correlation between spay or castration and weight gain. In cats, it has been demon-
strated that gonadectomy is associated with decreased metabolic rate. Weight gain is easily
controlled by the owner, with appropriate diet and exercise. Another reported concern is general
surgical risk; adverse postsurgical events are reported to occur up to 33% of the time in queens,
with most reported side effects mild and self-resolving.
Clinical implications
The veterinarian and client must take into account incidence and morbidity and mortality of
disorders associated with OHE to determine the optimal age of OHE for a given cat. Breed also
may play a role; Siamese and domestic Japanese breeds of cat are predisposed to mammary
219
220 what age is best for ovariohysterectomy of female cats?
neoplasia. The high incidence and high morbidity and mortality associated with mammary
 neoplasia in cats argue strongly for OHE before the first estrus, which may occur at as young as
4 months of age (see Chapter 66).
Supplemental reading
Romagnoli S. 2008. Surgical gonadectomy in the bitch and queen: Should it be done and at what age?
 Proceedings, Southern European Veterinary Conference, Barcelona, Spain.
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. Determining the optimal age for gonadectomy of dogs and cats. J Armer Vet Med
Assoc 231:1665-1675.
NIT3:
70
When is it best to perform ovariohysterectomy of
female cats relative to heat?
General information
Vascularity of the ovaries and uterus is increased when cats are under the influence of estrogen,
 as in proestrus and estrus, and during pregnancy. Vascularity is decreased after ovulation, when
the queen is under the influence of progesterone, unless the queen becomes pregnant. Most cats
are best spayed between heat cycles, when in post-estrus or anestrus (see Chapter 67).
Cats that are induced to ovulate may develop mammary hypertrophy during diestrus, or non-
neoplastic enlargement of one or more mammary glands (Fig. 70-1). This condition also may
 Occur in animals receiving exogenous progestins.
Clinical implications
Because of the increased vascularity, anesthesia and surgery take longer, and there is a greater
risk of intra- and postoperative bleeding if surgery is performed during proestrus or estrus.
Hgure 70-1: Mammary hypertrophy in a queen
221
Zeay oi aae au siey aleway yo Awopalaisayoeao woyad oi isag t! s! uaym 7?
 Similar risks, along with dehydration and anemia, are present if OHE is performed during preg-
nancy, as the heavily gravid uterus is removed surgically. There are no published studies docu-
menting increased incidence of side effects relative to the stage of pregnancy during which OHE
is performed.
OHE is curative for mammary hypertrophy, which willregress after the progesterone stimulus
de yu e io azis u aaai sua reu n puoisod q u hns poai si
may be necessary in severe cases.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 474-477.
NIT
E
71
What age is best for castration of male cats?
General information
Although studies have demonstrated safety of castration in cats as young as 6 weeks of age, there
 are no prospective long-term studies demonstrating the optimal age for castration of male cats.
Non-owned cats (stray or feral animals, humane society animals) should be castrated prior to
placement in a new home. There is much in the popular literature on this topic; veterinarians
are cautioned to be aware of the number and validity of studies cited to support statements of
fact in any publication.
The advantages of castration include decreased incidence of sexually dimorphic behaviors and
decreased incidence of diseases of the testes. The sexually dimorphic behaviors best controlled
by castration are aggression and urine marking.
The only significant disadvantage of castration is weight gain. Obesity is the most common
nutritional disorder of cats, and multiple retrospective studies have demonstrated a correlation
ated with decreased metabolic rate. Weight gain is easily controlled by the owner with appropri-
ate diet and exercise.
The popular literature and tradition cite increased incidence of urethral blockage as a com-
plication of castration in male cats. Multiple studies have demonstrated that there is no correla-
fion between castration at any age and incidence of urethral obstruction in cats. One study has 
demonstrated a possible increase in incidence of feline lower urinary tract disease, defined as
hematuria in the absence of urinary tract infection, in castrated animals.
Clinical implications
The normal behavior of the intact male cat makes him a poor candidate for a house pet and, in
many cases, a danger to other animals and to people in the home. The author strongly recom
mends castration well before puberty of male cats not intended for breeding (see Chapter 66).
Supplemental reading
Root Kustritz MV. 2007. Determining the optimal age for gonadectomy of dogs and cats. J Armer Vet Med
Assoc 231:1665-1675
223
72
Are nonsurgical alternatives available for
sterilization or contraception of female or
male cats?
General information
Contraception is reversible control of reproduction; sterilization is nonreversible or permanent
 control of reproduction. Most often we are interested in the latter in companion animal medi-
cine. As of this writing, there are no nonsurgical sterilants commercially available that are com-
pletely effective and safe for use in dogs and cats. This discussion will primarily concern
nonsurgical contraceptives.
Females
Hormones
Progesterone
 For female dogs, a synthetic form of progesterone, megestrol acetate (Ovabanrm), was commer-
cially available for many years and is still an approved estrus-suppressing drug for breeding and
nonbreeding bitches. It is not available commercially at this time but can be dispensed as a
human brand of megestrol acetate through a human pharmacy. Megestrol acetate works by
exerting negative feedback to the pituitary, preventing release of follicle-stimulating hormone
and luteinizing hormone. Megestrol acetate has never been approved for use in cats, although a
regimen of 5 mg/cat per os for 5 days and then weekly has been published. Side effects include
increased appetite, mammary development, uterine disease, diabetes mellitus, and possibly
mammary neoplasia.
Many other forms of progesterone are available as contraceptives in other countries. These
 include injectable forms of progesterone, such as medroxyprogesterone acetate, and unique
progestin compounds reported to have minimal side effects, such as proligestone. In many
countries where performance of elective ovariohysterectomy (OHE) and castration are unethical
or illegal, progestins routinely are administered as injections or via a patch, implant, or other
slow-release systems. These compounds are not available in the United States.
Androgen
A mild androgen, mibolerone (ChequeM), is approved for use in nonbreeding bitches in the
United States. This drug is not approved for use in breeding bitches and has never been approved.
for use in cats. Cheque'M is no longer available commercially, but mibolerone can be procured
through compounding pharmacies. Androgens inhibit estrus by exerting negative feedback on
225
226 Are nonsurgical alternatives available for sterilization or contraception of cats?
the pituitary. In cats, the effective dose of mibolerone for estrus suppression is nearly the toxic
dose. Side effects of therapy include cervical skin thickening, clitoral hypertrophy, and, if toxicity
occurs, hepatic failure and death. Mibolerone is not recommended for use in cats.
Ovuiation induction
Queens that are induced to ovulate but do not become pregnant will maintain high progesterone
for an average of 45 days after ovulation induction. Although this is not a long-term solution,
intermittent ovulation induction will permit queens to be shown or transported when not in
heat. Ovulation may be induced with physical manipulation of the vagina, but ovulation usually
is induced with gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH: 25 μg/cat intramuscularly). It is not
known whether recurrent ovulation induction and subsequent prolonged exposure to proges-
terone may predispose treated queens to pyometra.
Immunocontraception
Immunocontraception relies on the body's immune response to block fertility by stimulating the
creation of antibodies against specific molecules or tissues. The two antigens best described are
zona pellucida (ZP) proteins, which encircle the egg, and GnRH.
ZP proteins are highly conserved between species. This permits use of readily available pig
ovaries as a source of antigen. At present, there is no commercially available ZP vaccine for cats.
Research has documented an antibody response in queens immunized against ZP proteins from
 many species, but these antibodies do not prevent conception.
Mafes
Very little work has been done to demonstrate efficacy of contraceptives in male cats. Because
the normal sexual behavior of male cats is so aggressive, most people prefer castration as a means
Clinical implications
Most pet owners are as concerned about controlling their queen's or tom cat's physical and
behavioral manifestation of reproduction as they are in controlling reproduction itself. Current
nonsurgical methods either are not efficacious in controlling reproduction or permit continuing
physical changes of heat and reproductive behaviors that owners consider objectionable. Surgery
(OHE or castration) is the standard for reproduction control in the United States at this time
(see Chapters 69 to 71).
Supplemental reading
Kutzler M, Wood A. 2006. Non-surgical methods of contraception and sterilization. Theriogenology
66:514-525.
Levy JK, Mansour M, Crawford PC, et al. 2005. Survey of zona pellucida antigens for immunocontraception
of cats. Theriogenology 63:1334-1341.
73
What comprises recommended pre-breeding
evaluation for queens?
General information
A complete physical examination should be performed. Vaccinations should be current and the
animal should be tested or treated for internal and external parasites. Feline leukemia testing
should be performed on all group-housed and breeding animals, and feline leukemia vaccination
should be discussed. Some advocate testing of all cats for feline coronavirus and only housing
and breeding positive animals with positive animals, to prevent the spread of this ubiquitous
virus and potentially decrease incidence of feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Because heritability
 of susceptibility to FIP may be high, some advocate removing positive cats from breeding
programs.
i on so sm r s sio y a  p y s  oo oi a si
type B antigen; type B cats have natural strong antibodies to the type A antigen. If a type B queen
is bred to a type A tom, she may produce type A kittens who will undergo hemolytic crisis when
they ingest her colostrum, which will contain her strong anti-A antibodies and destroy their red
blood cells (see Chapter 99). For this reason, all breeding cats should be blood typed before
breeding and like bred to like. Blood types vary by breed; Persians and some British breeds have
 greater prevalence of type B cats in their population than other breeds.
Clinical implications
Much of pre-breeding evaluation for cats is preventative, promoting wiser breed pairings and
housing of animals in the cattery.
Supplemental reading
Bell ET, Malik R, Norris JM. 2006. The relationship between the feline coronavirus antibody titre and the
age, breed, gender and health status of Australian cats. Aust Vet J 84:2-7.
Bucheler J, Giger U. 1993. Alloantibodies against A and B blood types in cats. Vet Immunol Immunopath
38:283-295.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WE
Saunders Co., p. 406.
227
74
How do I use progesterone and other measures
for breeding management?
General information
Because queens are induced ovulators, breeding management is less concerned with identifying
significant events in the cycle and more concerned with providing optimum conditions for
conception to occur.
Most queens exhibit overt behaviors of heat. Some queens may be more subtle in their estrous
 in these queens (see Chapter 58). Queens with cornifed vaginal cytology should be presented to
the male, and if breeding does not occur, artificial insemination can be considered.
The queen usually is brought to the tom, who is more likely to exhibit normal breeding
behavior in his home territory. The male will grasp the scruff of the queen's neck in his teeth to
pull her into position, introduce his penis, ejaculate, and release the queen within seconds. The
queen will cry out as intromission of the penis and ejaculation occur (the coital cry) and, after
the male releases her, will throw herself frantically about, rolling and licking at her vulva (the
after-reaction). The coital cry and after-reaction may be taken as evidence that breeding occurred.
At some point after the after-reaction is finished, the male will try to approach the queen again
and she may or may not permit breeding.
The most common trigger for ovulation induction in queens is coitus. It has been well dem-
onstrated that queens must be bred an average of three to four times during a given estrus for
ovulation induction to occur reliably
Clinical implications
Breeders often put cats together when they perceive the female to be in heat but do not observe
or quantitate the breedings. It is valuable for the person responsible for the breedings to observe,
both to make sure breeding did take place and to count the number of time coitus occurred.
Some queens will allow breeding four times in one afternoon, while other queens will have to
be introduced to the male over several consecutive days. If the owner is unsure whether or not
breeding occured or if breeding happens with suffcient frequency without subsequent concep-
tion and pregnancy, measurement of serum progesterone can be used to determine if ovulation
 Occured. Serum progesterone should be greater than 5 ng/ml by 1 week after the last breeding.
 If serum progesterone has not risen, medical induction of ovulation may be attempted (see
Chapter 86).
229
 230 How do I use progesterone and other measures for breeding management?
Supplemental reading
Concannon PW, Hodgson B, Lein D. 1980. Reflex LH release in estrous cats following single and multiple
copulations. Biol Reprod 23:111-117.
 Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 396-413.
 Root MV Johnston SD, Olson PNS. 1995. Estrous length, pregnancy rate, gestation and parturition lengths,
litter size, and juvenile mortality in the domestic cat. J Amer Anir Hosp Assoc 31:429-433.
3NIT3E
75
What drugs are unsafe to use during pregnancy
in queens?
General information
 Drugs can be classified using the follwing designation: A = probably safe in cats, based on the
lack of toxicity or teratogenicity identified in other species; B = safe if used cautiously; C = poten-
tially risky and to be used only when the benefit clearly outweighs the risks; and D = contrain-
 dicated in all cases. Few drug studies have been completed in queens, requiring extrapolation
from work in other species, most commonly humans and laboratory animals (Table 75-1).
Clinical implications
All drug use during pregnancy requires careful weighing of benefits and detriments. Because of
 the lack of research in queens and the subsequent need to extrapolate from other literature, good
client communication regarding extra-label use of drugs is critical.
Table 75-1. Safety of drugs for use in pregnancy.
Chemical Name
Safety
Comments
Designation
Antibiotics
 Ampicillin 
A
 Amoxicillin
A
 Amoxicillin-clavulanate
A
Cephalosporins
A
Chloramphenicol
C
May decrease protein synthesis in fetus.
Doxycycline
D
All tetracyclines may cause bone and teeth
 malformations in fetus
 Erythrornycin 
A
 Fluoroquinolones
C
All drugs in this class have been associated with
cartilage damage
Gentamicin
C
Aminoglycosides are associated with ototoxicity and
nephrotoxicity.
Metronidazole
C
Teratogenic in laboratory animals
Trimethoprim-sulfa
B
231
232 what drugs are unsafe to use during pregnancy in queens?
Table 75-1. Continued
Chemical Name
Safety
Comments
 Designation
Preanesthetics, anesthetics, sedatives
Acepromazine
B
loissaidap waiss snoau peuan peiay asneo Ae
Atropine
B
May cause fetal tachycardia
 Diazeparm 
C
Glycopyrrolate
B
Isoflurane
B
Ketamine
B
May induce premature labor.
Naloxone
A
 Oxymorphone
B
Sevoflurane
B
 Thiopental
C
May cause respiratory depression in fetus.
Parasiticides
Diethylcarbamazine
A
Fenbendazole
A
vermectin
A
Milbemycin oxime
A
Piperazine
A
 Praziquantel
A
 Pyrantel
A
Selamectin
A
Thiabendazole
B
High doses cause toxemia in ewes
 Pain medications
 Acetaminophen
D
Unsafe for use in cats at any time
Aspirin
D
Unsafe for use in cats at any time.
Carprofen
C
Increased gestation length and increase in stillbinrths
 identified in laboratory animals.
lbuprofen 
D
 Unsafe for use in cats at any time.
Selective COX-2
D
In humans, ingestion of dnugs of this class may retard
inhibitors
lenal development in neonates.
 Endocrine steroids
Dexamethasone
C
Increased incidence of cleft palate and other congenital
defects; may induce premature labor. High doses at
 mid-gestation may cause pregnancy temmination.
Diethylstilbestrol
D
 May induce abnomal development of reproductive
 systerm.
Prednisolone
C
76
How can I terminate pregnancy in queens?
General information
 Pregnancy maintenance in all species requires continuous secretion of progesterone. The source
of gestational progesterone varies by species. In queens, the source of gestational progesterone
is not well defined, with some studies indicating the corpora lutea (CL) as the sole source and
others identifying both luteal and placental production. Drugs that lyse the CL are not as effective
as pregnancy-terminating agents in queens as in bitches. No drugs are approved for pregnancy
termination in queens in the United States (Table 76-1).
Clinical implications
Knowledge of the stage of pregnancy best permits the veterinarian to tell the owner what to
expect; for this reason, the author prefers ultrasound as a pregnancy diagnostic technique. If
pregnancy is terminated before 40 days, virtually all evidence of pregnancy will be resorbed. From
40 to 50 days, fluid and tissue will be passed through the vulva. After 50 days, recognizable fetal
tissues will be passed. After 55 days, kittens may be born alive and should be euthanized upon
passage. No one has demonstrated detriment to the queen with pregnancy termination later in
 gestation, but most veterinarians and owners will not perform termination late in pregnancy for
aesthetic reasons.
Supplemental reading
 Baldwin C, Evans LE, Peter AT. 2000. Evaluation of natural prostaglandin therapy for pregnancy termina-
tion in the domestic cat. Fel Prac 28:16-21.
Eilts BE. 2002. Pregnancy termination in the bitch and queen. Clin Tech Sm Anirm Prac 17:116-123.
Fieni F, Martal J, Marnet PG et al. 2006. Clinical, biological and hormonal study of mid-pregnancy termi-
nation in cats with aglepristone. Theriogenology 66: 1721-1728.
pristone in queens. Theriogenology 65: 1401-1406.
233
234 How can I terminate pregnancy in queens?
Table 76-1. Pregnancy termination protocols reported for the queen
Drug
Regimen
Side effects
Notes
ESTROGENS—uppress movement of eggs, affect implantation
Estradiol cypionate
0.125 to 0.25 mg
1. Bone marrow toxicity-
Behavioral estrus will
("Mismate shot")
intramuscularly (IM) 2
aplastic anemia,
be extended in
to 3 days after coitus
thrombocytopenia,
duration.
intramuscular one time
leukopenia
2. Pyometra (see Chapter 80)
 PROSTAGLANDINS—lyse corpora lutea (CL): decrease progesterone; cause uterine contraction5
 Prostaglandin 
0.5 to 1.0mg/kg
1. Ptyalism, vormiting.
Side effects include
FZalpha (LutalyseIM)
 subcutaneously given
diarrhea
 panting and mydriasis,
twice 24h apart after
and usually occur
day 40 of pregnancy or
within minutes of
2 mg IM once daily for
drug administration.
5 consecutive days after
 subsiding within 1 to
day 30 of pregnancy
3 h.
 PROLACTIN INHIBITORS—decrease function of CL (decrease progesterone)
Cabergoline
5-15 μg/kg once daily
(DostinexIM)
 per os for 5 days after
 mid-gestation
PROGESTERONE RECEPTOR BLOCKERS
Aglepristone
10mg/kg or 15mg/kg
87% success rate
(Alizine IM)
subcutaneously (SQ)
reported. Depression
once daily for 2
and anorexia were
consecutive days after
exhibited briefly at the
mid-gestation
time of fetal expulsion
in 9% of queens. Not
available in the United
N
States.
E
77
Should queens be spayed at the time of removal
of a mammary mass?
General information
Mammary neoplasia is the third most common tumor type in female cats. Malignant adenocar-
factors. In queens, Siamese cats are considered to be at high risk, but whether this is due to a
 genetic predisposition or to a longer lifespan in that breed has not been defined. Similarly, not
 all feline mammary tumors contain estrogen receptors. However, early ovariohysterectomy
(OHE) is associated with decreased incidence of mammary neoplasia in aged female cats. The
with a decreasing benefit with each heat cycle.
Surgery is the treatment of choice for mammary neoplasia. Concurrent OHE often is recom-
mended. The arguments are that decreased exposure to estrogen and progesterone with subse-
quent heat cycles may prevent recurrence of neoplasia, and that performing both surgeries at
once minimizes the total number of anesthetic episodes in the animal's life. The author is
unaware of published studies demonstrating any beneficial effect of OHE at the time of surgical
removal of mammary tumors.
Clinical implications
There is not overwhelming evidence to support concurrent OHE and mammary tumor removal
as a method of decreasing mammary tumor recurrence and prolonging survival time in queens.
However, incidence of other conditions of aged queens, specifically pyometra, will be decreased
by OHE. The greatest benefit may be minimizing the number of anesthetic episodes for a given
queen. If OHE and mammary tumor removal are performed at the same time, the OHE should
be performed first to prevent seeding of the abdomen with tumor cells.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 474-485.
235
Section
VI
Feline disease
78
How do I diagnose and treat dystocia?
Etiology
 Incidence of dystocia, or abnormal queening, is reported as 3 to 6%. The risk of dystocia is
 increased in brachycephalic breeds and in some doliocephalic breeds.
 Dystocia is best defined by comparison with normal queening. Normal queening occurs in
three stages. Stage I of labor is the long stage during which the cervix dilates. The queen acts
restless, may show nesting behavior, pants, is often inappetent, and may vomit. Stage II is active
o s no un  no  s y s a yo sssd pe so
fluid may be passed before any kittens are born. Once active contractions are seen, a kitten should
 be born within 4h; if the queen is pushing hard constantly, a kitten should be passed within
30min. No more than 2h should be allowed to pass between kittens. Kittens may be passed
within the amniotic sac or the sac may rupture as the kitten passes through the birth canal. At
birth, the queen should tear open the sac, if present, and vigorously lick the kitten to stimulate
 respiration. Stage III is passage of the placentas. Stages II and II often alternate. Placentas should
be passed within about 15 min of passage of a kitten. The normal feline placenta is olive green
pign
entation in the marginal hematomas on the edge of the
placenta. The queen may try to eat the
entas; this is an atavistic behavior that serves to keep
the den clean to avoid attraction
redators, and the placentas have no nutritional or thera-
peutic value. Queening usually occurs at night and may be prolonged compared with whelping
in the bitch; queens have been rep
ported to give birth to live kittens over several calendar days.
Maternal causes of dystocia include uterine inertia, inadequate size of the birth canal, and
abnormality of the pregnancy. Uterine inertia can be primary (no propulsive uterine contrac-
tions) or secondary (muscle fatigue after unproductive uterine contractions). Primary uterine
inertia may be associated with hypocalcemia and may have a hereditary component. Primary
uterine inertia is the most common reported cause of dystocia in queens. Secondary uterine
inertia usually occurs in the presence of obstruction preventing passage of a kitten into the birth
canal. Inadequate size of the birth canal may occur in very small queens. An example of abnor-
mality of pregnancy is uterine torsion, which is uncommon.
Fetal causes of dystocia include fetal oversize and abnormalities of presentation, posture, and
position. Fetal oversize may be absolute (normal birth canal, oversize kitten) as in small litters,
or relative (part of kitten too big to fit through normal birth canal) as in kittens with hydro-
cephalus. Presentation is defined by what part of the kitten first enters the birth canal. Cranial
239
240  How do I diagnose and treat dystocia?
presentation (muzzle and extended forelimbs presenting to the birth canal) and caudal presenta-
tion (tail and extended rear limbs presenting) are normal. Examples of abnormal presentations
include breech (tail and flexed limbs presenting) and transverse (spine presenting). Position is
defined by disposition of the extremities relative to the body. An example of abnormal position
is neck flexed to the side.
Brachycephalic breeds of cat are at increased risk of dystocia compared with mesocephalic
breeds. Other disorders associated with dystocia are prolonged gestation (more than 7l days
from the last breeding), and abnormal vulvar discharge (green discharge prior to the birth of
any kittens is indicative of placental separation).
Clinical signs
Queens in labor may look tired but should not appear systemically ill. Disorientation, vomiting,
and aggression all are abnormal during active labor in queens. Normal vulvar discharge may be
clear, tan, or slightly blood-tinged. It should not be purulent or frankly hemorrhagic, and should
not be green if no kittens have been passed.
Diagnosis
History findings suggestive of dystocia are prolonged time limits (longer than 24 h of Stage I
labor; more than 4 h since onset of Stage II labor or more than 30min since onset of active,
repetitive contractions; more than 2h between kittens), overtly abnormal presentation of a
kitten, or appearance of systemic illness, or abnormal vulvar discharge from the queen.
 A brief but complete physical examination should be performed. Radiographs permit assess-
ment of the number and size of kittens remaining in the uterus (Fig. 78-1). Viability cannot be
determined accurately from radiography alone; signs of fetal death (gas within and around the
fetus, collapse of the skull and axial skeleton) may not appear for up to 24h after fetal death.
Abdominal ultrasound is best used to determine viability by assessment of fetal heart rate.
Feline disease 241
Normal fetal heart rate should be about twice that of the queen. Fetal heart rate less than 170 bpm
is indicative of fetal distress.
Treatment
Queens that appear healthy, have no evidence of fetal death or distress, and no apparent cause
for dystocia may benefit from being left alone in a dark place with minimal observation for a
time before any other measures are undertaken. Most queens give birth at night unattended.
Overzealous observation and assistance from owners or veterinary professionals may slow
parturition.
Manipulation of kittens with abnormal presentation or position is difficult in queens because
of size restrictions. It is easy to dislocate joints and pull skin off of kittens while attempting
manipulation. Instruments should not be used.
Oxytocin therapy is appropriate if radiographs have demonstrated normal size and likelihood
that the kittens can pass through the birth canal. Doses of 0.5 to 2 IU can be given intramuscularly
at 20- to 30-min intervals for no more than three doses. Repeated doses do not promote con-
tinuing uterine contractions because the uterus becomes refractory to oxytocin therapy as recep-
tors fill on the myometrium and do not readily dissociate. Oxytocin increases frequency of
uterine contractions; calcium increases strength of uterine contractions.
Queens carrying kittens that are in distress, that are carrying kittens too large to pass through
the birth canal, or that are non-responsive to oxytocin therapy should undergo Cesarean section
(C-section)(see Chapters 64 and 65). In one study of 1056 births, 8% resulted in C-section.
Supplemental reading
Gunn-Moore DA, Thursfield MV. 1995. Feline dystocia: Prevalence, and association with cranial conforma-
tion and breed. Vet Rec 136:350-353.
Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN. 1995. Estrous length, pregnancy rate, gestation and parturition lengths,
litter size, and juvenile mortality in the domestic cat. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc 31:429-433.
 d  yo s as  o e ia  aa  s  ss
meonatal mortality in pedigree breeding cats in the UK. J Fel Med Surg 8: 145-157.
79
What diagnostic tests can be performed to
identify the cause of pregnancy loss?
Etiology
Pregnancy loss can occur as a result of infectious or noninfectious causes. Infectious causes
include bacterial infection; viral infections including feline herpesvirus, feline immunodeficiency
virus, feline infectious peritonitis virus, feline leukemia virus, and feline panleukopenia virus;
and protozoal infection with Toxoplasma gondii. Noninfectious causes include endocrine imbal-
ance, developmental defects, and uterine disease.
Clinical signs
suis qm pisse aq pou  o a pue ses eaa m pnosse s s aui
of systemic disease. Oftentimes, pregnancy loss is the presenting complaint. Signs that may be
seen with specific infections are described under diagnosis.
Diagnosis
When presented with a pregnant cat that appears to be losing that pregnancy based on the pres-
ence of vulvar discharge or systemic signs of disease, a complete physical examination, abdominal
ultrasound, drawing of blood for measurement of progesterone concentration in serum and
complete blood count, and collection of a sample of vulvar discharge for aerobic culture should
be performed. A thorough history should be taken and records reviewed to determine status of
the queen for infection with any of the common viral diseases. If fetal heart rate is less than
200 bpm, fetal distress is present and the fetuses should be closely monitored for viability. If fetal
heart rate consistently fals to less than 150 to 170 bpm, fetal death is imminent and pregnancy
loss should be allowed to continue or the kittens removed via hysterotomy or hysterectomy.
If fetal tissues or aborted kittens are available for diagnosis, tissues should be harvested imme.
diately after death, if possible, and the tissues should not be frozen prior to examination. Fresh
samples should be refrigerated and submitted to a diagnostic laboratory, and fixed samples
should be submitted as well. Tissues that should be submitted include liver, kidney, adrenal,
small and large intestines, lung, heart, thymus, brain, fetal membranes, and fetal stomach content
or fetal fluids. Swabs from the queen's vagina should be submitted in transport media.
Infectiouscauses
Bacteria
Causative bacteria of pregnancy loss reportedly are those that are part of the normal flora of the
feline vagina. Other possibilities include Salmonella sp. and, very rarely, Brucella canis. Many
243
244 what diagnostic tests can be performed to identify the cause of pregnancy loss?
queens with bacterial causes of pregnancy loss present with vulvar discharge as the only clinical
sign of disease. Samples to be collected for bacterial culture include vulvar discharge, passed fetal
tissues, and stomach contents of aborted kittens, which contain amniotic fluid and therefore
accurately reflect the intrauterine environment.
Viruses
Any of the common feline viral diseases can be associated with pregnancy loss, which is usually
associated with fetal death in utero. Other clinical manifestation of viral disease may or may not
be evident.
Protozoa
T. gondii is the most common protozoal infection associated with pregnancy loss in cats. Systemic
signs of disease always are present and include depression, diarrhea, ocular and nasal discharge,
and anorexia. Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of cysts of the organism in fetal tissues.
Noninfectious causes
Hypoluteoidism
Progesterone is required throughout pregnancy in all species. In queens, it has not been estab-
lished where all progesterone is produced during gestation. Some research suggests that there is
a transition from primarily luteal progesterone production to primarily placental production at
about 40 days of pregnancy. Because pregnancy loss is commonly seen at this stage of gestation,
it has been hypothesized that inadequate progesterone may be a cause of pregnancy loss in
queens.
Developmentai abnormalities
Small litters may be due to DNA abnormalities reflected as developmental defects incompatible
with life. Teratogenic drugs also may induce abnormalities that are incompatible with life; the
latter is more commonly associated with loss of an entire litter, while the former more commonly
is reflected in loss of individual kittens.
Uterine disease
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) and chronic uterine infection may be associated with
pregnancy loss. In queens with severe uterine changes, chemical abnormalities may alter the
function of spermatozoa. CEH may alter the movement of the fertilized ova, and implantation
or placentation of the embryos. Severe uterine abnormalities may be visible on ultrasound.
Definitive diagnosis requires uterine biopsy.
Treatment
Bacterial infections are treated with appropriate antibiotics, based on culture and sensitivity and
acknowledging danger of some drugs during pregnancy if live offspring are present (see Chapter
75). Treatment for viral or protozoal infections usually is not rewarding for preventing further
pregnancy loss.
Supplemental reading
Givens MD, Marley MSD. 2008. Infectious causes of embryonic and fetal mortality. Theriogenology
70:270-285.
Schlafer DH. 2008. Canine and feline abortion diagnostics. Theriogenology 70:327-331.
80
How do I diagnose and treat pyometra
in queens?
Etiology
Pyometra is a two-step process. The first pathologic change is cystic endometrial hyperplasia
(CEH), a thickening of the uterine lining that occurs secondary to repeated estrous cycling-
Although queens are induced ovulators, CEH does develop in many queens with age. Research
suggests that stimuli other than coitus may, on occasion, induce ovulation, making even unbred
intact queens susceptible. After ovulation, the presence of elevated concentrations of progester-
 one promote hyperreactivity of the endometrium and gradual cystic hyperplasia. Development
of CEH is a continuum and it is not completely understood why some queens develop pyometra
with minimal CEH while other queens with severe CEH do not develop pyometra.
The second pathologic change is infection. Infection invariably is due to an organism that is
part of the normal vaginal flora. Escherichia coli is the most common isolate. Pyometra is most
common in queens that have never been pregnant, suggesting that pregnancy may have some
sort of protective effect, presumably at the level of the endometrium.
Renal disease is a common sequel to pyometra. Endotoxins released from the cell wall of
Gram-negative bacteria inhibit normal renal tubular function. These changes are reversible if
infection is controlled quickly enough.
Clinical signs
Pyometra is most common in older queens that had been in estrus within the previous 4 weeks.
There is no history of recent estrus in up to 22% of cases. Clinical signs vary with cervical patency.
Queens presenting with open-cervix pyometra have yellow-green to pink or red-tinged, thick,
odoriferous vulvar discharge. Other signs include depression, inappetence, and vomiting.
Affected cats may be febrile or hypothermic. Polyuria/polydipsia is less common in queens than
in bitches.
Queens presenting with closed-cervix pyometra do not have vulvar discharge. Systemic signs
of disease are as with open-cervix pyometra (depression, anorexia, vomiting, hyperthermia or
hypothermia) but usually are more severe. Abdominal distension is evident.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of pyometra requires demonstration of excessive fluid in the uterus and either purulent
vulvar discharge (open-cervix) or systemic response indicative of infection (closed-cervix).
245
246 How do I diagnose and treat pyometra in queens?
R
Figure 80-1: Lateral abdominal radiograph from a queen with pyometra
     o   
 Uterine enlargement can be identified by abdominal palpation; care should be taken in manipu
lating the friable uterus. Imaging is less directly traumatic to the uterus. Radiography can be used
to identify uterine enlargement but cannot differentiate disease from pregnancy in animals that
were bred (Fig. 80-1). Ulrasonography is preferred because it permits the operator to see within
the uterus to identify free fluid. Pregnancy is readily identifiable using ultrasound by 16 to 25
 days after breeding, permitting definitive differentiation from disease. Ultrasound cannot be used
to determine if intrauterine fluid is purulent.
Cytology of vulvar exudate reveals full felds of degenerative polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs),
bacteria, and non-cornified epithelial cells (Fig. 80-2). A sample of this discharge should be
submitted for aerobic culture and sensitivity.
 Blood should be drawn for a complete blood count and serum chemistry profle. The number
 of PMNs present may be very high, especially in animals with closed-cervix pyometra. Changes
that may be evident on serum chemistry profle include azotemia and hyperproteinemia.
Feline disease 247
Table 80-1. Medical treatment of feline pyometra
1. Assess uterine size in a repeatable manner (palpation, radiography, ultrasonography).
2. Collect a specimen of vulvar discharge for aerobic culture and sensitivity testing. Begin empirical
therapy with ampicillin or arnoxicillin. Change antibiotic if necessary based on culture and sensitivity
results
3. Administer prostaglandin FZalpha (0.25 mg/kg BID subcutaneously). Treat until uterine size nears
normal (palpation, radiographs) or until no free intrauterine fluid is visible (ultrasound). Side effects of
drug therapy include hypersalivation, panting. kneading at the abdomen, restlessness, and
vocalization
4. Send the queen home on antibiotics. Antibiotic therapy should continue for 1 month or until there
has been no visible vulvar discharge for at least 1 week
 5. The queen is predisposed to pyometra at every subsequent cycle. Eary in the next estrus, antibiotic
therapy should be instituted. The queen should be bred at that first cycle after medical therapy for
pyometra and should be spayed as soon as her breeding life is over
Treatment
Ovariohysterectomy is the best treatment for pyometra in all cases. Surgical removal of the
infected uterus immediately clears endotoxins from the body. CEH is not reversible so no
medical therapy can return that queen to normal reproductive function.
 Medical therapy may be considered if the queen meets the following criteria: ( 1) the cervix is
open; (2) azotemia is absent or mild enough to be attributed to dehydration of other pre-renal
causes; (3) the queen is still of breeding age; and (4) she is a valuable part of a breeding program.
Medical therapy is not recommended in cases of closed-cervix pyometra. Treatment with drugs
cal os with subsequent relaxation, but those drugs may also promote movement of fluid through
the uterine tubes and into the abdomen, or cause uterine rupture, with subsequent peritonitis.
Medical therapy with antibiotics and prostaglandin F2alpha is described here (Table 80-1).
Aglepristone, a progesterone receptor blocker, is available in other countries and is reported
to be a successful component of medical therapy for pyometra in queens.
Supplemental reading
Agudelo CF. 2005. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia-pyometra complex in cats. A review. Vet Q
27:173-182.
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 463-471.
Nak D, Nak Y, Tuna B. 2009. Follow-up examinations after medical treatment of pyometra in cats with
the progesterone antagonist aglepristone. J Fel Med Surg doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2008.09.006.
and other cystic conditions of the canine and feline uterus. Theriogenology 70:349-358.
81
How do I treat mastitis in a nursing queen?
Etiology
Mastitis is most commonly seen post-partum in the actively nursing queen. Environmental
organisms and skin flora are those bacteria most commonly associated with the disease and
include Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus sp. and Streptococcus sp.
Clinical signs
The infected gland is engorged, reddened, hot, and painful to the queen upon manipulation
More than one gland may be affected. The queen may be febrile with inappetence and lethargy
and may neglect the kittens. Localized abscesses may develop with gangrene of tissue. The very
occasional queen will undergo septic shock.
Diagnosis
 Mastitis is diagnosed by inspection. Cytology of fluid expressed from the mammary gland reveals
bacteria and inflammatory cells. Expressed fluid from the affected gland(s) should be submitted
for culture and sensitivity. Gangrenous tissue is black.
Treatment
Antibiotics that are likely to achieve therapeutic levels in the mammary gland are those that are
lipid-soluble and are therefore also likely to be excreted into milk. Caution must be taken when
using antibiotics with potential negative side effects on neonates (see Chapter 91). Kittens should
be allowed to nurse unless gangrenous mastitis is present. The affected gland(s) should be
covered to prevent excoriation of the friable tissue by kitten nails. A common empirical choice
is amoxicillin-clavulanate. Abscessed areas should be incised, gangrenous tissue debrided, and
drains placed.
 Pain management in lactating queens is complicated by the ready movement of most analge-
sics into milk and the lack of research documenting potential effects on nursing kittens. Opioids
e aq ono po si i su  psau aq  n  o i sd
(lethargy, failure to nurse).
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 443-445.
Mathews KA. 2008. Pain management for the pregnant, lactating, and neonatal to pediatric cat and dog-
Vet Clin NA 38:1291-1308.
249
82
What are the causes of persistent estrus (heat)
in cats?
Etiology
The most common causes of true persistent estrus in queens are folicular ovarian cysts and
Ovarian tumors. Persistent estrus is caused by continuing secretion of estrogen. Estrogen produc-
tion through the adrenal gland is possible but has not been reported as a pathologic phenomenon
 in queens. Exogenous estrogen administration, either as a “mismating shot'* (see Chapter 76) or
through dermal absorption of topical products applied to the owner, is another possible cause.
Clinical signs
Cats in estrus show behavior that many owners find annoying or disturbing. The client should
be closely questioned to determine if the cat is truly in a persistent estrus or if that is a perception
based on the severity of the behavior change and the normal frequent cycling of queens. True
persistent estrus is defined as physical and behavioral signs of proestrus and estrus, and the pres-
ence of cornified vaginal cytology, for at least 4 weeks (see Chapter 67). Bilaterally symmetrical
alopecia may be evident, especially if exposure to estrogen has been very prolonged. Abdominal
distension and ascites may be evident in queens with granulosa cell tumor.
Diagnosis
Follicular ovarian cysts are visible by abdominal ultrasonography and usually are not large
enough to distort the ovary. The most common ovarian tumor type that is functional, secreting
estrogen, is granulosa cell tumor. Clinical signs may arise at any time, not necessarily at the
expected time of estrus. Otentimes, the ovary is so enlarged as to be palpable per abdomen as
a cranial abdominal mass. Ultrasonographically, ovarian tumors are more likely to appear
motfled and septate. Differentiation of follicular ovarian cysts and ovarian tumors also may be
made by careful history taking and response to withdrawal of potential inciting agents. With
any prolonged estrogen exposure, bone marrow suppression may occur, evidenced by non-
 regenerative anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia.
Treatment
Ovarian follicular cysts are treated by induction of ovulation, either with gonadotropin releasing
hormone (Cystorelin), 25 μg/cat intramuscularly ( IM) or human chorionic gonadotropin (500 IU
251
252 what are the causes of persistent estrus (heat) in cats?
Figure 82-1: Gross appearance of follicular ovarian cysts in a queen.
IM), or by ovariohysterectomy (OHE) (Fig. 82-1). OHE may be the preferred therapy as cats
induced to ovulate after persistent estrogen exposure may be predisposed to pyometra (see
Chapter 80). Granulosa cell tumors are treated by OHE. Because metastasis and local invasion
 are uncommon, OHE usually is curative. Blood dyscrasias are treated with appropriate blood
products.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 456-462.
5
5
10
83
What are the causes of lack of cycling (persistent
anestrus) in cats?
Etiology
Seasonal anestrus is normal in queens (see Chapter 67). Nonseasonal anestrus may be due to
previous ovariohysterectomy (OHE), inadequate exposure to light during the breeding season,
 abnormalities of chromosome complement and sexual differentiation, and progesterone-
secreting ovarian cysts or tumors. Malnutrition and poor body condition may be associated
with lack of estrous activity.
Clinical signs
Regular observation of queens and intermittent exposure to toms may be required to identify
behavioral estrus. Some queens housed in a colony will not demonstrate signs of estrus in the
presence of a dominant queen; vaginal cytology may be required to identify follicular activity in
these queens.
Diagnosis
 Owners should be questioned regarding where the queen is housed and how they have tried to
identify signs of heat. Other history questions may include diet, medications given, and whether
there is any possibility of the queen having been spayed. Previous OHE may be identifed by
demonstration of a scar on the ventral midline or by demonstration of elevated concentrations
of luteinizing hormone in the blood. Blood should be drawn for assay of progesterone in serum;
 progesterone concentration of greater than 2 ng/ml may indicate presence of a luteal ovarian cyst
d  a no a  s r  - 
sistence of elevation in serum progesterone for more than 2 months is diagnostic. Chromosomal
abnormalities can be identified by karyotyping, which is available at Texas A&M University (see
Resources).
Treatment
 If there is no clear evidence of systemic disease or another cause of lack of cycling, queens can
be put on a good plane of nutrition and housed with adequate exposure to natural light or to
luteolytic agent prostaglandin F2alpha. Side effects include panting, hypersalivation, vomiting,
and defecation. These side effects usually subside within 3h of treatment. Luteal cysts also can
be treated by OHE.
253
254 what are the causes of lack of cycling (persistent anestrus) in cats?
Chromosomal abnormalities reportedly associated with persistent anestrus in queens include
37,XO, and cats with multiple cell lines. Some cats with an abnormal karyotype may demonstrate
intermittent estrous cycling, but all are considered infertile.
In the absence of any defined cause, medical induction of estrus may be attempted. There are
no drugs approved for this purpose in queens in the United States. No drug described can accu-
rately induce estrus on a given date or with complete consistency. The regimen reported is fol-
licle-stimulating hormone, 2 mg once daily intramuscularly (IM) for 3 to 7 days or until estrus
 onset, followed by natural mating or induction of ovulation with human chorionic gonadotro-
pin, 250IU IM.
Supplemental reading
Kutzler MA. 2007. Estrus induction and synchronization in canids and felids. Theriogenology 68:354-374.
Lyle SK. 2007. Disorders of sexual development in the dog and cat. Theriogenology 68:338-343.
5
5
10
NIT
3E
84
What are the causes of estrus after
ovariohysterectomy of female cats?
Etiology
The primary rule-out in all cases is ovarian remnant syndrome. Adrenal production of estrogen
to the extent of causing clinical signs of estrus has not been identified in cats. It has been well
demonstrated that ovarian tissue can vascularize and regain function after transplantation. Inci-
dence of ovarian remnant syndrome is not correlated with reason for the ovariohysterectomy
(OHE), with physical condition of the cat at the time of surgery, or with level of experience of
the veterinary surgeon.
Clinical signs
Spayed female cats will show behavioral signs of estrus with the periodicity of intact cats (see
Chapter 67). Signs may first appear anywhere from 7 days to 10 years after the OHE. In areas
where cats cycle seasonally, signs often first appear at the beginning of the breeding season.
Diagnosis
The cat should be seen when the owner perceives her to be showing signs of estrus. Vaginal
cytology is used to identify estrogen production by presence of cornified cells (see Chapter 58).
This is evidence of follicular tissue. Ovulation is induced by administration of gonadotropin
releasing hormone (25μg/cat intramuscularly). Serum progesterone is assayed 2 to 3 weeks later.
If it is greater than 2 ng/ml, luteal tissue is present. This is definitive for diagnosis of ovarian
s n pai q   e a d  e s o a si ao  
progesterone.
Treatment
Surgery is the preferred treatment. There are no estrus-suppressing drugs approved for use in
cats in the United States, and all those available for dogs have severe side effects in cats. Cats
should not be allowed to continue cycling as that predisposes them to mammary neoplasia (see
Chapter 69). Surgery should be performed when there is active tissue on the remnant to make
it easier to see (Fig. 84-1). This can be carried out either when the cat is showing signs of behav-
 ioral estrus and has cornified vaginal cytology, in which case the surgeon is looking for follicles
on the ovarian remnant, or after induction of ovulation, in which case the surgeon is looking
for luteal tissue on the ovarian remnant. The advantage of the latter is that the cat will bleed less
255
256 what are the causes of estrus after ovariohysterectomy of female cats?
Figure 84-1: Ovarian remnant in a cat.
during surgery if she is not under the influence of estrogen and that luteal tissue persists longer
than follicular tissue, increasing the odds that the tissue will still be evident when surgery is
performed. Remnants may be present on both sides, and practitioners are strongly encouraged
to explore both ovarian pedicles and remove any abnormal tissue. If there is no overtly abnormal
tissue, remove the scar tissue in the area, taking care not to ligate the ureter. Rarely, ovarian
remnants are found away from the ovarian pedicles. Any tissue removed should be submitted
for histopathology; there are reports of neoplastic transformation of ovarian remnant tissue.
Supplemental reading
DeNardo GA, Becker K, Brown NO, Dobbins S. 2001. Ovarian remnant syndrome: Revascularization of
free-floating ovarian tissue in the feline abdominal cavity. J Armer Anirm Hosp Assoc 37:290-296.
Miller DM. 1995. Ovarian remnant syndrome in dogs and cats: 46 cases (1988-1992). J Vet Diagn Invest
7:572-574.
5
5
10
INIT
E
85
What are the causes of persistent male behavior
after castration of male cats?
Etiology
 Rule-outs for persistent male behavior after castration are retained testes and functional adrenal
masses.
Clinical signs
Male behavior includes spraying of foul-smelling urine and aggression. These behaviors are often
mediated by testosterone in cats, as evidenced by a significant decline after castration. Intact male
 cats often have thickened cervical skin and are more muscular than average.
Diagnosis
Testosterone secretion is readily evidenced by appearance of cornified spines on the cat's penis
(Fig. 85-1). Measurement of testosterone in serum is problematic because it is secreted pulsa-
tfilely. If testosterone assay is preferred, blood should be drawn 60min after intramuscular
administration of gonadotropin-releasing hormone; a value of 3 ng/ml or greater is evidence of
testosterone-secreting tissue.
Hgure 85-1: Cornified penile spines in a cat (photo courtesy of Dr. Anne Traas).
257
258 what are the causes of persistent male behavior after castration of male cats?
Treatment
Surgical exploration and removal of testosterone secreting tissue is required.
Supplemental reading
Millard RP, Pickens EH, Wells KL. 2009. Excessive production of sex hormone in a cat with an adrenocorti-
cal tumor. J Amer Vet Med Assoc 234:505-508.
DISEA
NI3E
86
What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of
a queen?
Etiology
 Causes of infertility in queens include improper breeding management, poor semen quality of
the male (see Chapter 87), reproductive tract infection, systemic disease, non-receptive behavior
reproductive tract, and advanced age of the queen. In one survey of seven queens presented for
infertility, four had uterine pathology and three had no definitive cause for lack of conception
orpregnancyloss.
Clinical signs
Queens with infertility may present for failure to stand to be bred, apparent conception failure,
or known pregnancy loss. Because there is no early pregnancy test for cats (see Chapter 59),
 conception failure and early pregnancy loss cannot be differentiated. Queens with infection of
the reproductive tract or uterine pathology often exhibit no specific clinical signs.
Diagnosis
See Table 86-1 for a diagnostic key. An accurate history must be taken of any past breeding
attempts to determine if the queen was bred an appropriate number of times (see Chapter 74).
Reproductive tract infection is best identified by culture of the vagina when the queen is in estrus.
Behavioral causes are identified by observation of breeding.
 Uterine pathology may or may not be visible ultrasonographically. Cystic endometrial hyper-
plasia may be visible as fluffy thickening of the endometrium and presumably interferes with
fertility by altering the movement of spermatozoa from the cervix to the uterine tubes and inter-
fering with normal implantation and placentation of conceptuses. Uterine pathology often is
diagnosed at histopathology. Samples most commonly are retrieved at the time of ovariohyster-
ectomy. Uterine biopsy requires laparotomy and hysterotomy and is rarely performed.
Impatency of the reproductive tract may be identifable with hysterography, performed as
vaginography when the queen is in estrus and the cervix open. More commonly, abnormalities
of the tract are identified during laparotomy. Anovulatory cycles are defined as those cycles in
which ovulation is not induced, evidenced as serum progesterone remaining below 2 ng/ml after
three to four successful copulations.
259
260 what is the diagnostic approach for infertility of a queen?
Table 86-1. Diagnostic key for infertility of queens.
1a. The queen is cycling.
.2
1b. The queen is not cycling.
.3
Za. The queen is induced to ovulate...
.4
 Zb. The queen is not induced to ovulate.
5
3.
Causes of lack of cycling are described in Chapter 83
 Causes of apparent lack of conception include poor sermen quality, reproductive tract infection,
uterine pathology. and impatency of the reproductive tract. Causes of pregnancy loss are
described in Chapter 79.
Ovulation can be induced with gonadotropin-releasing hormone (25 μg intramuscularly) and
mating attempted that day or the next, or artificial insemination performed.
Treatment
Ensure the queen was bred successfully three to four times in estrus. Evaluate semen quality of
the male if possible or ask for a record of success in recent breedings (see Chapter 61). Some
queens and toms are not compatible genetically, if a queen has consistently failed to produce
kittens with one male, recommend the use of males from different lines. Some breeds of cat are
very recently derived from their wild cat ancestors; ensure the individuals being bred are not
 inbred or too closely related. Reproductive tract infection should be treated with appropriate
 antibiotics, based on culture and sensitivity.
Supplemental reading
Axner E, Agren E, Baverus V, et al. 2008. Infertility in the cycling queen: Seven cases. J Fel Med Surg
10:566-576.
Romagnoli S. 2003. Clinical approach to infertility in the queen. J Fel Med Surg 5: 143-146.
Romagnoli S. 2005. Case report: Failure to conceive in the queen. J Fel Med Surg 7:59-63.
 Root Kustritz MV. 2008. Infertility in a queen. Vet Med 6:23-24.
5
5
10
NIT
E
87
What is the diagnostic approach for infertility of
a male cat?
Etiology
 Infertility in male cats may be due to poor libido, inability to achieve intromission, and poor
semen quality. Poor semen quality may be due to reproductive tract infection or to abnormal
chromosome complement.
Clinical signs
Poor libido may be associated with systemic disease and evidenced by clinical signs associated
with those conditions, for example, tachycardia and weight loss in aged toms with hyperthyroid-
ism. Calico or tortoiseshell toms often are infertile as this coat color is associated with abnormal
chromosome complement.
Diagnosis
Poor libido is diagnosed by observation of the tom with estrous queens. Inability to achieve
intromission is difficult to observe and usually is inferred from lack of a coital cry or after-
reaction by the queen (see Chapter 74). Lack of intromission also may be evidenced by lack of
induction of ovulation, proven by lack of rise in serum progesterone to greater than 2 ng/ml after
breeding. Penile abnormalities, either congenital or acquired (hair ring), are easily identifed on
physical examination. Semen collection and evaluation are described in Chapters 60 and 61.
Seminal fluid culture may help identify reproductive tract infection. Chromosomal abnormali-
 ties can be identified by karyotyping, which is available at Texas A&M University (see Resources).
 In the absence of any identified cause of infertility, testicular biopsy may be performed as in male
dogs (see Chapter 11).
Treatment
 Hair rings can be removed with gentle traction and incision of the matted hair. Ovulation can
be induced medically in the queen but obviously will not correct the infertility if ejaculation of
semen of normal quality is not occurring. Infection can be treated with an appropriate antibiotic
based on culture and sensitivity. Prostate disease is very rare in cats so practitioners need not be
overly concerned about using antibiotics that penetrate the prostate.
Supplemental reading
Johnston SD, Root Kustritz MV, Olson PNS. 2001. Canine and Feline Theriogenology. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders Co., pp. 544-548.
261
Section Ix
Pediatric techniques
88
What are some of the techniques
for venipuncture?
Anatomy
 Blood cannot be drawn from the cephalic or saphenous veins of most pediatric animals because
of their small size and the fragility of the vessels. The external jugular vein is the preferred site
for venipuncture.
Pre-procedure considerations
The area over the vein should be moistened with water, not alcohol, to minimize heat loss. Use
 of a 25-gauge needle and tuberculin syringe minimizes collapse of the vessel or trauma to the
vessel with subsequent hematoma formation.
Procedure
The animal may be restrained upright with forelimbs extended down and head extended, expos-
ing the neck. Another technique that may be used is crading the animal in dorsal recumbency
in one's hand with the head near the wrist, holding down the forelimbs against the animal's sides
with the pinky and thumb (Fig. 88-1). Restrict venous outflow at the thoracic inlet and draw
blood as in adult animals.
Hgure 88-1: Restraint for venipuncture from a pediatric small animal (reprinted with permission from Root
Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successfuf Breeoing and Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier).
265
266 what are some of the techniques for venipuncture?
Post-procedure care and complications
 Complications are as in adult animals and consist primarily of hematoma formation.
Supplemental reading
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successful Breeding and Health Management.St. Louis
MO: Elsevier pp. 204-223.
30
OIN
89
What are some of the techniques for collection of
a urine sample?
Anatomy
The urinary bladder of pediatric animals may be abdominal or pelvic, as in adults.
Pre-procedure considerations
The small size of the urinary bladder relative to the size of needles available for use of urine col-
lection preclude cystocentesis as a safe method for urine collection in very small animals. There
are no studies documenting safety of various urine collection techniques in pediatric dogs and
cats.
Procedure
Within the first 3 weeks of life, puppies and kittens must be stimulated to urinate and defecate.
Stimulate urination by manipulating the genitalia with a moistened cotton ball or cloth. As
micturition occurs, urine can be collected with a syringe or allowed to drop into a sterile con-
tainer, such as a red top tube. Another method involves use of “blue pads" or human inconti-
nence pads, which have a porous surface and sterile cotton liner. Stimulate urination and allow
the urine to fall onto the pad. Remove the outer surface layer and cut out the portion of the
cotton layer that contains urine. Press this cotton layer in a syringe to remove the urine.
Post-procedure care and complications
There are no reported complications to urine collection as described above.
Supplemental reading
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeders Guide to Successul Breeding and Health Managerment. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier, pp. 204-223.
Valenti N. 2003. Another way to gather urine samples. Vet Med 98:304.
267
90
What is the technique for placement of
an intraosseous catheter?
Anatomy
Intraosseous catheters can be placed in either the humerus or the femur The author prefers
placement in the femur, for ease of placement and maintenance of the catheter if it is to be
indwelling (Fig. 90-1).
The head of the femur lies within the acetabulum. The greater trochanter of the femur is the
ridge palpable at the hip joint as it is flexed and extended. Just medial to the greater trochanter, 
between the greater trochanter and the head, lies the trochanteric fossa.
Pre-procedure considerations
 Intrasosseous catheter placement for administration of fluids, antibiotics, or any other substance
that could be administered intravenously, is performed only in seriously ill neonatal animals.
For this reason, anesthesia usually is not administered. Shave and surgically prepare the area over
the trochanteric fossa.
Hgure 9o-1: Placement of an intraosseous catheter in the femmur (reprinted with permission from Root
Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successfut Breeding and Hearth Management. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier).
269
270 what is the technique for placement of an intraosseous catheter?
Procedure
 Insert a 25-gauge 1-in. catheter into the trochanteric fossa, directing the stylette and needle along
the marrow canal visually. The normal spiral configuration of the bone helps keep the needle
within the marrow canal. Move the stifl and watch the hub of the catheter; if it is properly
placed, movement of the stifle will cause synchronous movement of the catheter hub at the hip.
 You may be able to verify placement of the catheter by attaching a syringe and applying gentle
suction. The dark blood of bone marrow will be evident if the catheter is in the marrow canal.
You also can introduce a small volume of heparinized saline to check placement; fluid should
flow freely. Bandage the catheter in place as you would in an adult animal. Maintenance fluid
requirements for neonates are 60 to 200 ml/kg/day maintenance plus losses. Fluids and other
substances may be administered using gravity or using a pump; the latter may better permit
monitoring of adverse effects. Overhydration of neonates may cause cardiac overload, pulmo-
nary edema, and intracranial hemorrhage, with subsequent decompensation and death.
Post-procedure care and complications
If the catheter is not placed properly, fluid will not flow freely or movement of fluid into the soft
tissue surrounding the femur will be evident. It is not known whether disruption of the proximal
femoral physis affects subsequent bone growth or whether disruption of the marrow cavity affects
hematologic status in these pups. However, because the technique is used when the animal is
near death and placement of intravenous catheters is diffcult in small, dehydrated animals,
placement of an intraosseous catheter is preferable to the alternative.
Supplemental reading
Freshman JL. 2005. Initially treating fading puppies and kittens. Vet Med 100:800-805.
Little S. 2006. How I treat orphaned kittens. Waltham Focus 16:2-6.
91
How do I determine safety and efficacy, and
calculate correct dosage for drugs used in puppies
and kittens?
Anatomy
 Organs of distribution, metabolism, and excretion of drugs include the bloodstream, liver, lungs,
kidneys, and intestinal tract.
Pre-procedure considerations
Small muscle size and reduced vascularity decrease the value of intramuscular injection as a route
of drug administration for pediatric animals as absorption is slowed. Conversely, decreased
subcutaneous fat in young animals compared with adults increases the rate of absorption of
substances given subcutaneously. However, if the animal is hypothermic, blood flow to the
subcutaneous space will be reduced and absorption slowed. The cardiovascular system of pedi-
atric animals is unable to respond readily to increased volume by increased heart rate. Intrave.
nous fluids and drugs must be administered carefully so as not to cause pulmonary edema.
Vascularity of the extremities is relatively poor, especially in animals less than 3 weeks of
age, who are not mobile and do not thermoregulate well. Hypothermia is associated with con-
centration of blood centrally and with decreased gastrointestinal (GI) motility. In general, the
variable Gl motility of young animals alters drug uptake. Renal function does not mature until
8 weeks of age; liver function does not mature until 5 months of age. Hepatic protein synthesis
is less than in adults, decreasing the amount of protein available for binding to drugs in the
bloodstream.
elevated relative percentage of body water permits the wide distribution of these drugs in the
body. Lipid-soluble drugs may achieve very high concentrations in plasma as there is so little
body fat in which they may be sequestered.
General principles for treatment of critically ill neonates include the following:
· For serious bacterial illness, avoid oral antibiotics during initial treatment because of the
unpredictability of absorption of drugs through the GI tract. Subcutaneous, intravenous, or
intraosseous routes are preferred.
· If the animal is near death, any antibiotic or other drug may be better than no therapy at all.
Carefully weigh risks versus benefits.
· Every drug given carries some risk.
271
272 How do I determine safe use of drugs?
Table 91-1. Pharmacokinetics of commonly used drugs.
Drug
Route of
Tissue where
Route of
Comments
Administration/
 Metabolized
Excretion
Dose
Amoxicillin/
PO/IM/SQ
Liver (partial)
Urine primarily.
ampicillin
some excretion
in feces
Amoxicillin-
PO/IM/SQ
Liver (partial)
Urine primarily.
clavulanate
some excretion
(ClavarmoxIM)
in feces
Cephalosporins
PO/IM/SQ
Minimally
Urine
 IM injection may be
metabolized, some
 painful.
 hepatic conversion 
Sulfadimethoxine 
PO/IM/IV
Minimally
Urine but
 Highly protein
(Albon IM)
 metabolized in dogs,
leabsorbed by
punoq
metabolized in liver
renal tubules 50
in other species
has long half-life
Pyrantel pamoate
PO
Liver (partial)
Urine and feces
Metronidazole
PO
Liver
Urine and feces
Absorption enhanced
if given with food.
lipid-soluble.
Praziquantel
 PO/IM/SQ
Liver
Urine
 Not recommended
for pups less than 4
weeks of age or
kittens less than 6
weeks of age.
Piperazine
PO
Kidney
Urine
Fenbendazole
PO
Liver
Feces
 Thiopental
IV
Liver
Urine
Moderately
 protein-bound.
Oxymorphone
IV/IM/(SQ)
Liver
auun
Metabolism
prolonged in cats.
lengthening drug
half-life.
Propofol
IV
Liver
Urine
Highly lipid-soluble,
highly protein
bound.
lsoflurane/
Inhalant
Exhaled
sevoflurane
PO = orally. IM = intrasmuscular, SQ = subcutaneous, IV = intravenous.
Pediatric techniques 273
Procedure
There are very few publications documenting pharmacokinetics of commonly used drugs in
puppies and kittens. Empirical dosing regimens include giving half the adult dose at the same
frequency as in adults, and giving the adult dose less frequently. Veterinarians must take what
they know about a given drug, and what they know about the animal's physiology, and use that
information to decide how quickly a drug will be taken up, metabolized, and excreted (Table
91-1). For example, if you wished to treat a 4-week-old puppy with metronidazole, factors to
consider would be that decreased hepatic function would lead to slower breakdown of the drug,
decreased renal function would lead to slower excretion of the drug, and decreased body fat
would lead to decreased distribution of the drug into body fat stores. All three of these would
lead to increased levels in the bloodstream and prolonged half-life, suggesting that less frequent
 dosing and lower doses than those used in adults would be appropriate.
Antibiotics that in general should be avoided in puppies and kittens are chloramphenicol
(blood dyscrasias), tetracyclines (enamel dysplasia and staining, inhibited or abnormal bone
growth), potentiated sulfas (anemia, hepatitis), and aminoglycosides (ototoxicity, nephrotoxic-
ity). Commonly used antibiotics and doses include amoxicillin (6 to 20 ml/kg twice daily per os),
amoxicillin/clavulanate (12.5 to 25mg/kg twice daily per os), and cephalexin (10 to 30mg/kg
twice daily per os).
Pain relief in pediatric animals is complicated by diffculty in identifying adverse side effects
and by varying ability of young animals to metabolize and excrete medications in these classes.
 In general, nonsteroidal analgesics should not be used in pediatric animals. Opiates are the drug
of choice, with their use restricted to the short-term and use balanced by reversal as needed.
Table 91-2. Side effects and signs of toxicity of commonly used drugs
Drug
Signs of Toxicity
Amoxicillin/ampicillin
Rare: Gastrointestinal distress
Amoxicillin-clavulanate (ClavamoxIM)
Rare: Gastrointestinal distress
Cephalosporins
Rare: Gastrointestinal distress
Sulfadimethoxine (Albon IM)
Rare: Crystallunia, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, bone marrow
depression.
Pyrantel pamoate
Rare: lncreased respiratory rate, ataxia
Metronidazole
Anorexia, vomiting. depression, mydriasis, neurologic signs
 Praziquantel
Rare: Vomiting. ataxia, depression
Piperazine
Emesis, neurologic signs including muscle fasciculation5
paralysis, death
 Fenbendazole
Extrermely rare
Thiopental
Central nervous systerm (CNS) and respiratory depression
Oxymorphone
CNS and respiratory depression, cardiovascular collapse
Propofol
Hypotension, bradycardia
Isoflurane/sevoflurane
Hypotension, respiratory depression, nausea, and vomiting
274 How do I determine safe use of drugs?
Post-procedure care and complications
Signs of toxicity must be evaluated carefully in neonatal animals and medications stopped if any
such signs are noted (Table 91-2).
Supplemental reading
Little S. 2006. How I treat orphaned kittens. Waltharm Focus 16:2-6.
 Mathews KA. 2008. Pain management for the pregnant, lactating, and neonatal to pediatric cat and dog.
Vet Clin NA 38:1291-1308.
 Plumb DC. 2004. Drugs in neonates: Principles and guesses. Proceedings, Society for Theriogenology
Annual Meeting, Lexington KY, pp. 307-315.
 Plumb DC. 2008. Veterinary Drug Handbook. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Section X
Pediatric physical examination and
management
92
What are normal physical examination findings at
various ages in puppies and kittens?
General information
See Table 92-1 for a summary. Body weight should be measured at birth and daily thereafter.
Normal birth weight in dogs varies from about 4 oz (120g) in toy breeds to 22oz (625g) in giant
breeds. Normal birth weight for kittens is about 3.5oz ( 100 g). Body weight may decrease slightly
within the first day of life but should remain stable or rise every day after that, doubling at 10
to 14 days of age.
 Normal rectal temperature varies by age, averaging 96.0 ± 1.5°F (35.6 ± 0.7°C) in the first 7
days of life, 98.6 to 100.0°F (37.0 to 38.2°C) from 7 to 21 days of life, and gradually achieving
adult values by 7 weeks of age.
Eyelids open at about 10 to 14 days on average. In some breeds, eyelids may open earlier.
When the eyelids open, corneal edema may be present, evidenced by blue discoloration. This
will clear within several days. Fundic examination can be performed as early as 6 weeks of age.
The ear canals are closed until 6 to 14 days of age. When they first open, the ear canals will
contain cellular debris that will clear over the next several weeks. Otoscopic examination can be
performed by 4 weeks of age. Hearing testing should be performed with the brainstem auditory
evoked response (BAER) test; this requires specialized equipment and training. Use of percussion
to assess hearing is not accurate because one may get either false negatives (animal inattentive)
or false positives (animal responds to movement of hands or air movement).
Teeth erupt in a predictable manner, allowing use of dentition to determine age (Table 92-2).
Oral mucous membranes may be quite hyperemic in normal puppies and kittens in the first week
 of life. Abdominal palpation can be used to assess size and abnormalities of the liver, left kidney,
colon, and urinary bladder
The skin and hair coat should be assessed for evidence of external parasites and dermatologic
disease. The most common disorders of this type identified in puppies and kittens are fleas and
dermatophytosis.
Auscultation of the heart and lungs is complicated by the small size of the animal relative to
the size of the equipment available, and to the normal rapid heart rate of pediatric animals.
Normal heart rate is 200 bpm in the first week of life. Bradycardia in neonates is not mediated
by the vagal nerve and is commonly an indicator of hypoxia. Cardiac murmurs usually are aus-
culted at the base of the heart on the left side and vary in significance by grade. On a six-point
scale, murmurs graded I to Ill most commonly are functional murmurs due to anemia
277
278 what are normal physical examination findings at various ages in puppies and kittens?
Table 92-1. Timing of significant events in pediatric development.
Event
Age at Occurrence
Umbilical cord dries and falls off
2 to 3 days
 Eyelids open
 5 to 14 days
 External ear canals open
6 to 14 days
Extensor dominance
5 days
Capable of crawling
7 to 14 days
Capable of walking. urinating. and defecating spontaneously
14 to 21 days
Hematocrit/red blood cell number stabilize near that of adult
8 weeks
Renal function nears that of adult
8 weeks
Hepatic function nears that of adult
5 months
Table 92-2. Timing of tooth eruption in dogs and cats (weeks)
Tooth Type
Dog
Cat
Deciduous
Adult
Deciduous
Adult
Incisor
2-3
12-16
3-4
12-16
Canine
3-4
16-20
3
16-24
Premolar
3-6
16-24
4-12
16-24
Molar
14-20
一
20-28
hypoproteinemia, fever, or septicemia. These innocent murmurs are more commonly identified
 in puppies than in kittens. Murmurs graded IV to VI most likely are due to congenital anomalies
 d    ti   s r se s nd sn 
 Palpation of the skull may be performed to identify open fontanelles. There is no correlation
in the literature between presence of open fontanelles, presence of hydrocephalus, and eventual
 signs of neurologic disease. The average date of closure of open fontanelles is not described.
 Musculoskeletal examination can be performed at any time. Puppies and kittens should be
able to hold their head up at birth, to push themselves up on their forelimbs and crawl by 2
weeks of age, and to walk by about 3 weeks of age.
Neurologic function does not mature until 6 to 8 weeks of age but neurologic examination
can be performed at any age, localizing neurologic disease as in adults. At birth, puppies and
kittens can suckle, vocalize, and respond to odor, touch, and pain. At birth, puppies and kittens 
have a functioning but slow withdrawal reflex and have flexor dominance. Extensor dominance
becomes apparent within the first 3 weeks of life.
Pediatric physical examination and management 279
Clinical implications
Failure to gain weight may be the first sign of an abnormality of a puppy or kitten. Causes of
failure to thrive are described in Chapter 96.
Hypothermia is associated with lack of intestinal motility, with ileus most common when body
perhaps as a mechanism to minimize the risk of aspiration.
Abdominal distention may prevent ability to palpate abdominal organs. Distention most com-
monly is due to aerophagia, often secondary to persistent crying or increased respiratory effort;
maldigestion; or retention of feces or urine. If the spleen is palpable, it is enlarged. If the liver
margins are palpable beyond the rib cage, the liver is enlarged.
Functional cardiac murmurs (Grade I to IHI on a six-point scale) usually are due to anemia.
hypoproteinemia, fever, or septicemia (see Chapter 98). Congenital murmurs (Grade IV to VI)
are associated with clinical manifestations of dyspnea, cyanosis, open-mouth breathing, failure
to suckle, and lethargy.
Radiography for assessment of bone and joint abnormalities is difficult in puppies and kittens
because of decreased mineralization of bone. Quality of radiographs may be improved by using
 a tabletop cassette, and by decreasing kVp to one-half that for an adult of the same thickness or,
 in puppies, by using 2kvP for each 1cm of soft tissue measured for values up to 80kVp.
Supplemental reading
Grundy SA. 2006. Clinically relevant physiology of the neonate. Vet Clin NA 36:443-459.
Lawler DF. 2008. Neonatal and pediatric care of the puppy and kitten. Theriogenology 70:384-392.
Little S. 2006. How I treat orphaned kittens. Waltharm Focus 16:2-6.
Root Kustritz MV. 2006. The Dog Breeder's Guide to Successful Breeding and Health Management. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier, pp. 204-223.
93
What are normal values on complete blood count,
chemistry profile, and urinalysis of puppies
and kittens?
General information
Complete blood count
Changes seen on complete blood count (CBC; Table 93-1) include a decrease in hematocrit and
an increase in polychromasia, nucleated RBCs, Howell-Jolly bodies, and Heinz bodies (kittens).
Hematocrit reaches adult values by 8 weeks of age. A stress neutrophilia may be seen due to
venipuncture. White blood cell number may be increased in normal pups up to 8 weeks of age.
Serum chemistry profile
 See Table 93-2 for serum chemistry profles in puppies and kittens. Liver enzyme values vary in
pediatric animals, with a decrease in alanine aminotransferase concentrations and an increase in
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) concentrations. ALP concentration remains elevated throughout the
period of most rapid growth, which varies with adult size in dogs and peaks in kittens at 7 months
of age, decreasing in both species as long bone physes close. Phosphorus mirrors this pattern.
Total protein and albumin are decreased in young animals, reaching adult values by 6 to 9
months of age. Fasting and post-prandial bile acid concentrations are as adult concentrations by
4 weeks of age.
 Renal function is immature in neonates, gradually achieving adult levels by 8 weeks of age.
Glomerular fltration rate is reduced in puppies and kittens, varying from 20% of adult values
at birth to 100% of adult values by several weeks of age. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) values vary
with time of sampling to ingestion of the most recent meal, but BUN is still a more sensitive
 indicator of renal function than is creatinine in young animals.
Normal neonates have relatively low blood glucose, averaging about 70mg/dl from 3 days of
age and gradually increasing to normal adult values. Significant hypoglycemia is defined as a
blood glucose concentration of <50 mg/dl and often is associated with septicemia (see Chapter
97). Pathologic hyperglycemia is uncommon in pediatric patients; hyperglycemia may be evident
in young animals as they near death.
Calcium and phosphorus concentrations are altered by slow update through the gastrointes-
tinal tract and need for these minerals as a component of mineralizing bone. Phosphorus is
elevated during rapid bone growth and is normal by 8 to 12 months of age; normalization may
take longer in giant breeds.
281
PeDIATRIC EXAMINATION
282
What
are
normal
values
Table 93-1. Complete blood count (CBC) values for puppies (P) and kittens (K)
Age
Hematocrit (%)
WBC (×10/μl)
Differential (x10°/μl)
on
P
K
P
K
Neutrophils
Bands
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
compl
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
lete
1 day
36
7 days
37
00d
一
2 week5
29-53
34-37
9-10
3-10
0-1
0-0.1
2-7
3-4
0-1
0-2
0-2
0
count,
7-23
5-7
0
0
4 weeks
27-37
26-27
9-26
14-17
4-13
6-8
E'0-0
0-0.2
1-8
6-7
0-2
0
0-1
1
0
0
9
6 weeks
26-36
26-28
13-27
16-19
4-18
8-11
E'0-0
2:010
3-17
6-7
E-0
0
0-1
1
0
D
nemistry
8 weeks
31-39
29-31
13-17
16-20
6-12
8-9
0-0.3
0-0.3
3-7
8-11
0-2
0
0-1
1
0
0
WBC = white blood cell number.
profile,
and
urinalysi
15?
Table 93-2. Serum chemistry profile values in puppies (P) and kittens (K)
Age
ALT (IU/l)
AP (IU/)
Albumin
Total
Glucose
BUN
Creatinine
Sodium
Chloride
Potassium
Calcium
(g/dl)
 Protein
(mg/dl)
(mg/dl)
(mg/dl)
(mEq/l)
(mEq/l)
(mEq/l)
(mg/dl)
(g/dl)
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
P
K
1 day
38
29-
1069
1348-
2.3
1.9-
4.0
-6'E
106
65-
EE
34-
0.6
0.6-
147
104
5.8
11.5
9.6-
77
3715
2.7
5.8
149
94
1.2
12.2
 Pediatri
7 days
22
11-
242
126-
2.3
2.0-
4.3
3.5-
129
105-
24
16-
0.4
0.3-
148
111
6.1
一
11.8
10-
76
E9E
2.5
4.8
145
9E
0.7
13.7
2
10-
10-
176-
116-
2
2.1-
3.7-5
111-
107-
一
11-
0.4-
9.9-
physi
weeks
34
24
560
90E
2.6
146
158
OE
0.6
13
4
20-
14-
135-
90-
1-
2.4-
4
4.5-
86-
99-
10-
0.4-
149-
120-
4-5
10-
一
week5
22
55
201
274
2
2.9
5.6
115
152
22
0.7
153
124
12.2
examination
6
16-
125-
4-
2
-E
4-5
125-
<120
9
<30
1-4
0.6
148
151-
105
119-
5
5-6
11
10-
week5
17
132
5
4
126
156
125
11
8
9-
12-
144-
60-
2-
2.4-
4-
4.8-
134-
94-
16-
0.6-
150-
119-
4-5
9.8-
weeks
24
56
177
161
3
3.0
5
6.5
272
143
33
1.2
152
125
11.7
and
ALT = alanine arminotransferase, AP = alkaline phosphatase, BUN = blood urea nitrogen.
managem
ent
283
PEDIATRIC EXAMINATION
284 what are normal values on complete blood count, chemistry profile, and urinalysis?
Urinafysis
Because renal function is immature, urine specific gravity is decreased in pediatric animals,
averaging 1.006-1.017. Physiologic proteinuria is present in the first days of life as colostral
antibodies are absorbed and excreted in the urine. Normoglycemic glucosuria may be present
until renal function matures.
Clinical implications
All bloodwork must be interpreted using pediatric values as normals. In general, by 12 to 20
weeks of age, all animals can be evaluated as adults.
Supplemental reading
Grundy SA. 2006. Clinically relevant physiology of the neonate. Vet Clin NA 36:443-459.
Harper EJ, Hackett RM, Wilkinson J, et al. 2003. Age-related variations in hematologic and plasma bio-
chemical test results in Beagles and Labrador retrievers. J Amer Vet Med Assoc 223: 1436-1442.
Levy JK, Crawford PC, Werner LL. 2006. Efect of age on reference intervals of serum biochemical values
NOIL
in kittens. J Amer Vet Med Assoc 228:1033-1037.
5
XE
E
94
How are orphan puppies and kittens best fed?
General information
Orphan puppies and kittens must be provided with correct environmental temperature. Pediatric
animals are incapable of thermoregulation until they are walking and can generate heat by muscle
activity. Orphans should be maintained in an environment at about 85°F (29.5 °C) for the first
2 weeks of life, and about 80°F (26.5°C) for the subsequent 2 weeks. Warmed and cooler areas
 should be available, so the puppies and kittens can crawl to an area appropriate in temperature.
Among surface sources of heat, circulating hot water blankets are best. Hot water bottles should
be wrapped in towels and frequently changed. Regular heating pads may heat unevenly and more
easily burn the fragile skin of neonates. Heat lamps are an excellent, safe way to provide radiant
 heat; if neonates are not capable of crawling from warmer to cooler areas, they must be carefully
observed.
It is important to determine, if possible, whether or not the pup or kitten ingested colostrum
in the first 24 h of life. Maximal absorption of antibodies through the intestine occurs at 8 h after
birth and decreases significantly by 1 day of life. If the owner is unsure whether a puppy has
ingested colostrum, blood can be drawn from the puppy and from a littermate that is known to
have nursed, and serum alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutyl transpeptidase concentrations
compared between the two. Concentrations remain high for only days in puppies that have
ingested colostrum. If a puppy or kitten has not ingested colostrum, antibodies can be provided
by subcutaneous administration of serum from the dam or another immunocompetent animal
in the household. The empirical dose for kittens is 15 ml of serum, given subcutaneously as 5ml
boluses at birth and 12 and 24h later. Donor cats should be negative for feline leukemia virus
 and feline immunodeficiency virus, and should have the same blood type as the kitten. The
empirical dose for puppies is 10 ml/lb (22 ml/kg) of pooled adult serum; this can be given at once
in large pups or split into boluses as described for kittens. Early vaccination may be warranted
in puppies and kittens that did not receive adequate amounts of colostrum.
A milk-based diet should be offered for the first 3 to 4 weeks, with weaning begun at about 4
weeks of age. Urination and defection must be stimulated by genital manipulation affer feeding
 until the animal is walking, at about 3 weeks of age.
S       sn  s
s  i  d       n    
Feline milk replacers must contain a source of taurine for optimal growth to occur. Homemade
diets are best used in emergency situations only (Table 94-1).
285
286 How are orphan puppies and kittens best fed?
Table 94-1. Emergency hormemade milk replacers for puppies and kitten5s
Puppies
Kittens
1. 3 parts evaporated milk (not skim) to 1 part
1. 1/2 cup (120ml) whole milk. 1 egg yolk, 1 drop
water
liquid infant vitamins
2. 1 cup (240ml) whole milk, 1 tsp (5ml)
2. 1/2 cup (120ml) condensed milk, 1/2 cup
vegetable oil, 1 drop liquid infant vitamins 
(120 ml) water, 1/2 cup (120ml) plain yogurt, 3 to
4 egg yolks
3. 1/2 cup (120 ml) whole milk, 1/2 cup (120ml)
water, 1 to 2 eg9 yolks, 2 Turms (calcium
 5upplerment), 1 tsp (5ml) vegetable oil
4. 1 cup (240 ml) whole milk, 1 T (15 ml) vegetable
oil, pinch salt, 3 egg yolks. 1 drop liquid infant
vitamins
Amount to be fed varies with the caloric density of the formula, and age and weight of the
animal. Kittens should receive 100 to 175kcal/1b (220 to 380kcal/kg) daily, split into four to six
feedings. Puppies should receive 105 to 120 kcal/1b (230 to 260kcal/kg) daily, split into four
 feedings. Less frequent feeding may be associated with volume overload, abdominal discomfort,
diarrhea, and aspiration. Feeding frequency can be decreased to three times daily after the orphan
reaches 2 weeks of age. For example, kitten homemade diet number 1 shown in the table contains
237kcal/cup, which equals 30kcal/fl oz (3kcal/ml). Kittens require 100 to 175 kcal/lb daily; a 4-oz
(1/41b = 113g) kitten requires 25 to 44 kcal daily. The amount to be fed daily is 0.8 to 1.5floz
(8 to 15 ml). This yields, for four daily feedings, a per feeding volume of 0.2 to 0.4oz (2 to 4 ml).
Similarly puppy homemade diet number 3 shown in the table contains 208 kcal/cup. Calculation
determines a per feeding volume for a 1-lb puppy of 1 to 1.3 floz (10 to 12ml). Commercial milk
replacers offten bypass discussion of calories, providing volume instructions only. Examples are
the puppy milk replacer Esbilac and kitten milk replacer KMR (2T/4oz (10 ml/125g) daily; see
Resources).
The formula should be warmed to 95 to 100 °F (35 to 38 °C) when feeding 1- to 2-week-old
animals. If the animal has been inappetent, it may be beneficial to feed half the calculated dose
for 1 to 2 days. Equipment for feeding of pediatric animals includes spoons, droppers, bottles,
 or tubes. Using spoons and droppers to feed kittens and puppies is dangerous because the limited
 gag reflex of these animals easily permits aspiration of formula into the lungs. Bottle-feeding
 poses less risk of aspiration and more readily satisfies the neonate's need to suckle. Small bottles
marketed for animals or bottles intended for premature human infants may be used. The hole
in the nipple should allow milk to ooze slowly. The bottle should never be squeezed to force
 expulsion of milk while the animal is nursing.
Tube-feeding is quick. Caution must be taken to ensure proper placement of the tube into the
gastrointestinal (Gl) tract and to prevent overflowing and regurgitation. The animal should be
held horizontally on its ventrum. The feeding tube varies in diameter and length with age. A #5
French feeding tube should be used in animals weighing less than 300 g, and a #8 to #10 French
feeding tube should be used in animals weighing more than 300g. Measure the length of the
feeding tube by marking off 75% of the distance from the animal's last rib to the tip of its nose.
Pediatric physical examination and management 287
This length ensures placerment in the stomach without kinking of the tube within the GI tract.
Length should be rechecked and adjusted weekly. The warmed formula is gently expelled through
the tube with a syringe. Monitor gastric distension; average stomach capacity in neonates is about
0.7 floz (4tsp) per pound (40ml/kg). Kink the tube before pulling it out to prevent leaking and
aspiration of formula as the tube moves through the oral cavity.
Weaning, introduction of solid food, begins at 3 weeks of age in puppies and at 3 to 4 weeks
 in kittens. Puppy or kitten food, either canned food or moistened dry food, should be offered
in preference to human foods. Food should be offered as a gruel initially, formed by thoroughly
blending 1 part dry food to 3 parts water or 2 parts canned food to 1 part water for puppies, and
1 part dry food to 3 parts formula or 2 parts canned food to 1 part formula for kittens. Fresh
water always should be provided as well. Gradually mix less water or formula with the food until
the puppy or kitten is eating dry food exclusively. Weaning usually is complete by 6 to 8 weeks
of age. By the time the animal is weaned, it should have a body weight roughly 6 to 10 times its
birth weight.
Clinical implications
An effort should always be made to find another lactating bitch or queen to support orphan
animals. No homemade or commercial milk replacer duplicates all the nutritional components
and antibodies, enzymes, and other unique features of bitch or queen milk. Another important
aspect of nursing from a foster mother is behavioral development; socialization by a dam from
the same species is difficult to replace.
 Problems reported with feeding of either commercial or homemade milk replacers to puppies
and kittens include small, focal cataracts that develop because of deficiencies in vitamins or
amino acids that resolve after weaning, and slower growth rate due to lack of enzymes necessary
for fat digestion. By several months of age hand-raised puppies and kittens achieve the same size
content and decreased caloric density make it difficult to provide orphans with an adequate
number of calories without inducing diarrhea. If feeding induces diarrhea, the formula can be
diluted 1:2 with electrolyte solution until the neonate can tolerate it.
Supplemental reading
Lawler DF. 2008. Neonatal and pediatric care of the puppy and kitten. Theriogenology 70(3):384-392.
Little S. 2006. How I treat orphaned kittens. Waltham Focus 16:2-6.
What flea and tick control products are safe to
use in puppies and kittens?
General information
Commercially available products can be used on puppies and kittens as young as 4 to 6 weeks
(Table 95-1).
Table 95-1. Flea and tick products suitable for use in puppies and kittens.
Name of
Drugs
Route of
Active
Safe during
Youngest Age
Product
Contained
AdministrationAgainst...
Pregnancy?
Can Be Used
Puppies
Kittens
Frontline
 Fipronil
Topical
Adult fleas,
 Not approved
10 weeks
8 weeks
ticks
Sentinel 
Lufenuron +
Oral
pue s66a eau
Safe
4 weeks
Not for
millberycin
larvae,
(or
use
heartworm,
2 Ib)
in
rounds,
cats
hooks
Advantage
Irmidacloprid
Adult fleas
Not approved
7weeks
8 weeks
in the United
States but
used
elsewhere
Advantix
Imidacloprid +
Topical
 Adult fleas.
Not approved
7 week5
 Not for
permethrin 
ticks,
use
mosquitoes
in
cats
 Revolution 
 Selamectin
Topical
pue s66a eay
Safe
6 week5
6 weeks
larvae, adult
fleas, ticks.
ear mites,
mange,
hooks.
heartworm
Capstar
Nitempyrarm 
Oral
 Adult fleas
Manufacturer
4 weeks
4 weeks
claims safe
(or
(or
2 lb)
2 lb)
 Program
Lufenuron
Oral
Hea eggs and
Safe
6 week5
6 weeks
larvae
289
Clinical implications
Flea control is desirable but difficult in very small animals. The feeding of fleas, coupled with
normal physiologic changes in hematocrit in young animals, can precipitate pathologic anemia
Dips are not recommended because of the difficulty in gauging the amount of drug taken up
on application and through later exposure. Shampoos may be less toxic because they have no
residual activity. Flea combs can be used to some effect in very young animals.
Section Xl
Pediatric disease
96
What are the causes of failure to thrive in
puppies and kittens?
Etiology
 Failure to thrive, or fading, is a poorly defined phenomenon. It is defined by some as failure of
weight gain and general unthriftiness from birth, and by others as regression in growth and
development in animals that had been growing well There is no one etiology associated with
either phenomenon.
 Differentials common to both groups include low birth weight; abnormal environment or
parasites (see Chapter 97); and septicemia (see Chapter 98). Differentials for animals that never
grow well include failure to suckle effectively (cleft palate or abnormal nipples), congenital
abnormalities of metabolism, and, in cats, neonatal isoerythrolysis (see Chapter 99). Differentials
for animals that had been growing well but then stagnate or regress in growth and development
vary depending on body condition. Differentials for those with poor body condition include
portosystemic shunt, renal failure, megaesophagus, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and cardiac
disease. Differentials for those with good body condition include hypothyroidism, diabetes mel-
litus, and adrenal disease; these are very uncommon in puppies and kittens.
In general, one can identify environmental, genetic, and infectious causes of failure to thrive
( Table 96-1). Of the many infection-related possibilities, only canine herpesvirus will be covered
in detail in this section; puppies that acutely stop nursing, cry incessantly, and die within 24 h
 of first clinical signs may be infected with canine herpesvirus.
Clinical signs
Puppies and kittens should be seen if they are not gaining weight. The owner should weigh them
at birth and every day thereafter; puppies and kittens should remain stable or gain weight every
day, doubling their birth weight by about 10 days of age. Other nonspecific signs of illness include
moving away from the dam and littermates or being persistently rejected by the dam, crying for
more than 20 min, and poor muscle tone.
Cleft palate may be evidenced by passage of milk through the nostrils while suckling or by
respiratory distress if milk is aspirated into the lungs. Clinical manifestations of septicemia are
variable (see Chapter 98). Neonatal isoerythrolysis is evidenced by lethargy and icterus (see
Chapter 99). Clinical signs associated with other disorders are as in adults.
293
294 what are the causes of failure to thrive in puppies and kittens?
Table 96-1. Causes of failure to thrive in puppies and kitten5.
General Cause
Specific Cause?
Environment
Hypothermia
Hyperthermia
Maternal factors
Environmental toxins
Genetic
Gross developmental abnormalities
Thynic dysfunction
Infectious agents—Bacteria
Brucella canis (P)
Bartonella henselae (K)
Campyiobacter sp. (P/K)b
Gram-negative enterobacters (P/K)
Gram-positive cocci (P/K)
Infectious agents—Viruses
Canine herpesvirus (P)
Canine adenovirus (P)
Canine parvovirus types 1 and 2 (P)b
Canine distermper virus (P)
Feline herpesvirus type 1 (rhinotracheitis) (K)
Calicivirus (K)
15
Feline leukemia virus (K)
D
Coronavirus (K)
RI
 Feline imrnunodeficiency virus (K)
Panleukopenia virus (feline distemper) (K)
E
Infectious agents—Parasites
Roundworms (Toxocara sp.) (P/K)
Hookworms (Ancylostoma caninum) (P)
Toxopiasma gondlil(K)
Tritrichomonas foetus (K)
Giardia sp. (P/K)b
Coccidia (P/K)
*P, puppies; K, kittens.
See Chapter 97.
'See Chapter 98.
Pediatric disease 295
Hgure 96-1: Typical lesions of herpesvirus on abdominal organs (reprinted with permission from Root Kustritz
MV. 2006. The Dog Breeoer's Guide to Successfuf Breeoing and Hearth Management, St. Louis, MO: Elsevier)
 Canine herpesvirus may be apparent late in gestation as pregna ncy loss (see Chapter 46) or as
birth of a mixed litter of stillborn, macerated, mummified, and apparently normal puppies. Pups
exposed within the first 3 weeks of life develop acute viremia with subsequent vasculitis of all
internal organs (Fig. 96-1). The most common description is acute onset of lethargy, crying, and
unwillingness to suckle in pups that had been vigorous and growing rapidly. Affected pups often
die within 24 to 48h of onset of clinical signs.
Diagnosis
Normal rectal temperature varies by age, averaging 96.0 ± 1.5°F (35.6 ± 0.7°C) in the frst 7 days
of life, 98.6 to 100.0°F (37.0 to 38.2°C) from 7 to 21 days of life, and gradually achieving adult
values by 7 weeks of age.
If the owner is unsure whether a puppy or kitten has ingested colostrum, blood can be drawn
from the neonate of interest and a littermate that is known to have nursed, and serum alkaline
phosphatase and gamma-glutyl transpeptidase concentrations compared between the two. Con-
centrations remain high for only days in puppies or kittens that have ingested colostrum.
Cleft palate is diagnosed by inspection (Fig. 96-2). Diagnosis of septicemia is discussed in
Chapter 98. Diagnosis of neonatal isoerythrolysis is discussed in Chapter 99. Diagnosis of other
disorders is as in adults.
Canine herpesvirus infection in pups most often is made at necropsy. Diffuse pinpoint hemor-
rhages of the kidney, liver, and intestinal tract are pathognomonic. Free fluid may be present in
the abdominal and thoracic cavities. Inclusion bodies may be identified in hepatocytes. Virus
isolation and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing also is available.
Treatment
Rewarming of hypothermic neonates should be gradual, taking anywhere from 30 min to 2h.
Too rapid warming may be associated with increased metabolic demand. Remember that normal
body temperature for animals less than 3 weeks of age is lower than that for adults. The use of
296  what are the causes of failure to thrive in puppies and kittens?
Figure 96-2: Cleft palate.
 indirect heat, such as a radiant heat lamp, is prefered to the use of direct heat, such as a heating
 pad. Body temperature less than 94 °F (34.4 C) is associated with ileus, or gastrointestinal stasis.
Hypothermic animals should not be fed milk-based products, which will ferment in the stomach
if motility is absent.
 If a puppy or kitten has not ingested colostrum, antibodies can be provided by subcutaneous
administration of serum from the dam or another immunocompetent animal in the household.
The empirical dose for kittens is 150ml/kg or 15ml of serum, given subcutaneously as 5ml
boluses at birth and 12 and 24 h later. Donor cats should be negative for feline leukemia and
feline immunodeficiency virus, and should have the same blood type as the kitten. The empirical
dose for puppies is administration of 10 ml/1b (22 ml/kg) of pooled adult serum; this can be given
at once in large pups or split into boluses as described for kittens.
Puppies and kittens dehydrate quickly because of their relatively large surface to volume ratio
compared to adults, greater skin permeability, increased total body water content, and decreased
renal function with subsequent inability to retrieve water. Dehydrated neonates that are not
hypothermic can be tubed and provided with oral fluids. Ill neonates require parenteral therapy.
Fluids can be administered into the subcutaneous space but are taken up variably. Fluids con-
taining dextrose cannot be given subcutaneously as this hypertonic solution actually may draw
more fluid into that space. Intravenous catheters (20- to 22-gauge cephalic catheters) can
be placed; in moribund animals, intraosseous catheter placement may be considered (see
Chapter 90).
 Cleff palates may be closed surgically or permitted to close spontaneously. Treatment of sep-
ticemia is discussed in Chapter 98. Treatment of neonatal isoerythrolysis is discussed in Chapter
99. Treatment of other disorders is as in adults.
Canine herpesvirus is diffcult to treat. The virus does not replicate well at normal to high
body temperatures, so some advocate maintaining the pups in a high environmental temperature
such that their body temperature is 101.0 to 102.2 °F (36.3 to 37.0 °C). The antiviral agent, acy-
clovir, has been described for therapy but has not been evaluated in scientific studies. One
described dose is 10 mg/kg every 6h per os for 5 days.
Pediatric disease 297
Supplemental reading
Addie DD. 2000. Prevention of infectious causes of death in pups and kittens. Proceedings, British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, England, pp. 1-6.
Crawford PC, Levy IK, Werner LL. 2006. Evaluation of surrogate markers for passive transfer of immunity
in kittens. J Amer Vet Med Assoc 228:1038-1041.
Freshman JL. 2005. Causes of fading puppy and kitten syndrome. Vet Med 100:781-788.
 Freshman JL. 2005. Initially treating fading puppies and kittens. Vet Med 100:800-805.
Lawler DF. 2008. Neonatal and pediatric care of the puppy and kitten. Theriogenology 70:384-392.
Levy JK, Crawford PC, Collante WR, Papich MG. 2001. Use of adult cat serum to correct failure of passive
transfer in kittens. J Amer Vet Med Assoc 219:1401-1405.
Macintire DK. 2008. Pediatric fluid therapy. Vet Clin NA 38:621-627.
Root Kustritz MV. 2003. The Practical Veterinarian: Small Animal Theriogenology. St. Louis, MO:
Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 283-329.
ATRIC
ED
97
What are the common causes of diarrhea in
puppies and kittens?
Etiology
 The most common cause of diarrhea in puppies and kittens is internal parasites. Common para-
 sites are protozoa (Coccidia and Giardia) and helminths (roundworms and hookworms). Para-
sites are present in greater numbers in very young animals than in older animals; in one study,
10.9% and 7.8% of dogs less than 6 months of age had a positive fecal flotation test for round-
worms and hookworms, respectively. Other causes of diarrhea include overnutrition or feeding
of high-solids formulas in nursing pups and kittens, and supplementation with inappropriate
foodstuffs in weaned puppies and kittens. Any cause of diarrhea in adult dogs and cats may also
be a cause of diarrhea in puppies and kittens. Viral causes, including parvovirus, will not be
discussed here in detail.
Clinical signs
 In the first 3 weeks of life, the dam stimulates defecation and may mask presence of diarrhea.
Dehydration and weight los may be the first evidence of a problem. Animals with a heavy para-
site burden also may have a pot-bellied appearance and scruffy hair coat. Roundworm larvae
  nim ood pu qo ou e so o  q a a
bowel diarrhea in kittens may be evident in animals carrying Tritrichomonas foetus.
Diagnosis
Fecal flotation may be used to identify the oocytes of roundworms and hookworms. Coccidia
and Giardia sp. may be best identified on fresh fecal samples. The small size of puppies and
kittens and grooming behavior of the queen may preclude ability to definitively diagnose pres-
ence of specific parasites. Fecal flotation on a sample from the dam may be informative. Fecal
culture may be necessary to identify persistent infection with Salmonella sp., Campylobacter sp-,
or other bacterial causes of diarrhea. As with parasitism, fecal culture from the dam may inform
decisions regarding possible bacterial infection as a cause of diarrhea in her offspring. Identifica-
tion of Tritrichomas foetus requires special culture media or polymerase chain reaction testing:
call your diagnostic laboratory for details of testing.
Treatment
 For roundworms and hookworms, puppies or kittens aged 2 weeks or older can be treated with
pyrantel pamoate (5 to 10mg/kg per os and repeat in 2 to 3 weeks). Coccidia and Giardia sp.
299
300  what are the common causes of diarrhea in puppies and kittens?
usually cause mild, self-limiting diarrhea. If treatment for coccidiosis is necessary, puppies and
kittens can be treated with sulfadimethoxine (30mg/kg once daily or 15mg/kg twice daily in
puppies, 30 mg/kg once daily in kittens weighing at least 1 kg, until signs regress). If treatment
  ao  pn a  s p saidnd essa si sia r
daily per os for 3-7 days) and perhaps with metronidazole, depending on age (see Chapter 91).
Tritrichomas foetus infection in kittens can be treated with ronidazole (30 to 50mg/kg twice daily
for 2 weeks).
 Parasite burden may be reduced in bitches and shedding at the time of whelping reduced by
 treatment with fenbendazole late in gestation (50 mg/kg once daily per os from about day 40 of
gestation through early lactation).
Supplemental reading
Freshman JL. 2005. Initially treating fading puppies and kittens. Vet Med 100:800-805.
Magne ML. 2006. Selected topics in pediatric gastroenterology. Vet Clin NA 36:533-548.
Mohamed AS, Moore GE, Glickman LT. 2009. Prevalence of intestinal nematode parasitism among pet
dogs in the United States (2003-2006). J Amer Vet Med Assoc 234:631-637.
Munnich A, Lubke-Becker A. 2004. Escherichia coli infections in newborn puppies—Clinical and epide-
miological investigations. Theriogenology 62:562-575.
Root Kustritz MV. 2003. The Practical Veterinarian: Small Animal Theriogenology. St. Louis, MO:
Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 283-329.
15
15
D
E
98
What are the clinical manifestations of septicemia
and how is it diagnosed and treated?
Etiology
Septicemia is, by definition, whole body infection with circulating bacteria. Animals that are
hypothermic or that failed to ingest colostrum are predisposed to septicemia. Gram-negative
organisms are most commonly isolated, with Escherichia coli reported as the most common
causative organism. Other reported organisms include Staphylococcus sp., Streptococcus sp.,
Kebsiella sp., Pseudomonas sp., Pasteurella sp., Enterobacter sp., Enterococcus sp., Clostridium
Sp., Bacteroides sp., Fusobacterium sp., Brucella canis, and Salmonella sp.
The subtype of bacterium often is the same as that isolated from the vulvar discharge of the
bitch. The most common route of entry is the umbilicus, but neonates also may be infected by
exposure through the gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, urinary tract, and skin lacerations.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs vary with organ(s) infected. Possibilities include vomiting foamy fluid, passing
liquid diarrhea, and reddening of the anus; pyelonephritis with abdominal pain, hematuria, and
fever; respiratory distress, open-mouth breathing, and cyanosis; conjunctivitis; and omphalitis
(inflammation of the umbilicus). Nonspecific signs include lethargy, lack of suckling, dehydra-
tion, and sloughing of the extremities secondary to vasculitis and tissue hypoxemia (Fig. 98-1).
Fgure 98-1: Ischemic skin lesions of the extremities secondary to vasculitis in a puppy with septicemia.
301
302 What are the clinical manifestations of septicemia and how is it diagnosed and treated?
Diagnosis
Definitive diagnosis requires blood culture. However, the relatively large volume of blood
required is prohibitive in very small animals. One reported technique is dilution of 1 ml of whole
blood into 5 to 10ml enrichment broth, with any growth by 6 to 18h later considered diagnostic.
Culture of urine may be positive (see Chapters 88 and 89 for venipuncture and urine collection
technique). Supportive diagnostics include normocytic, normochromic anemia, and mild to
moderate neutrophilia on complete blood count, and hypoglycemia on serum chemistry profile.
Septicemia often is diagnosed at necropsy. There are no pathognomic signs of septicemia, but
pathology indicative of infection will be evident in infected organ systems. Culture of tissue or
free abdominal or thoracic fluid is definitive.
Treatment
Antibiotic choice should be based on culture and sensitivity, if possible, and specifics of pediatric
physiology must be considered (see Chapter 91). Penicillins and cephalosporins are logical
empirical choices.
Supportive therapy includes fluid replacement with a balanced electrolyte solution. Dextrose
(5%) may be added, and KCl supplemented if serum potassium concentrations are less than
2.5 mEq/L. Oxygen therapy may be necessary for management of tissue hypoxemia. Provision of
 prebiotics that support growth of the intestinal microflora may be beneficial.
Supplemental reading
Munnich A, Lubke-Becker A. 2004. Escherichia coli infections in newborn puppies—Clinical and epide-
miological investigations. Theriogenology 62:562-575.
Root Kustritz MV. 2003. The Practical Veterinarian: Small Animal Theriogenology. St. Louis, MO:
Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 283-329.
15
99
How is neonatal isoerythrolysis diagnosed,
treated, and prevented in cats?
Etiology
 Cats have two main blood types, A and B. Cats with type A red blood cell (RBC) antigens have
weak anti-B antibodies; cats with type B blood have very strong anti-A antibodies. These anti-
 adi e i amsodxa se uad io uosnsu d subai jou eu doap so
queen is bred by a type A tom, she may produce kittens who are type A. When those kittens
ingest colostrum, the strong anti-A antibodies ingested will lyse their RBCs, precipitating a
hemolytic crisis.
Clinical signs
Affected kittens are icteric and anemic and may slough the tip of the tail and extremities as blood
flow to those areas is compromised. Kittens demonstrate tachypnea and tachycardia, and hemo-
globinuria, and may die acutely. Clinical signs usually appear within the first days of life.
Diagnosis
 Neonatal isoerythrolysis usually is diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs and age at which they
appear.
Treatment
Kittens should be removed from the queen if they are less than 1 day of age and still capable of
taking up antibodies across the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract as they ingest the queen's colostrum.
They can be placed back on the queen at 2 to 3 days of age as they are no longer capable of
absorbing those large proteins across the GI tract at that point in development. Transfusion may
be required. The goal is to provide the kitten with RBCs to perrmit delivery of oxygen to tissues
until they can build up a store of their own RBCs. Because the dam's antibodies do not attack
her own RBCs, she is a good source of RBCs for transfusion to the kitten. Other alternatives
include transfusion of washed type B blood cells or transfusion from a donor that has been
cross-matched with the kitten. All donors should be negative for feline leukemia virus and feline
immunodeficiency virus. Recommended administration regimen for blood products is 10 to
20 ml/kg over a 4-h period, via an intravenous or intraosseous catheter. Mortality rate is high.
Prevention is preferred to treatment. All cats should be blood-typed before being used for
breeding and like bred to like. There also is variation by breed; virtually all domestic short-haired
303
304 How is neonatal isoerythrolysis diagnosed, treated, and prevented in cats?
cats in the United States are type A. The type B blood type is most common in the Devon Rex,
Cornish Rex, and British Shorthair breeds. Likelihood of incompatibility of mating is estimated
at 14 to 25% for Persians and Abyssinians. Umbilical blood from kittens also may be used for
blood typing, before those kittens are allowed to nurse from the dam.
Supplemental reading
Addie DD. 2000. Neonatal isoerthyrolysis. Proceedings, British Small Animal Veterinary Association,
Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, England.
 Freshman JL. 2005. Initially treating fading puppies and kittens. Vet Med 100:800-805.
Root Kustritz MV. 2003. The Prattical Veterinarian: Srmall Animal Theriogenology. St. Louis, MO:
Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 283-329.
DISEASE
IATRIC
LO3
100
What are the causes of stillbirths and neonatal
mortality in kittens and puppies?
Etiology
 Mortality rate in the first weeks of life is high in puppies and kittens. The rate of stilbirths in
cats ranges from 4.7 to 11.2%. In one study of 421 pups that died by day 45 of life, 29.9% were
stillborn. Mortality rate is highest in the first 7 days of life, averaging 27.3% in kittens and 26.0%
in puppies.
Causes of stillbirth and neonatal mortality in puppies include intrauterine bacterial infection,
canine herpesvirus (see Chapter 96), genetic abnormalities, savaging by the dam, and maternal
 neglect. Increased puppy mortality is associated with increasing age of the dam. Causes of still-
malities, neonatal isoerythrolysis (see Chapter 99), and savaging by the dam. Increased kitten
mortality is associated with increased parity of the queen, obesity of the queen, and litter size of
one or seven or more kittens. Predisposed breeds include Persians, Manx, and Himalayans.
Clinical signs
Clinical manifestation in the dam may help identify causes of stillbirth or neonatal mortality, as
may history regarding number in the litter affected. Intrauterine bacterial infection often is
associated with purulent vulvar discharge from the dam and loss of multiple offspring. Canine
herpesvirus often is associated with birth of a mixed population of apparently normal and still-
born pups (see Chapter 96). Maternal neglect may be due to pain, as in dams with mastitis.
Puppies and kittens that are persistently pushed away by the dam should be removed and hand-
raised. Savaging is anecdotally associated with hypocalcemia (see Chapter 40) and may be more
evident in primiparous dams and in high-strung dams.
Diagnosis
The dam always should be evaluated and a complete history and physical examination com-
pleted. If abnormal vulvar discharge is present, a sample should be collected for culture and
sensitivity and the dam tested for brucellosis if that was not done pre-breeding. Serum calcium
concentrations should be evaluated.
Necropsy of dead puppies and kittens is strongly recommended. The dead neonate should be
placed in a zip-top plastic bag and refrigerated, not frozen, before submission. Although a defini-
tive diagnosis may be arrived at in only about one-third of cases, that diagnosis often changes
305
306 what are the causes of stillbirths and neonatal mortality in kittens and puppies?
management in the facility significantly. The expense of the necropsy usually is less than the
continuing expense in puppies or kittens lost.
Treatment
Treatment is directed at the dam and littermates and is dependent on cause, if identified. Bitches
and queens exhibiting poor mothering behavior most likely are not secreting significant amounts
of oxytocin as their offspring fail to stimulate release by manipulation of the mammary gland.
Oxytocin has been demonstrated to increase pair-bonding in some species, and administration
of oxytocin may be useful in bitches and queens.
Supplemental reading
-r aos pue aoad yo jo toaia ai o 'e ia 'y noz vo Aos  z
phological characteristics effective on development curves of German Shepherd puppies during the
suckling period. Pol J Vet Sci 11:367-370.
Root Kustritz MV. 2003. The Practical Veterinarian: Small Aninal Theriogenology. St. Louis, MO:
Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 283-329.
Sparkes AH, Rogers K, Henley WE, et al. 2006. A questionnaire-based study of gestation, parturition and
neonatal mortality in pedigree breeding cats in the UK. J Fel Med Surg 8: 145-157.
SE
5
D
3
Resources
The following is a list of companies and products that can be used in small-animal theriogenol-
 ogy. This list is not inclusive of all such products available, and inclusion on this list is not an
endorsement of quality.
Equipment
Company
Cystoscopy (endoscopy) equipment for
Minitube of America, Verona, W/l, http://www.
transcervical insemination of bitches
minitube.com
Cystoscopy (endoscopy) equipment for
Karl Storz Endoscopy, Culver City, CA, http://www.
transcervical insemination of bitches
karlstorz.de/cps/rde/xchg/SID-AA16E478-F17E7354/
karlstorz-en/hs.xsl2274.htrm
 Chilled sermen breeding kit for dogs—Fresh
Synbiotics, Kansas City. MO, http://www.synbiotics
Expres5
610
 Chilled sermen breeding kit for dogs—Puppy Pak
International Canine Semen Bank, Sandy, OR,
http://www.ik9sb.com/Puppy_Pak.asp
Chilled sermen breeding kit for dogs—Fresh
Carmelot Farms, College Station, TX, http://www.
Cooled Canine Semen
carnelotfarms.com/shipping_semen.php
Chilled sermen breeding kit for dogs—Chilled
CLONE, Chester Springs. PA, http://www.cloneusa.
semen kit
com/chilled.html
Semen shipment container
Equitainer; Hamilton Research, South Hamilton MA,
http://www.equitainer.com
Kit for shiprment of chilled sermen to be
Intermational Canine Sermen Bank, http://www.
frozen—Cryo-Kit 
ik9sb.com/Cryo-Kit.asp
Rapid slide agglutination test (RSAT) for canine
D-TeciM; Synbiotics, Kansas City, MO, http:/www.
brucellosis
synbiotics.com
Agar gel immunodiffusion (AGID) test for canine
New York State Animal Health Diagnostic Center,
brucellosis
Cormell University. Ithaca, NY, 607-253-4136
307
308 Resources
Equipment
Company
Agar gel immunodiffusion (AGID) test for canine
University of Georgia College of Veterinary
brucellosis
Medicine. Athens, GA, 229-386-3340
Karyotyping (chromosome analysis)
Texas A&M University. Molecular Cytogenetics
Laboratory. College Station, TX, 979-458-0519
Hypo-osmotic swelling test for semen evaluation
Signa Chemical, St. Louis, MO, http://www.
sigmaaldrich.com
Formula for feeding of orphan kittens
KMR; Pet-Ag. Elgin, IL
Registration of eye certification by a board-
Canine Eye Registry Foundation (CERF), http://www.
certified veterinary ophthalmologist
vmdb.org/cerf.html
Registration of hip. elbow, heart, and thyroid
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA),
status
Columbia, MO, http://www.offa.org
Registration of hip joint laxity
 Penn-HIP, Philadelphia, PA, http://www.pennhip.org
Registration of commonly used sires or sires with
American Kennel Club (AKC), http:/www.akc.org/
semen chilled or frozen
dna/fus_faq.cfm
Computerized semen evaluation system
VOS Sperm Analyzer; Hammilton-Thorme, Beverly,
MA, http://www.hamiltonthorme.com/products/casa/
ivos.htrm
Computerized semen evaluation system
SpermaCue; Minitube of America, Verona, WWI,
http://www.minitube.com
Insemination pipettes for bitches
Reproduction Resources, Walworth, Wl, http://
www.reproductionresources.com
Monitoring during parturition
Whelp Wise; Veterinary Perinatal Specialties, Wheat
Ridge. CO. 1-888-281-4867 or http://www.
whelpwise.com
 Intratesticular injection to induce sterility in dogs 
Esterisol; Ark Sciencies, Baltimore, MD, http://www
arksciences.corm/products/html
Rubber collecting cone for canine semen
Nasco, Fort Atkinson, Wl, http:/www.enasco.com/
collection
farmandranch/
Polypropylene collecting cone for canine semen
Lane Manufacturing. Denver, CO, http://www.
collection
lane-mfg.com/bovineprod.html
Index
Page numbers in italics refer to Figures, those in bold to Tables.
abdominal distention in pediatric animals, 279
androgens, use in contraception
abdominal palpation, use in pregnancy diagnosis
in the bitch, 88
in the bitch, 22
in the queen, 225-226
in the queen, 192
anesthesia technique for Cesarean section
abdominal radiographs, use in pregnancy
in the bitch, 59-62, 60, 61
diagnosis
in the queen, 203-205, 204
in the bitch, 22,24
anestrus
in the queen, 192
persistent
acute-phase proteins, use in pregnancy diagnosis
in the bitch, 165-167,166
in the bitch, 23
in the queen, 253-254
agalactia in the bitch, 155
 stage in the estrous cycle
agarose gel immunodiffusion (AGID) test for
in the bitch, 7,10, 71,73
canine brucellosis, 140, 140-141
in the queen, 213
age and smalltter size in the bitch, 108
anovulatory cycle, 170, 259
agglutination test for canine brucellosis, 139-140,
antibiotics, use in the bitch during heat, 95-96
140,140
artificial insemination (AI)
 AGID test. See agarose gel immunodiffusion
 in the bitch
(AGID) test
and small litter size, 108
aglepristone, use in pregnancy termination
surgical intrauterine, 47, 57-58, 58
in the bitch, 113
timing,100
in the queen, 234
transcervical, 43, 47, 55-56
AI. See artificial insemination
vaginal,43,47, 51-54,52, 53
AKC. See American Kennel Club
in the queen
AlizineTM. See aglepristone
surgical intrauterine, 201
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in canine seminal
vaginal, 199
fluid,76,76-77、182
aspermia,canine,182
ALP. See alkaline phosphatase
asthenozoospermia, canine, 183
American Kennel Club (AKC)
automated semen evaluation systems, 32, 196
certification of freezing centers, 47
azoospermia, canine,182
DNA sample requirement, 43, 47
 anatomic tests for hereditary conditions, canine,
balanoposthitis, canine, 179, 180
91,92
behavioral changes in the bitch due to heat, 99
309
310Index
benign prostatic hypertrophy and hyperplasia
 canine herpesvirus (CHV)
(BPH), canine, 173-175, 174
and failure to thrive in puppies, 293, 295, 295,
biopsy technique, canine
296
prostatic,37-38
and pregnancy loss, 146, 147
testicular, 41—42,42
cardiac murmurs in pediatric animals, 277-278,
blood types, feline,227,303-304
279
body weight in pediatric animals, 277, 293
CASA systems. See computer-assisted semen
bone abnormalities in pediatric animals,
analysis systems
assessment of, 279
castration
 BPH. See benign prostatic hypertrophy and
canine
hyperplasia
best age for, 85-86
 breeding management
and cranial cruciate ligament injury, 85-86
in the bitch
and high-morbidity cancers, 86
and behavioral/physical changes, 99
and obesity, 85
and electrical impedance, 99
and prostate disease, 85, 174
and ferning of vaginal fluid, 99
and sexually dimorphic behavior, 85
and glucose concentration in vaginal fluid, 99
and testicular neoplasia, 85
and luteinizing hormone assays, 97
feline, 226
and progesterone assays, 97, 98, 99-100
best age for, 223
and ultrasound evaluation of ovaries, 99
and obesity,223
and vaginal cytology, 7,810, 97-98,99
and persistent male behavior, 257-258, 257
and vaginoscopy, 98
catheter, intraosseous, technique for placement of
in the queen
in pediatric animals, 269-270, 269
use of progesterones and other measures,
CBC. See complete blood count
229-230
CCL injury. See cranial cruciate ligament (CCL)
and vaginal cytology, 189-190, 189, 190
injury
 bromocriptine, use in pregnancy termination in 
CEH. See cystic endometrial hyperplasia
the bitch,112
CERF. See Canine Eye Registry Foundation
Cesarean section
cabergoline
 in the bitch
use in inhibiting lactation in the bitch, 73、83
anesthesia for,59-62,60,61
 use in pregnancy termination
concurrent with ovariohysterectomy, 63, 64,
in the bitch, 112
65,83
in the queen,234
and dystocia, 127, 128
calcium
technique for, 63-65,64
gluconate, for treatment of hypocalcemia in the
in the queen
bitch, 130
anesthesia for, 203-205, 204
loss of, and hypocalcemia in the bitch, 129
concurrent with ovariohysterectomy, 207,
supplements in the bitch, 105、106,107,129
208
calico male cat, 261
and dystocia, 241
cancers, high-morbidity
technique for, 207-208,208
and canine castration, 86
ChequeTM, 88, 225-226
and canine ovariohysterectomy, 82
 chilled semen, preparation of, 43-45
canine brucellosis, 139-142
CHV. See canine herpesvirus
causes,139
cleft palate, 293,295,296, 296
clinical signs, 139
cloprostenol, use in pregnancy termination in the
diagnosis, 139-141, 140, 140
bitch, 112
management of Brucella canis positive animals,
color, in semen evaluation
141
canine, 29,30, 75,76, 76
treatment,141-142,141
feline,195,215,215
Canine Eye Registry Foundation (CERF), and tests
colostrum, in pediatric animals, 285, 295, 296
for hereditary conditions, 43, 47,51, 55, 57,
complete blood count (CBC), normal values, in
92
pediatric animals,281,282,284
Index311
 computer-assisted semen analysis (CASA) systems,
drugs
32,196
pharmacokinetics of commonly used drugs for
 concentration, in semen evaluation
pediatric animals, 272, 273
canine, 29-31, 31, 75-76
safety for use in pregnancy
feline, 195-196,215,216
in the bitch, 101, 102-103
 contraception, nonsurgical alternatives
in the queen, 231,231232
canine, 87-90
side effects of commonly used drugs for
feline, 225-226
pediatric animals,273
 corticosteriods, use in pregnancy termination in
signs of toxicity of commonly used drugs for
the bitch, 113
pediatric animals, 273, 274
 cranial cruciate ligament (CCL) injury
use in anesthesia of the bitch during Cesarean
and canine castration, 85-86
section, 60
and canine ovariohysterectomy, 82
use in pediatric animals, 271-274, 272, 273
cryopreservation, semen, 48
use in termination of pregnancy
cryptorchidism, canine
in the bitch, 111, 112113
as heritable defect, 119-120, 121,122
in the queen, 233,234
locating without surgery, 119-120
dystocia
medical therapy for, 121-122
in the bitch,125-128
C-section. See Cesarean section
causes,107,125-126
cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)
and Cesarean section, 127, 128
in the bitch, 147,149
dlinical signs, 126
in the queen, 244, 245
diagnosis, 126-127, 126
cystoscopes,use of,13,14
prevention, 107-108
cytology
treatment, 127-128,127
use in canine semen evaluation, 32
in the queen, 239-241
vaginal. See vaginal cytology
causes,239-240
 of vulvar discharge, in diagnosis of pyometra in
and Cesarean section, 241
the bitch,151
clinical signs, 240
diagnosis, 240, 240-241
developmental abnormalities and pregnancy
treatment, 241
loss
in the bitch,147
ear canals, opening of, in pediatric animals, 277,
in the queen, 244
278
dexamethasone, use in pregnancy termination in
eclampsia. See hypocalcemia
the bitch,113
electrical impedance and breeding management in
diarrhea in pediatric animals, 299-300
the bitch, 99
diestrus stage in the estrous cycle
electroejaculation in feline semen collection,
in the bitch, 7, 10, 71,73
193-194, 194
in the queen, 213
en-bloc ovariohysterectomy
dietary recommendations
in the bitch, 65
for orphan pediatric animals, 285-287, 286
in the queen, 208
for pregnancy in the bitch, 105, 106, 107,
endoscopes
129
use in transcervical insemination in the bitch,
dietary supplements
55-56
for improvement of canine semen quality.
use in vaginoscopy in the bitch, 13, 16
117-118
EsterisolTM, 89
 for improvement of fertility in the bitch,
 estradiol cypionate, use in pregnancy
105-106
termination
 DNA sample requirement, American Kennel Club,
in the bitch, 112
43,47
in the queen, 234
DNA-based tests for hereditary conditions, canine,
estrogens,use in pregnancy termination
91,92
in the bitch, 112
DostinexTM. See cabergoline
in the queen, 234
312 Index
estrous cycle
u ssol Aueusaid pue snllauu saaqeip [euoeisa
in the bitch
the bitch, 147,148
normal parameters, 71, 72, 73
glucose concentration in vaginal fluid and
and puppy vaginitis, 134
breeding management in the bitch, 99
vaginal cytology, 9
GnRH. See gonadotropin releasing hormone
in the queen
gonadectomy. See castration, ovariohysterectomy
normal parameters, 213-214, 214
gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH)
seasonality,211,213
use in canine semen collection, 117
estrus
 use in contraception
after ovariohysterectomy in the queen, 255-256,
in the bitch, 88
256
in the male dog,89
 induction protocols
use in ovulation induction in the queen, 226
in the bitch, 166
in the queen, 254
heart rate, in pediatric animals, 277
persistent
heat. See estrous cycle, estrus
in the bitch, 161-163, 162
hemacytometer, use in semen evaluation, 30-31,
in the queen,251-252,252
31,196
stage in the estrous cycle,
hereditary conditions, tests for, canine, 43, 47, 51,
in the bitch, 7,71,72
55,57,91, 92
in the queen, 213,214
high-morbidity cancers 
extenders, use in canine semen preparation, 43,
and canine castration, 86
48
and canine ovariohysterectomy, 82
eyelids, opening of, in pediatric animals, 277,
homemade milk replacers for pediatric animals,
278
286
hormones, use in contraception
fading. See failure to thrive
in the bitch, 87-88
failure to thrive, in pediatric animals, 293-297,
in the male dog. 89
294,295,296
in the queen,225-226
false pregnancy. See false whelping
hypocalcemia in the bitch, 129-130
false whelping、73、83
 hypoluteoidism and pregnancy loss
feline coronavirus,227
in the bitch, 146-148
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), 227
in the queen, 244
feline leukemia, 227
hypo-osmotic swelling test, use in canine semen
ferning of vaginal fluid and breeding management
evaluation, 32
in the bitch, 99
hypothermia in pediatric animals, 279
fertility improvement and dietary supplements in
hypothyroidism, effect on canine fertility, 93-94
the bitch, 105-106
finasteride, use in treating canine benign prostatic
immunocontraception
hypertrophy and hyperplasia, 174
in the bitch, 88
fne-needle aspirate, technique for, canine
in the male dog,89
prostatic,37-38
in the queen, 226
testicular, 3940
 inbreeding and small litter size in the bitch, 108
FIP. See feline infectious peritonitis
infertility
flea control products, safety for use in pediatric
in the bitch, 169-171, 170
animals,289-290,289
in the male cat, 261
fluid therapy in pediatric animals, 296
in the male dog, 181-183,182
follicular ovarian cysts,
in the queen, 259-260,260
in the bitch, 161-162,162
intraosseous catheter, technique for placement of
in the queen, 251-252, 252
in pediatric animals,269-270,269
freezing centers, certified by American Kennel
intratesticular injection for contraception,canine
Club, 47
89
frozen semen, preparation of 47-49
isoerythrolysis,neonatal, in the kitten, 303-304
Index313
joint abnormalities in pediatric animals,
NeutersolTM, 89
assessment of, 279
normal physical examination findings in pediatric
juvenile vaginitis. See puppy vaginitis
animals,277-279、278
kittens, resuscitation of, 204, 205
obesity
and canine castration, 85
lack of cycling. See persistent anestrus
 and canine ovariohysterectomy, 82
lactation. See also agalactia, hypocalcemia, mastitis
and feline castration, 223
and depletion of calcium in the bitch, 105, 106,
 and feline ovariohysterectomy, 219
129
OFA. See Orthopedic Foundation for Animals
use of prolactin-inhibiting drugs to inhibit, in
OHE. See ovariohysterectomy
the bitch,73,83
oligozoospermia, canine, 182-183
LH. Se luteinizing hormone
omega-3 fatty acids, 105
ltter size in the bitch, 107, 108
orphan pediatric animals
lordosis posture in the queen, 213, 214
dietary recommendations, 285-287,286
LutalyseTM. See prostaglandin F2alpha
environmental temperature recommendations,
luteinizing hormone (LH) assays, use in breeding
285
 management in the bitch, 97
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA), and
 lymphoid follicles on vaginal mucosa in the bitch,
tests for hereditary conditions, canine, 43,
16, 16
47,51,55,57,91
otoscopes,use of,13、14
mammary hypertrophy, feline, 221,221, 222
OvabanTM. See megestrol acetate
mammary neoplasia and ovariohysterectomy
ovarian remnant syndrome in the queen, 255-256,
in the bitch, 81, 115
256
in the queen, 219-220,235
ovariohysterectomy (OHE)
mastitis
in the bitch
in the bitch, 157-159,158
best age for, 81-82
in the queen, 249
best time to perform relative to heat, 83-84
mechanical barriers for contraception
concurrent with Cesarean section, 63, 64, 65,
in the bitch, 88-89
83
in the male dog,89
and cranial cruciate ligament injury, 82
 megestrol acetate
en-bloc, 65
use in the bitch, 87
and high-morbidity cancers, 82
use in the queen, 225
and mammary neoplasia, 81, 115
metritis in the bitch, 131
and obesity, 82
mibolerone
and persistent estrus, 162
use in the bitch, 88
and pyometra, 81, 151-152
use in the queen, 225-226
and sexually dimorphic behavior, 81
mifepristone, use in pregnancy termination in the
and urinary incontinence, 81-82
bitch, 113
in the queen
milk replacers for pediatric animals, 285-287, 286
best age for, 219-220
"mismating" shot, 112, 161,234, 251
best time to perform relative to heat,
 morphology, in semen evaluation
221-222
canine,31-32,32,75,76
concurrent with Cesarean section, 207, 208
feline,196,215,215
en-bloc,208
motility, in semen evaluation
estrus after, 255-256, 256
canine,29, 76
and mammary neoplasia, 219-220, 235
feline, 195,215
and obesity,219
Mycoplasma, 91-92, 95-96
and persistent estrus, 252
and pyometra, 219, 247
neonatal isoerythrolysis in the kitten, 303-304
ovulation induction for contraception in the
neonatal mortality, 305-306
queen,226,229
314Index
oxytocin
pre-partum physical/physiologic changes in the
and poor mothering behavior, 306
bitch, 109-110, 110
use in treatment of dystocia
probiotics, use in the bitch, 105, 106
in the bitch, 127
 proestrus stage in the estrous cycle
in the queen, 241
in the bitch,7,8-9, 71,72, 73
in the queen, 213
paraphimosis, recurrent, canine,179-180
profile, serum chemistry, normal values in 
parasites and diarrhea in pediatric animals, 299-300
pediatric animals, 281, 283, 284
PennHIP. See University of Pennsylvania Hip
progesterone
Improvement Program
assays, use in breeding management
persistent anestrus
in the bitch, 97,98, 99-100
in the bitch, 165-167, 166
in the queen, 229-230
in the queen, 253-254
concentration, and pregnancy loss in the bitch,
persistent estrus
146-148
in the bitch, 161-163, 162
 receptor blockers, use in pregnancy termination
in the queen, 251-252, 252
in the bitch, 113
persistent male behavior after feline castration,
in the queen,234
257-258,257
 use in contraception
pharmacokinetics of commonly used drugs for
in the bitch, 87-88
pediatric animals, 272,273
in the queen, 225
physical barriers for contraception
 prolactin inhibitors
in the bitch, 88-89
use in lactation inhibition in the bitch, 73, 83
in the male dog,89
 use in pregnancy termination
physical changes in the bitch due to heat, 99
in the bitch, 112
physical examination findings in pediatric animals,
in the queen,234
normal,277-279、278
 PropeciaTM. See finasteride
 physical pre-partum changes in the bitch,
 ProscarM. See finasteride
109-110, 110
prostaglandin F2alpha
 physiologic pre-partum changes in the bitch.
use in canine semen collection, 117
109-110,110
 use in pregnancy termination
pipettes, use in vaginal insemination in the bitch,
in the bitch, 112
51-52,52
in the queen, 234
 post-estrus stage in the estrous cycle in the queen,
use in treating infertility in the male dog, 183
213
 use in treating persistent anestrus
prebiotics, use in the bitch, 105, 106
in the bitch, 166
pre-breeding evaluation
in the queen, 253
in the bitch, 91-92
use in treating prolonged vulvar discharge after
in the queen, 227
whelping, 132
pregnancy
use in treating pyometra
in the bitch
in the bitch, 152
diagnosis,21,22-23,24
in the queen, 247
dietary recommendations, 105, 106, 107,129
prostaglandins, use in pregnancy termination
loss, 145-148
in the bitch, 112
physiologic changes, 110
in the queen, 234
safety of drugs, 101, 102-103
prostate disease, canine
termination, 111-114,112-113
benign prostatic hypertrophy and hyperplasia,
toxemia,147
173-175, 174
in the queen
and castration, 85, 174
diagnosis, 191, 192
discoloration of urine, 76
loss, 243-244
prostatic biopsy, technique, canine, 37-38
safety of drugs, 231, 231232
prostatic fine-needle aspirate, technique, canine,
termination, 233,234
37-38
Index315
prostatitis, canine,177-178,178
quality, 75-77,76, 76, 181-183
pseudocyesis. See false whelping
type, and timing of insemination, 100
puberty, normal age of onset
feline
canine,69
collection technique,193-194,194
feline, 211
evaluation, 195-197
puppies, resuscitation of, 61,62
quality, 215-216,215,261
puppy vaginitis, 133-134, 134
shipment of,44, 45,49
pyometra
septicemia in pediatric animals, 301-302, 301
in the bitch, 149-153
serum chemistry profle, normal values, in
causes, 149
pediatric animals, 281, 283,284
clinical signs, 149-150
sexually dimorphic behavior
diagnosis, 150,150, 151
and canine castration, 85
and ovariohysterectomy, 81, 151-152
and canine ovariohysterectomy, 81
treatment,95,151-152,152
shipment of semen, 44, 45, 49
in the queen, 245-247
 side effects of commonly used drugs for pediatric
causes, 245
animals, 273
 clinical signs, 245
signs of toxicity of commonly used drugs for
diagnosis, 245-246,246
pediatric animals, 273, 274
and ovariohysterectomy, 219, 247
silent heat, 165
treatment,247、247
SIPS. See subinvolution of placental sites
small litter size in the bitch, 107, 108
queening, normal, 239
spay. See ovariohysterectomy
split heat, 100
radiographs
standing heat. See estrus 
 abdominal, for pregnancy diagnosis
sterilization, nonsurgical alternatives
in the bitch, 22,24
canine, 87
in the queen, 192
feline, 225
 for assessment of bone/joint abnormalities in
stillbirths in pediatric animals, 305-306
pediatric animals, 279
subinvolution of placental sites (SIPS),131-132
in diagnosis of dystocia
surgical intrauterine insemination
in the bitch, 126-127, 126
in the bitch, 47,57-58, 58
in the queen, 240,240
in the queen, 201
 in diagnosis of pyometra
in the bitch, 150,150
T4. See thyroxine
in the queen, 246,246
teaser bitch, use in canine semen collection, 25
rectal temperature in pediatric animals, 277, 295
teeth, eruption of, in pediatric animals, 277, 278
recurrent paraphimosis, canine, 179-180
temperature, and pediatric animals
relaxin assay for pregnancy diagnosis
environmental, 285,295-296
in the bitch,23
rectal, 277,295
in the queen, 192
teratozoospermia, canine, 183
resuscitation
termination of pregnancy
of kittens, 204, 205
in the bitch, 111-114,112-113
of puppies, 61, 62
in the queen, 233, 234
retained testes. See cryptorchidism
testicular biopsy, canine, 41-42,42
testicular descent, canine, 121-122
seasonality of estrous cycle in the queen, 211, 213
testicular fine-needle aspirate, canine, 39-40
semen
testicular neoplasia, canine, 85
canine
testicular ultrasonography, canine, 35-36, 35,
chilled, 43-45
119
collection technique, 25, 26, 27
testosterone secretion and persistent male behavior
evaluation, 29-33,30, 31,32
after feline castration, 257-258, 257
frozen, 47-49
thyroxine, 93
316Index
tick control products, safety for use in pediatric
specimen, collection technique, 5-6,6
animals,289-290,289
use in breeding management, 7, 80, 97-98, 99
tortoiseshell male cat, 261
in vaginitis, 134, 135, 136
total number, in semen evaluation
in the queen
canine,29-31,31,75-76、76
interpretation for diagnosis of disease, 190
feline,195-196,215,216
specimen, collection technique, 187
toxemia in the bitch, 147
use in breeding management, 189-190, 189, 190
toxicity, signs of, with commonly used drugs for
vaginal fluid
pediatric animals, 273, 274
 ferning of, and breeding management in the
 transabdominal ultrasonography for pregnancy
bitch, 99
diagnosis
glucose concentration, and breeding
in the bitch, 22,24
management in the bitch, 99
in the queen, 192
vaginal insemination
transcervical insemination in the bitch, 43, 47, 55-56
in the bitch,43,47,51-54,52, 53
in the queen, 199
ultrasonography
vaginal mucosa in the bitch, 1516, 16,98,98, 133, 135
canine
vaginal septum in the bitch, 16
in benign prostatic hypertrophy and
vaginitis
hyperplasia diagnosis, 173, 174
chronic, in the spayed bitch, 135-137, 136
and follicular ovarian cysts, 161, 162
puppy, 133-134、134
and location of retained testes, 119
vaginography in the bitch, technique, 19-20, 20
of ovaries, in breeding management, 99
vaginoscopy in the bitch,13、1416、16-17,98
in prostatitis,177、178
venipuncture, techniques for, in pediatric animals,
in pyometra diagnosis, 150, 151
265-266,265
testicular, 35-36, 35, 119
volume, in semen evaluation
 transabdominal, for pregnancy diagnosis, 22,24
canine, 29,75,76
feline
feline, 195,215,215
in pyometra diagnosis, 246
vulvar discharge
transabdominal, for pregnancy diagnosis, 192
in the bitch, 10-11
University of Pennsylvania Hip Improvement
as clinical sign of dystocia, 126
Program (PennHIP), and tests for
in estrous cycle, 71, 72
hereditary conditions, canine, 43,47, 51,
and ovulation, 99
55,57,91
in pregnancy, 143-144
Unopette system, use in semen evaluation, 30, 31,
 pre-partum, 109
195-196
prolonged, after whelping, 131-132
urinalysis, normal values, in pediatric animals, 284
in pyometra, 150, 151
urinary incontinence in the bitch and
and vaginitis, 133, 135
 ovariohysterectomy, 81-82
in the queen
urine sample, techniques for collection, in
as clinical sign of dystocia, 240
 pediatric animals, 267
in pyometra, 245-246, 246
uterine disease and pregnancy loss
in the bitch, 147
weaning,287
in the queen, 244
weight, in pediatric animals, 277,293
uterine inertia
whelping
in the bitch, 125
 abnormal. See dystocia
in the queen, 239
false, 73, 83
normal, 125
vaginal culture
 prolonged vulvar discharge after, 131-132
 and antibiotic use during heat in the bitch, 95
in pre-breeding evaluation of the bitch, 91-92
zona pellucida (ZP) proteins, for contraception
vaginal cytology
in the bitch, 88
 in the bitch
in the queen, 226
interpretation for diagnosis of disease, 7, 10-11
ZP proteins. See zona pellucida (ZP) proteins