A PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR VETERINARIANS, VETERINARY STAFF, AND BREEDERS
CANINE
Reproduction and Neonatology
Marthina L. Greer, DVM, JD
A PRACTICAL GUIDE FOR VETERINARIANS, VETERINARY STAFF, AND BREEDERS
CANINE
Reproduction and Neonatology
Marthina L. Greer, DVM, JD
TETON NEWMEDIA
Teton NewMedia
Teton NewMedia
90 East Simpson, Suite 110
Jackson, WY 83001
@ 2014 by Tenton NewMedia
Exclusive worldwide distribution by CRC Press an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
Version Date: 20141126
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-2850-8 (eBook - PDF)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts have
been made to publish reliable data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal respon-
sibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publishers wish to make clear that any views or
opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or contributors are personal to them and do not neces-
sarily reflect the views/opinions of the publishers. The information or guidance contained in this book is intended for
use by medical, scientific or health-care professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or other
professional's own judgement, their knowledge of the patient's medical history, relevant manufacturer's instructions and
the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in medical science, any information or advice
anip aunnnsuos o paain uos s iapeai a paa Auapuadapui aq pinous sasouaeip io sainpaod saespuo
companies' printed instructions, and their websites, before administering any of the drugs recommended in this book.
This book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular individual. Ulti-
mately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his or her own professional judgements, so as to
advise and treat patients appropriately. The authors and publishers have also attempted to trace the copyright holders of
all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has
 not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify
in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or uti-
lized in any form by any electronic,mechanical, or othermeans,nowknown rhreafterinvented,includingphotocopy
ing, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the
publishers.
ww w.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
and the Teton NewMedia Web site at
www.tetonnewmedia.com
Preface
Breeder clients cannot be stereotyped and classified any more than the rest of your client base
emergency care. This is the client base for which this book is wriftten.
In today's medical climate of "evidence-based medicine", there are still fields in veterinary care
that cannot rely on this process. Although there are protocols where published and researched
information can be applied, many decisions in the scope of the topics in this book are based on
common sense, intuition and experience.
Many breeder clients are very wellinformed and have a great deal of experience. They are often
demanding and frequently require after-hours care for timed breedings, whelpings, as well as
pediatric and prenatal care. We look at working with these clients as a joy and a challenge. We hope
you tind this book to be valuable when you need a readily retrievable, practical resource.
most effective way to work with these clients is to listen carefully to their opinions, guide them to a
This page intentionally left blank
Dedication
I would like to dedicate this book to my family, staff, and clients.
for putting me up and putting up with me during the warm Phoenix winters so I could get away from
practice and school to concentrate on writing.
To my husband, Dan Griffths and kids Katy and Karl, for picking up the slack.
me hard enough to make this happen.
To my terrific clients, who taught me all you see represented in this book. To Ch. Jane Marple and
her grand-dogs who taught me humility and boundaries.
To Carroll Cann, for his patience.
This page intentionally left blank
Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Working with Breeders
What is Normal Reproduction?..
2
Who are the Breeders?.
2
What Skills Does a Veterinarian Need to Develop to Provide Basic Reproductive Care?
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening
Selecting Breeding Stock...
10
Counseling the Breeder/Client...
11
DNA and the Canine Genome
13
Specific Disease - Based Screening Examinations
16
The Breeding Program....
34
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed
Planning the Breeding.
38
Stud Dog Selection.
39
Preparing the Bitch for Breeding.
41
Timing the Bitch for Breeding ...
.45
Chapter 4: Orchestrating the Breeding - Natural and Special Breeding
Scheduling the Breeding Appointment.
54
Vaginal Artificial Inseminations
57
Handling Fresh Chilled Semen
58
Surgical Insemination..
63
Transcervical Insemination (TCl).
65
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy
 Environmental Management and Housing the Pregnant Bitch.
68
Managing the Abnormal Pregnancy ..
77
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section
Preparing for the whelping at Home..
84
Managing a Whelping at the Veterinary Hospital ..
89
Managing the C-section.
97
Resuscitation of the Neonate at Vaginal or C-section Birth
121
Chapter 7: Managing the Immediate Postpartum Period in the Bitch
Health Care....
128
Common Disorders of the Immediate Postpartum Period.
130
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care
The Normal Neonate....
140
Advanced Home Care.
146
Causes of Neonatal Mortality.
152
Neonatal Supportive Care
164
Raising the "Singelton" Puppy..
207
Preparing Puppies for a New Home .
212
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Problems in the Valuable Bitch
The Normal Estrous Cycle.
218
Abnormal Estrous Cycles
222
Missed Breedings.
229
Failure to Maintain Pregnancy.....
232
Hypoluteoidism
240
 Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Supplements Causing Infertility.
242
Genetic Incompatibility .
242
Uterine Pathology-CEH, Fibrosis. Neoplasia
242
Hormonal Alteration of Estrous
246
Diagnosis and Treatment of Pyometra.
252
Miscellaneous Disorders of the Female Reproductive Tract.
261
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Problems in the Valuable Stud Dog
Breeding Soundness Examination
282
Collecting the Stud Dog.
284
Diagnostic Workup for the Infertile Stud Dog 
..........
293
Disorders of the Prostate.
294
Disorders of the Testes.
301
Scrotal Disorders .
310
Disorders of the Penis
311
Disorders of Ejaculation
315
Disorders of Sperm Production, Classification, Diagnostics and Treatment.
316
TreatmentProtocolsfortheInfertileStudDog
322
Chapter 11: Special Breedings
Introduction
326
Breeding a Bitch with Frozen Semen.
329
References
331
Appendices
Appendix A: For Technical Staff
336
Appendix B: For Telephone Staff
350
Appendix C: Client Information.
358
Appendix D: For Veterinarians.
381
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER1
Working with Breeders
What is "Normal" reproduction?
'normal"?
very skiled in handling breeding timing, the actual breeding, the pregnancy and the whelping and
require little veterinary intervention. However, according to current AKC records, 60% of all breedings
are now handled by some form of artifcial insemination and veterinarians are more likely to be
involved. We will have more and more to offer these technically skilled clients as more sophisticated
techniques become available, which now include shipping fresh and frozen semen necessitating
 o y p op s e  smo om a a s u, o   sa
breeding including the timing based on behavior of the stud dog and bitch. They handle the breeding
either by natural breeding by copulation or doing an artificial insemination themselves. They either
palpation. They manage the bitch throughout her pregnancy. The whelping takes place uneventfully
at their home or kennel and the breeder assesses that the bitch has completed whelping based
period. All either goes off without a hitch or the breeder is willing to accept the situation and does
we areavailabletoprovidethem.
Who are the breeders?
There are many different varieties of breeders, just as there are many different types of pet-owning
clients. They can be categorized, but this is done at the risk of faling to recognize overlap between
Breeders involved in competitive events
of the "perfect dog" in mind when selecting breeding stock. This may include dogs who compete in
conformation (appearance, based on a breed standard), agility, flyball, tracking, herding, coursing.
feld and hunting dogs, earth dogs, bear and raccoon hunting, to name some representative
categories. They tend to travel long distances to attend these events and may have professional
trainers or hire handlers for competitive events.
and they have been screened for genetic diseases.
Most of these breeders have several dogs, 2 to 20, of the same or related breeds (usually 1 or
years, sometimes a lifetime. These dogs tend to live in the home of the breeder or in a small well-
maintained kennel built to the breeder's specifications.
Many breeders willproduce one to several liters a year. They sell directly to the end consumer,
list of potential homes. They rarely run ads to sell pups. These breeders are likely to keep one or
stock. The breeder will often keep the puppies until at least 8 weeks of age for socialization and
2 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
for which family. In some cases, they may "run on several puppies", in other words, keep several
littermates until they are adolescent when they are better able to tell which puppy they want to keep
for performance and breeding.
and have them return briefly for breeding. Some prefer to place adult dogs in single dog homes after
they are finished competing, breeding, and spaying or neutering.
This type of breeder is frequently a member of one or more dog breed clubs. They may belong to
a local kennel club and also one or more breed specific clubs with restricted memberships. They
often participate in breed specific "rescue", where if a dog of their breed is relinquished to a humane
society or shelter, they will actively attempt to provide a foster home until they can re-home the dog.
buyer. Often, the contract will state that the pup is to be returned to the breeder if the family who has
made the purchase cannot keep the dog - this minimizes the likelihood that their pups will end up
meaning if these pups are used for breeding, their offspring cannot be registered with AKC. These
paperwork and a well-thought out vaccine and worming schedule.
Pet breeders
or two dogs of their specifc breed. These tend to live in the home or in a small kennel in the garage.
total. Others breed their dogs because they purchased it as a puppy and want to "make some of
the money back" that they spent cn the purchase. Some breed because they have friends, family
havenow.
 intentionally breed two different breeds together.
Commercial breeders
tend to raise many puppies (in the double to quadruple digits), many different breeds (over five),
and often raise mixed breed dogs (designer dogs - which changes with the public's preferences).
They may have signs posted where they can change the listing of the breeds available and may run
newspaper and internet ads listing all of the breeds available or run multiple ads by breed.
Some commercial breeders house the dogs in groups, in barns or other buildings converted for this
facilities far superior to that of breeders who are involved in competitive events. If they sell directly
off site - "we live way out in the country and it is so hard to find us") or you may not be allowed to
pet stores. Buyers often find them on the internet.
Chapter 1: Working with Breeders 3
Commercial breeders often have USDA and/or state certification and are routinely inspected by
early age (under 6 weeks), given trequently, and administered by the breeder. Ihe vaccines used may
be brands you do not use in your practice; worming protocols include drugs such as lvermectin? and
coccidiostats from a very early age (2 weeks) on. The pups often originate from Midwestern states in
the U.S. or from outside the U.S. (Mexico and islands off the coast of the U.S.)
The buyers (who are your well-meaning clients) are often convinced that they are not buying from a
commercial breeder, or make the purchase out of pity for the puppy. The commercial breeder will
Why work with breeders?
The breeder client of all types can be a boon to your client base. Not only will they build your
practice by being clients, but also by referring fellow dog-breeders and new puppy buyers to you.
Some veterinarians begin to work with breeders when they are breeders themselves.
How to work with breeders
The “Competition breeder client"
lines of dogs, are well connected in the breed, and have many resources. They are very aware of
the genetic screening tests available, often cutpacing the veterinarian as this field is changing very
rapidly. They have been breeding dogs for many years and usually have with great skills in breeding.
whelping, and neonatal care.
"breeder client" is not always well received in many veterinary clinics in the U.S. Veterinarians who
seek to assist breeders find that when handled correctly, these clients are hungry to learn more,
may initiate the veterinary visit with a seemingly strong opinion, when countered with respect and a
wellthought out scientifc approach to the situation, they will frequently be convinced to treat as the
If the veterinarian is willing to offer breeding services and develop a mutual exchange of information
with the breeder client, a truly wonderful working relationship can evolve
and each veterinary hospital must have its own policy. The hospital may choose to discount some,
but not all services. For instance, you may discount vaccinations, but not reproductive services only
sought out by breeders. The breeder client often brings in multiple puppies or adult dogs at one visit,
making more efficient use of the veterinarian's time. They can also serve as a wonderful source of
of new cllents, this can work out very well.
Additionally, the opportunity to aid breeders can be immensely rewarding. There are few procedures
that bring greater joy in veterinary practice than a cooperative effort with a client that results in the
The “Pet puppy breeder"
These clients can be less challenging regarding the services requested and the hours that they
4 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
expect you to be available. They ask less diffcult questions and do not generally go to the same
extremes as the competition breeder. They usually use a local dog and ask for less intervention on
fiming, prenatal care, and other services. They appreciate the assistance.
The “Commercial breeder"
These clients often use the veterinarian for USDA certificates and "herd management" issues but not
individual pet care. These pets are at the greatest risk of diseases such as parasites and brucellosis
as they move in and out of their kennels and those of others who transact business in the same way
offen overlooking the importance of testing and quarantining to prevent diseases
What skills does a veterinarian need to develop to provide basic
reproductive care?
1. Semen collection including sperm counts, motility, and morphology.
2. Artificial insemination - vaginal and surgical insemination.
 3. Ovulation timing and breeding management.
 4. Pregnancy diagnosis with ultrasound and radiographs, including estimations of litter size and
due dates.
 5. C-sections - surgical technique, dystocia management, and puppy resuscitation.
 6. Prenatal and postpartum management of the bitch.
/. Neonatal and pediatric care.
8. Infertility evaluation and treatment for males and females.
9. Treatment options for pyometras, uterine disease, prostate disease, accidental breedings, and
mammary disease.
10. Good client education tools, including handouts.
Caseload - Emergency care, weekends
ready and bitches need to be bred when they have ovulated. If you choose to work with breeders
appreciate your efforts. Of course, you should charge appropriately for these services and explain
this to them if necessary.
As valuable as emergency clinic services are, they are usually not suited to assisting the breeder
busy with critically ill and injured patients and are neither staffed nor equipped to provide breeding
services.
Csections can frequently be handled very wellby general practiticners, but in some situations are
better handled at emergency and referral practices.
C-section, this can be a wonderful service to offer to your breeder clients. Of course, this requires that
anticipated puppies or does not have anesthesia and equipment for C-sections and the associated
Whether in general, referral or emergency practice, we must remember our caesarian patient is not
one patient but a group of patients. When faced with a bitch with a dystocia or premature labor, we
   si ns       e     
Chapter 1: Working with Breeders 5
Therefore to adequately provide services to these patients, they must be seen as patients who are
in a life-threatening situation even if the bitch has the appearance of being stable. The staff must be
bitch alone would indicate if the pups are to be saved.
Your role in education, referrals and alternatives to conventional
treatments
Remind your breeder clients that there are many procedures you offer as a licensed professional
that they are not legally permitted to perform themselves. These vary from state to state and may
such as ear crops and taildocks. Each state has its own veterinary practice act, which should be
consulted if there is any question.
Help your clients cultivate the 8 skills they should have to become
better breeders
You may ask why you should contribute to this aspect of assisting your breeder clients. Good
question. Some will not require your assistance as they are skilled already. Some will not want your
We want cur breeders to rely on us as the experts for their examinations and treatment planning.
Use the skills and knowledge you have, and limit your services to what you know.
The following are skills you can help clients develop but are not skills you yourself will likely have or
need to have first-hand knowledge of.
1. Know the breed standard
Each breeder should strive to know what their breed club has written as its "breed standard" - their
ideal dog.
mlustrated standard
Many breed clubs not only have written descriptions but have included photographs and drawings of
their standard. These can be found on-line or in published form from the breed clubs
Mentor
Nearly every successful breeder has had someone take them under their wing early in their dog
Dog events
network with others. Most areas also have allbreed clubs and single breed clubs that can be joined.
Internet
Many breed clubs have an on-line list or lists prospective breeders can join for advice and
networking.
6 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
2. Breed knowledge
Know which lines "click"
This information is often found only as an oral tradition, discussed when breeders get together. It is
better to find out from another's experience than to try the experiment again and again.
Identify and prioritize
Identify and prioritize the top 4 genetic problems in the breed: researching the breed on-line, thrcugh
breed clubs, and in print can illuminate the most common disorders of a breed. As this can change
from time to time, the breeder should continue to research their breed
Focus on crippling, life-altering or fatal diseases first
These are the diseases that are the most damaging to the breed.
Avoid including genetic problems in the lines
Observation by the breeder, physical examination by the veterinarian, blood tests, radiographs, DNA
testing and many other techniques exist or will exist in the near future to aid in selection
3. Develop a method to select dams and sires
4. Pedigree analysis
Review the traditional AKC pedigree, the stick dog pedigree by Carmen Battaglia and the inheritance
pedigree.
5. Develop a retrievable record keeping system
Complete paper or software records, photos and videos for each dog are essential.
6. Learn to evaluate litters
sell the "wrong" dog, the one they should have kept.
7. Follow up all puppies at 6 months
Puppy parties (see chapter 2), videos and radiographs are all useful techniques. By doing this, the
8. Learn to manage, feed and condition a competition dog
ue 'uonu 'uaa si %g 'oauaa si auadde pue uoasand saop e jo %ge Auo
training - aspects that the owner can control.
When to refer
who frequently deal with breeders and are skilled in these procedures or by board-certified Theriog-
enologists. In these cases, referrals to this group of veterinarians should be offered to the clients.
Chapter 1: Working with Breeders 7
Screening for genetic selection
Dogs have been subjected to genetic selection ever since humans domesticated the dog. This is
Selection based on phenotype
general tindings on physical examination of the dog. Second are specitic disease-based screening
be used in evaluating their offspring and breeding stock.
General findings on physical examination
This is where the veterinarian or breeder classifes the dog's structure as normal, abnormal, or some
gradation in between on physical characteristics found by examination (See Chapter 2).
Specific disease-based Screening Tests
These tests use the physical appearance of the dog to detect abnormalities. Perhaps the best
analysis.
radiographic and laboratory findings.
Selection based on genotype
There are four types of DNA tests: parentage tests, mutation-based tests, linked-marker tests and
tests to identify the breeds but not the individual parents who contributed genetics to an individual
dog. This type of genetic screening is the most rapidly evolving. Completion of the canine genome
 in 2004 and research at both commercial and non-commercial facilities is expanding the number
of DNA tests exponentially. It is not likely that any veterinarian will be able to stay current with all of
the available tests. Dog breed clubs will, however, have recommendations of the tests available for
mutation-based tests and linked-marker tests provide diagnostic insights (See Chapter 2).
With all of these genetic tindings available, the breeder may look to you for input on how to interpret
o uu ui a pie oi sn in suao ino 'weod supaag ja u asn on ii ind pue eep au
eliminating genetic diseases in their breeding stock, while at the same time maintaining the diversity
of their purebred dogs. Here is a great challenge for us as veterinarians: there is no genetically
looming in our future, very few dogs will be candidates to be tested for every disorder for which
genetic decisions they can.
8 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
CHAPTER2
Genetic Selection
and Screening
Selecting breeding stock
As a veterinarian entrusted to aid a breeder, it is helpful to understand in general how breeders
can be assisted as well as how individual breeders can use your expertise. You may be involved in
selecting dogs to include, and more importantly, to exclude from a breeder's breeding stock. Most
veterinary schools spend little time on teaching genetic counseling. Even if it was taught, the field
has changed so rapidly, it is probable what was taught is now out of date.
To be most effective in this role, you will need to avoid the temptation to systematically eliminate
come to you for assistance. The goal is not to say what the breeder wants to hear, but to aid them
in selecting dogs to include in their breeding program to perpetuate the positive traits and eliminate
the undesirable traits.
There are several flaws in systematically eliminating all dogs with a defect. First, our purebred dogs
have been described as "endangered species" by Dr. Anne Traas. Pure-bred dogs cannot be interbred
and stilbe considered pure-bred. If we keep dog breeds from intermingling (that is the purpose of the
closed breed registries), each breed currently has all of the genetic material it will ever have. Genes
cannot be gained by breeding, only eliminated. If we eliminate every dog with a defect, we will have
few or no purebred dogs left in most breeds. Some breeds, such as the Otterhound, have less than
900 dogs world-wide; here there is already a dangerously small gene pool.
There is no perfect individual dog. By maintaining more dogs in the line, we maintain genetic
diversity in the breed. We must not make the mistake of eliminating dogs with obvious but minor
genetic defects (such as umbilical hernias and distichia) and inadvertently continue to breed dogs
breeders in determining carefuly how to select breeding dogs, not recommend the elimination ot
every dog with a defect.
Second, some individual dogs carry specific traits that are too valuable to the breed to be
eliminated. A top-winning or high performing dog is often too highly valued, both emotionally and
genetically, to be tossed cut of a breeding program. Even if this top-winning dog carries or is
(repopulating a breed from a limited number of individuals) or "founder's effect", also known as
Most breeders have too much invested in a line of dogs just to start over. Neither the breeder
nor the individual dog is to blame for the genetic defect. Random DNA mutations are the cause of
genetic diseases.
One approach to classifying genetic disorders is to rank them in order of severity, arbitrarily
numbered as below.
Group 1 disorders are genetic defects that are minor in their impact on the dog's health and owner's
need for ongoing care. These are disorders such as umbilical hernias - these may require surgical
repair (see AKC guidelines) but after correction, do not leave any lasting impact on the dog's
detected on the youngest dogs. It is too easy to mistakenly toss these dogs out of the gene pool;
them with other dogs of their breed. The affected dog may turn out to have the least serious defect
and the most valuable desirable traits, making them a valuable addition to their breed.
10 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Group 2 disorders are genetic defects that are non-life threatening but have an ongoing impact on
the dog's health and owner's need for cngoing care. Thyroid disease and, allergies are disorders
that falls into this category - this requires lifetime medication and an ongoing expense but if
Group 3 disorders are genetic defects that are life-changing disorders. These include seizures
caused by epilepsy, genetic orthopedic disorders such as hip dysplasia, and temperament issues.
lifestyle of the dog and owner, and often shorten the dog's life expectancy.
Using this type of classification is helpful to the client and veterinarian when determining if the
Counseling the breeder/client
The best approach to adopt when providing genetic counseling for a breeder is to assist them in
developing goals. Most breeders share the common goals of producing healthy dogs with longevity
while either maintaining or improving their breed type.Within the same breed, breeders have their
perform (temperament and abilities). Once general goals are defined, more specific goals can be
identifed. The breeder should be encouraged to focus on correcting weaknesses in their pedigrees
The breeder can be aided in determining their personal thresholds for traits. Some traits are all or
none, i.e. the dog must be free from a trait, i.e. cataracts, and other traits are on a continuum, i.e.
hip scores. If the criteria the breeder establishes are too stringent, no or few dogs will be eligible
eliminated from the line.
We can provide a valuable service to the breeder-client by helping them identify their goals. Diseases
that most veterinarians and breeders identify for elimination from the breeding pool are those that
cause death, are life-changing, or significant discomfort; or that have no available or affordable
treatment options. Many geneticists suspect that a number of the diseases seen today have a
genetic basis that has not yet been identified. In the future there will probably be DNA tests for
diseases that at this time are not known to be genetic.
Some breeders forget when they breed a litter that most of the pups will end up as "pet" puppies,
not show dogs. It is important that the pet puppies, those sold to families to become a beloved
family member, must be ot sound health and temperament. They must not knowingly produce pet
dogs who will be difficult or dangerous to live with and/or that will be costly or impossible to provide
with medical care.
On the rare occasion that a genetic defect is caused by a recent mutation which may only affect a
small number of individuals, the breeder is well-advised to be severe in eliminating these individuals
from their breeding program to avoid dispersing the new mutation into the whole gene pool. However,
if a smallpopulation breed (there are at least 44 recognized by AkC), has a wide-spread defective
stock with normal-testing offspring. "Defective genes were not created by breeders. They are due
As the number of genetic screening tests increase, breeders will have to determine which tests are
appropriate for their individual situation. It will soon become cost-prohibitive to run all available tests
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 11
such as frequently used sires, should be screened more intensively. An owner of a frequently used
a lau ui sasasp snoas pue uosoo sso an not sop aui uaas isy pinous op pns
DNA can be banked as blood (whole or dried on an FTA card) or as frozen semen. This is important
and he continues to sire pups long after his reproductive life is over.
It is generally the bitch owner who researches pedigrees and seeks out males for compatibility and
structure), health, performance and temperament. Usually, all four are desired and must be balanced.
the siblings of the bitch and sire are evaluated. Both analyses are important. Websites such as the
OFA and CHIC websites are valuable resources in researching some of the test results breeders
will want to analyze. Other sources are breeder and club websites, breed publications, and direct
communication with other experienced fanciers of the breed.
There are many ways to sort through strengths and weaknesses of individual dogs when selecting an
The most frequently identified reasons breeders select a stud dog are:
1. Convenience - knowledge of and proximity to a stud dog.
2. Cost - the expense of the stud fee and semen shipment/insemination costs
3.Pedigree-the desirability of the ancestors
4. Offspring produced - the success of previous offspring
(Battaglia, Carmen: “Breeding Better Dogs Seminar." Greater Racine Kennel Club. Racine,
Wisconsin. 19 Feb. 2005.)
uses "Stick Dog" figures and a symbols pedigree to help the breeder visualize the strengths and
strong supporter of breeders sharing information among themselves. He emphasized the importance
of revealing not only the good qualities of a dog to the owner of a potential mate to that dog, but also
information to others in your breed is necessary to prevent breeding two dogs together that share
an undesirable trait (doubling up on that trait). Unfortunately, the world of dog breeders is fiercely
and supporting them in sharing the information with others. However, as professionals, we must
members of the dog-owning public who are not privileged to have access to this intormation.
Traits such as temperament are subjective. Researching for phenotypic and genotypic tests is
time-intensive. Breed clubs often have resources on their websites. Ihe CHlC website (http://www.
caninehealthinfo.org) lists many but not all AKC breeds and is a good place to begin. This research
should be left for the breeder to initiate,allowing theveterinarian to become involved in discussing
frequency, severity of the disease and delivery of the testing services
12 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
If the breeder has questions or a severe problems that are beyond the scope of the primary care
Hybrid dogs
There is a current trend in breeding and puppy sales of producing hybrid or "designer dogs." This
out the "bad" genes and leave in only the good genes. If this were the case, practicing veterinarians
would see only purebred dogs - the mixed breed dogs would be in perfect health and never need
veterinary care. Of course, we all know that this is not the case.
unpredictable health problems. Randomly mixing genetics from one breed of dog with another is
not screened to prevent passing along known inherited diseases
DNA and the canine genome
In 2004, the collaborative effort of many researchers culminated in discovering the canine genome.
DNA tests available. However this number is likely to increase exponentially. This increase will make
it difficult and cost-prohibitive to have every individual screened for every disorder. However, by
dogs in the pedigrees and be able test only a limited number of dogs. When foundation dogs are
available and can be identihed as clear of a disorder, offspring may not need to be tested.
Researching the genetics of individual breeds
In the United States, breed clubs generally make recommendations but rarely mandate testing for
specific traits or diseases. Recommendations may be based on the frequency and/or the severity of
the disease. For instance, hip dysplasia affects 30 % or more of large breed dogs, so the frequency
and severity of the condition drives the desire to screen for the disease. Other disorders, such as
epilepsy, may be less frequently seen but it is a highly undesirable trait in a genetic line, due to both
the emotional and tinancial cost of controlling the disease. For these reasons epilepsy too is an
example of a disorder breeders strive to breed cut of their lines.
The CHIC website (http://www.caninehealthinfo.org/), breed specific parent club websites, and
website for institutions and companies offering DNA testing are excellent and up-to-date resources of
tests suggested and currently available
CHIC is co-sponsored by the OFA and the AKC Canine Health Foundation. CHIC works with parent
clubs to identify health screening protocols appropriate for individual breeds and serves as
their fee-based database. Dogs that are tested in accordance with the parent club established
requirements, that have their results registered and made available in the public domain are issued
CHIC numbers. CHIC's purpose is to encourage uniform health testing and sharing of all results,
normal and abnormal, so that more informed breeding decisions can be made in an overall effort to
reduce the incidence of genetic disease and improve canine health.
Selection based on phenotype
Phenotypic screening has been used for many years while genotypic testing, the gold standard for
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 13
test available. Until DNA genotype tests are available for more disorders and traits, we will continue
to use phenotype testing.
There are two broad categories of phenotypic testing. First are the general findings on physical
to provide breeders with a standardized approach they can use in evaluating their offspring and
hip dysplasia utilizing OFA for analysis.
Physical evaluation for phenotypic abnormalities
General findings on physical examination
You do this every time you examine a litter of puppies or an adult dog that the owner is considering
looking for undesirable traits such as a heart murmur, and they will be looking for traits such as the
The veterinary examination of adult or young dogs includes:
1. Evaluation of vital signs. Normal pups by 6 weeks and older should have a normal body
temperature of 101.0° to 102.5°, heart rates of 100 to 250 beats per minute and a
respiratory rate of 30 to 50 breaths per minute. Mucus membrane color may be slightly paler
aue gooisyd geou e y sdnd ue se npe a un u
 2. Evaluation of the dentition. This includes the size and shape of the jaw, alignment of the incisor
and canine teeth, and evaluation of the interdigitation of the premolars. It is believed the upper
and lower jaws can be influenced by different genes and therefore grow at different rates.
dentition is also a factor.
 3. Evaluation of the oral cavity. The pup should be evaluated for a complete hard and soft palate
and normal swallowing reflexes. Evaluation for elongaticn of the soft palate nearly always
examination. The size of the trachea is a valuable evaluation for the brachycephalic breeds,
but as it requires a lateral thoracic radiograph for evaluation, this is also not part of a routine
physical examination.
4. Evaluation of the nares includes the size of the nostril opening. No breed standards have
specifc requirement for this, but appearance of the dog can be influenced by this. As a matter
a board-certified veterinary ophthalmologist. However, some abnormalities are detectable
by simple visual examination with good lighting and magnification. These include distichia,
persistent pupillary membranes, dermoids, entropion and ectropion, epiphora, everted
nictitans, and microophthalmia. Pups should be observed during the evaluation to assure
that they have normal vision. Eye size and shape may be important to the breeder but is not
usually clinically significant.
6. Evaluation of the ears. The ears should be evaluated for the presence of a complete pinna
and ear canal on both sides of the head. Ear size, shape, and position are important to the
breeder but few ear abnormalities are clinically significant. Hearing tests are addressed by
BAER testing, described below.
7. Evaluation of the limbs. Pups should be observed on the floor to be certain that they have
normal locomotion. with a few breed specifc exceptions, the pups should not have deviation
of the forelimbs - the front toes should point forwards. Some breeders are reluctant to allow
14 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
their pups to be placed on the floor at the veterinary clinic, so this is a challenge you may
and swellings. Ihe feet should be evaluated to be certain that all toes and footpads are
present. Older pups can be evaluated with palpation for normal elbows and shoulders. You
assessed in even the very young puppy
8. Evaluation of the thorax. The lungs should be clear on auscultation and the heart should be
normal. Careful auscultation of the heart is essential. Both sides of the thorax should be
evaluated, with the stethoscope placed over each valve. This can be difficult to achieve with a
wiggly puppy and a room full of active littermates. It can be helpful to hold the pup in your lap
the pup baby food to lick can keep them more still during auscultation. The new electronic
stethoscopes make detecting subtle murmurs much less challenging.
An undetected heart murmur can lead to diffculties for you and the breeder if the pup
is found to have a murmur by the new owner's veterinarian. Be very thorough in your
may intensify as the pup ages
 Some murmurs are innocent murmurs and may disappear by 12 weeks of age. Some
murmurs are so loud they are suspect from the first visit. If a pup is found to have a murmur,
it is recommended the pup be held for subsequent evaluation or sold with full disclosure. If
the murmur has not resolved by 12 weeks of age, the pup is smaller than its littermates, or
if the pup seems to be exercise intolerant, a prompt referral to a veterinary cardiologist is
recommended for a full cardiac evaluation.
9. Evaluation of the abdomen. The abdomen should be soft on abdominal palpation with no
 masses or intestinal abnormalities noted. Ropey intestines or pot-bellied appearance are a
trequent tnding in pups who have not been adequately treated with anthelminthics. The ventral
abdominal wall should be evaluated for both umbilical and inguinal hernias. It may be useful
to place gentle pressure on the mid-abdomen to detect small hernias. Small reducible hernias
may resolve spontaneously but should be noted regardless as these are inherited and both the
breeder and prospective puppy owner should be made aware of their presence.
10. Evaluation of the rectum. It is possible but unlikely that a young pup can have an incomplete
Gl tract and no rectum. If feces are found on the rectal thermometer, a complete Gl tract can
be assumed.
11. Evaluation of external genitalia.
a. Male puppies should have their penis and testes evaluated. Both testes should be present in
the scrotum by 3 weeks of age. If there is family history of penile defects, such as phimosis,
should be exteriorized for visual examination. If the bladder is distended, the pup should be
cbserved for urination because some very young male pups may develop urinary calculi and
obstructive diseases
b. Female puppies should be carefully evaluated for location and size of the vulva and os
clitoris as well as for vaginal discharge. The vulva is frequently small or more ventrally located
than in the adult. If the os clitoris is enlarged or prominent, the possibility of an intersex pup
should be considered. Many female pups have mild to moderate vaginal discharge associated
with mild puppy vaginitis. This is not serious and may not require treatment unless the pup has
clinical signs of urinary tract disease or discomfort.
12. Evaluation of the tail. The tail may be complete or shortened either by surgical docking or a
genetic shortening. Clinically significant defects in the tail include kinks and skin folds. In most
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 15
Temperament and performance traits
Temperament qualities and desired performance traits vary with each individual breed and the
preferences of each breeder. This is a subjective evaluation; there are no rules and no database.
decisions are generally made by the breeder and their network of fellow dog breeders. In some
situations, veterinary participation and referral to a behaviorist with these skills may be beneficial to
the breeder.
Longevity
way to select for this.
Specific disease-based screening examinations and
their respective databases
This type of evaluation uses the physical findings (phenotype) of the dog to detect abnormalities in
for genetic diseases, in the absence of DNA tests, phenotypic evaluations are the only alternative
Applying results from the sire and dam, along with information on other close relatives such as
ideal standard and to one another. In some cases, the results are released only to the breeder,
but in others, the results are included in databases. Ihese screenings include findings based on
physical examination, radiographs and laboratory testing. General information and websites will be
included here to introduce each current category to the practicing veterinarian. Prior to a client visit
the tests requested.
Most of these tests are evaluations a general veterinary practitioner can offer as a service to their
clients. Several evaluations, however, require specialized training and/or equipment and will require
a referral to specialists. Many experienced breeders have already developed a network of preferred
specialists and expect to visit several veterinarians to complete their screening prior to the sale of
Phenotypic screening
CERF (Canine Eye Registration Foundation) exams and
ECR (Eye Certification Registry)
This is a complete ophthalmic examination, which must be completed by a board-certifed veterinary
will be registered with ECR or CERF upon submission of the form and the appropriate fee. Breeding
advice will be offered based on guidelines established for that particular breed by the Genetics
Committee of the ACvo for dogs with abnormalities noted on examination.
There is great variation in the type of eye disorders and age of onset in different dog breeds
life of any dog in a breeder's line that have offspring in an active breeding program. This certification
is good for 12 months at a time so the dog must be reexamined and recertified to maintain its
16 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
and there is no upper age limit. Some breeders will have ophthalmic examinations completed
prior to selling puppies as pets. As of January 1, 200l, patients are required to have permanent
identihcation in the form of a microchip, DNA profle, or tattoo to be registered with ECR or CERF.
Both will certify the eyes of normal hybrid dogs.
ECR and CERF exams are done cn a regular schedule at most veterinary ophthalmologist's
performance locations. Many breeders find it more convenient to attend an eye clinic.
ECR and CERF also maintains a data base based on dog breeds. This information will be used in
generating research reports, but the individual dog's identities will become confidential and will
never be released. CERF also has a publication called "OCULAR DISORDERS PRESUMED TO BE
INHERITED IN DOGS." The 5th Edition, 2007 version is available on CD and is a valuable resource
when assisting breeders in decisions about breeding programs. Additional information on CERF can
be found at www.vmdb.org/history.html. Information about ECR can be found at www.offa.org
OFA cardiac database
The purpose of the OFA cardiac database is to identify dogs which are phenotypically normal prior
to inclusion in a breeding program. For the purposes of the database, a phenotypically normal dog
is defined as either one without a cardiac murmur or one with an innocent heart murmur that is
found to be otherwise normal by virtue of an echocardiographic examination which includes Doppler
found on the OFA cardiac website at www.offa.org/cardiacgrade.html.
Cardiac auscultation is the primary screening method for initial identification of Congenital Heart
Disease (CHD) and the initial classification of dogs. This evaluation is completed by cardiac
auscultation at rest and may include additional auscultation after exertion to detect murmurs.
Complete instruction on how this examination should be performed is available on the OFA
website. It may be performed by Board- Certifed Cardiologists (preferred) (suffhx on OFA number
of C), internists or other Specialists (sufhix S) or by General Practitioners (sufhix P). In addition,
Echocardiograms and/or Holter monitoring may be recommended for some breeds. (See following
sections on testing for arrhythmias and echocardiographic exam.)
the heart or great vessels. The lesions characterizing congenital heart defects are present at birth
and may develop more fully during perinatal and growth periods. Many congenital heart defects
are thought to be genetically transmitted from parents to offspring: however, the exact modes of
inheritance have not been precisely determined for all cardiovascular malformations. At this time
inherited developmental cardiac diseases like subaortic stenosis and cardiomyopathies are diffhcult
to monitor since there is no clear cut distinction between normal and abnormal. The OFA states it
plans to modify the congenital cardiac database when a proven diagnostic modality and normal
parameters by breed are established. However at this time, the OFA cardiac database should not be
cardiac database can be located at: http://www.offa.org/cardiacinfo.html.
OFApatellas
age. In some cases, the affected dog has abnormal limb carriage from the time they begin fo bear
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 17
weight at 3 weeks of age. Frequently, the dogs have a knock-kneed (genu valgum) stance and the
foot can be seen to twist laterally as weight is placed on the limb. In many cases, the dog presents
reducible, and laxity of the medial collateral ligament may be palpable. The medial tissues of the
stifle joint are often thickened
Patellar luxation is diagnosed by palpation of the position of the patella with mild manipulation
performed by any qualifed veterinarian. Radiographic studies are not included in this evaluation.
sedated and must be at least 12 months of age to be included in the database. Re-evaluation later in
life is encouraged as some luxations become evident as the patient ages. The patella is classifed as
certification, the patient is examined, the appropriate form is completed including the veterinarian's
findings, signed by the veterinarian, and submitted to OFA with the associated fee. OFA encourages
evaluations
A method of classifying the degree of luxation and bony deformity is useful for diagnosis, and can
The position of the patella can easily be palpated starting at the tibial tubercle and working proximal
along the patellar ligament to the patella
Grade 1 patellar luxation
Manually the patella easily luxates at full extension of the stifle joint, but returns to the trochlea when
released. No crepitation is apparent. The medial, or very occasionally, lateral deviation of the tibial
crest (with lateral luxation of the patella) is only minimal, and there is very slight rotation of the tibia.
Flexion and extension of the stifle is in a straight line with no abduction of the hock.
Grade 2 patellar luxation
There is frequent patellar luxation, which, in some cases, can become permanent. The limb is
sometimes carried, although weight bearing routinely occurs with the stifle remaining slightly flexed.
Especially under anesthesia it is often possible to reduce the luxation by manually turning the tibia
laterally, but the patella reluxates with ease when manual tension of the joint is released. As much as
30 degrees of medial tibial torsion and a slight medial deviation of the tibial crest may exist. When
the patella is resting medially the hock is slightly abducted. If the condition is bilateral, more weight
is shifted onto the forelimbs.
Many dogs with this grade live with the condition reasonably well for many years, but the constant
luxation of the patella over the medial trochlear ridge of the trochlea causes erosion of the
articulating surface of the patella and also the proximal area of the medial lip. This results in
Grade 3 patellar luxation
30 degrees and 50 degrees from the cranial/caudal plane. Although the luxation is not intermittent,
many animals use the limb with the stifle held in a semi flexed position. The trochlea is very shallow
or even flattened.
Grade 4 patellar luxation
The tibia is medially twisted and the tibial crest may show further deviaticn medially with the result
that it lies 50 degrees to 90 degrees from the cranial/caudal plane. The patella is permanently
18Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
patellar ligament and the distal end of the femur. The trochlea is absent or even convex. The limb is
carried, or the animal moves in a crouched position, with the limb flexed.
inherited. Medial luxations cccur in toy, miniature, and large breeds. These patients have anatomic
deformities that cause luxaticn. Lateral luxation occurs in toy and miniature breeds. These patients
present at 5 to 6 months of age, are usually affected bilaterally, and may have associated hip
dysplasia. Luxation resulting from trauma occurs in various breeds, and is of no importance to the
certification process. Unless there is deviation of the tibial crest, it may be difficult to differentiate
 traumatic from congenital patellar luxation. (See www.offa.org)
Testing for arrhythmias
Use of a 24 hour ECG using a Holter monitor is currently the preferred evaluation when testing a
dog for arrhythmias. The Holter allows the monitoring over a period of approximately 100,000
of PVC's are at increased risk for syncope or sudden death. lt is presumed there is an inherited
component to this disease and in some breeds,
screening for PVC's is recommended prior to
breeding (Figure 2-1).
There are services that provide the equipment
and interpretation of the results by a Board-
certifed Cardiologist. In general, breed clubs
have already made these arrangements.
Screening for deafness
Congenital deafness in dogs (or other animals)
can be acquired or inherited. Inherited deafness
can be caused by a gene defect that is
autosomal dominant, recessive, or may involve
Figure 2-1
multiple genes. Congenital deafness has been
Holter monitor for cardliac arrhythmias
recognized in approximately 80 dog breeds, but
  id o id   s  a   u  s
are usually only available at veterinary schools or specialty practices and are usually performed by a
Board-Certified Neurologist.
dog's lifetime. Chemical restraint is administered at the discretion of the veterinarian performing
the evaluation. Only dogs with bilateral hearing are classified as passing the test. The submission
completed application form, and the appropriate fee.
The decision on how to proceed with a breeding program in which deaf individuals are identifed
individuals.
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 19
Screening for inherited liver shunts
Inherited liver shunts are found in 5 of every 1000 dogs. Most are small breed dogs. Breeds
affected include Havanese, Yorkshire Terriers, Maltese, Dandie Dinmont Terriers, Pugs, Miniature
Standard Schnauzers, Shih Tzus, Bernese Mountain Dogs, and Bichen Frises. Yorkshire Terriers,
Cairn Terriers, lrish Wolfhounds, and Maltese have a proven hereditary basis. Research shows it is
not a simple autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.
Testing all potential breeding stock of breeds at risk has been proposed. Testing involves paired fasting
and 2 hour post prandial bile acids and blood ammonia levels. Not including dogs with elevated levels of
either has been proposed as a method to eliminate phenotypically affected dogs from the gene pool.
Radiographic and ultrasound findings
OFA hip dysplasia
Hip dysplasia is a serious genetic disease which has been reported in every dog breed, in mixed-breed
dogs and cats. Many veterinarians think that every dog, regardless of breed, should be evaluated radio-
graphically for hip pathology prior to use in a breeding program. By contrast, many breeders consider
Radiographs for an OFA (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) hip study are taken by the breeder's
choice of veterinarian. The dog must be in the required dorsally recumbent, hip extended position
The view must include the wings of the ilium and patellas. The properly positioned, identihed and
exposed radiograph, completed application form, copy of the AKC certihicate (or other registry if
application form, detailed instructions on the correct positioning, and required flm identihcation are
included on the website: www.offa.org. If the patient is not positioned correctly, the exposure is not
      m    d  si    '
will be necessary to repeat the study.
Figure2-2.
A. VD Pelvis position, OFA excellent hips. Also the position for the first of 3 required PennHip views. Wings of ilium ano
patellas visible on view, bilateral symmetry, femurs parallel. B. VD Pelvis position- dysplastic hips.
20 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
can be submitted from ages 4 months to 2 years of age. Disccunts are available if multiple films
are submitted together. Results for accepted applicants are available approximately 4 weeks after
submission.
must be verified by the veterinarian taking the radiograph if they have signed it was verified) for
inclusion in their database. These identifed animals will have a suffix of "Pl" following their OFA
number if one is issued. Animals without permanent identification will still be evaluated but will not be
listed in the database and their OFA number will have "NoPl" as a sufhix.
OFA recommends but does not require sedation or anesthesia to take radiographs. This is left to the
discretion of the attending veterinarian and the owner of the dog.
In one small study, it was shown that some females show laxity of the hips around the time of
estrus and whelping. It is not recommended to take radiographs of pregnant females. The OFA
recommends radiographing three to four weeks before or after the heat cycle, and three to four
weeks after weaning a litter of puppies. (See PennHip? study on this in the following section).
Results are provided by a consensus of three veterinary radiologists. Each radiologist wil grade
the hips with one of seven different physical (phenotypic) hip conformations: normal which includes
excellent, good, or fair classifcations (which are issued OFA numbers); borderline; or dysplastic
which includes mild, moderate, or severe classifications (which are not issued OFA numbers).
OFA suggests the following use of hip dysplasia information for breeders in selecting
breeding stock and mates:
· Breed normals to normals
●Breed normals with normal ancestry
● Breed normals from liters (brothers/sisters) with a low incidence of HD
· Select a sire that produces a low incidence of HD
a aa a     s   r 
support inclusion in a breeding program.
this minimizes financial and emotional losses should dogs selected without this data fail to pass
the same hip grades as other OFA cases. As of May 1, 2004 the dog must be at least 12 months
of age at the time of the radiograph, and permanently identified via microchip or tattoo before
    a   paa   si snd g  sa d a
radiograph is taken).
Dr. Corley of OFA published a comparison of the reliability of the preliminary evaluation hip grade
of excellent being normal at 2 years of age (excellent, good, or fair). There was 97.9% reliability for
a preliminary grade of good being normal at 2 years of age, and 76.9% reliability for a preliminary
grade of fair being normal at 2 years of age. Reliability of preliminary evaluations increased as age
ns ss 9s1 s 11 0 21 1 %96 pue 's 7 0  1 %6 's 9 0 9 1e
that preliminary evaluations of hip joint status in dogs are generally reliable. However, dogs that
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 21
receive a preliminary evaluation of fair or mild hip joint conformation should be reevaluated at an
older age (24 months). Additional information on hip dysplasia, film submission, hip evaluation, and
fees is available at www.offa.org.
OFA Legg-Calve-Perthes
Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease (LCP), also known as avascular necrosis of the femoral head, is seen in
the hip of dogs and humans. In dogs, it is seen in young small breed dogs between 4 and 12 months
of age. Dogs usually present with unilateral pain and lameness, but can have bilateral disease. LCP is
believed to be an inherited disease, although the mode of inheritance is not known.
Radiographs,taken in the standard hip extended ventrodorsal view, show changes in the femoral
aq ot ydeopen au jo aep aui uo aae jo suuow zt jo wnwu e aq isnw sog yoau pue peay
eligible for an LCP number. The radiographs may be taken by any veterinarian, but must contain the
nu pue pauosod Auadond ag 'ydeaopen aun jo jed juauead e se uoneoyuapi sop painba
be of sufficient quality for the OFA to reach a diagnosis. The application form, fee and radiographs are
submitted for evaluation. Phenotypically normal dogs are assigned an OFA Legg-Calve-Perthes number.
OFA elbows
1. Pathology involving the medial coronoid of the ulna - fragmented coroncid process or FCP.
2. Osteochondritis of the medial humeral condyle in the elbow joint or OCD
3. Ununited anconeal process or UAP.
4. A fourth cause of elbow pathology is premature ulnar growth plate closure, an inherited disorder
plate in a young dog ot any breed (Figure 2-3A and B).
B
Figure 2-3.
A. Lateral flexed view of elbow, OFA elbow normal. B. Lateral flexed view of elbow, OFA dysplatic elbow
22 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
which may appear at nearly any age, range from slight gait changes, inward deviation of the foot,
decreased range of motion of the elbow, to severe lameness.
The view required by OFA to diagnose secondary degenerative changes in the elbow joint is an
extreme flexed medic-lateral view of the elbow. When there is instability of the elbow joint due to
elbow dysplasia, it leads to a of new bone proliferation (osteophytes) on the anconeal process of the
ulna) associated with secondary developmental degenerative joint disease.
For elbow evaluations, there are no grades for a radiographically normal elbow. The only
grades assigned are for abnormal elbows with radiographic changes associated with secondary
degenerative joint disease. Like the hip certification, the OFA will not certify a normal elbow until
To date, there are no long term studies for preliminary elbow examinations like there are for hips.
However, preliminary screening for elbows along with hips can also provide valuable information to
the breeder.
OFA provides the following rating for abnormal elbow radiographs:
Grade I Elbow Dysplasia shows minimal bone change along the anconeal process of ulna (less
than3mmy.
Grade Il Elbow Dysplasia shows additional bone proliferation along the anconeal process (3 to
5 mm) and subchondral bone changes (trochlear notch sclerosis).
Grade Ill Elbow Dysplasia shows well developed degenerative joint disease with bone
 g n   sd ge a  
OFA hip and elbow follow-up
OFA has recently begun to offer a new resubmission service. For a smallfee, OFA will provide a
"Follow-up Study" for hip and elbow studies taken later in a pet's life. The film will be read only by the
OFA board-certified in-house veterinary radiologist. Owners will receive a report of the findings. The
  s  s    a          
  o ss            
of the animal, and 2. owners will benefit from the same information without risking the earlier rating
assigned by the OFA. Specific information on this service is available at www.offa.org.
OFAshoulders
This study is to evaluate for ostoechondrosis (OCD) of the shoulder. OCD is a disruption in the
ossification of the cartilage mold under the articular cartilage of the joint. OcD has been reported
in many joints, most commonly the shoulder, but also in the elbow, stifle, hock, and spine. It can
at less than 1 year of age, and males cutnumber females. OCD is considered a genetic disease
although the mode of inheritance has not yet been established (Figure 2-4).
To receive an OFA number for shoulders, the dog must be a minimum of 12 months of age
Preliminary evaluations are also available. As with other OFA studies, the patient must be
appropriately positioned, the flm must have the patient identification permanently as part of the
radiograph, the film must be properly exposed, and all fees and signed paperwork must be included
in the submission.
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 23
PennHIpo
PennHIP? (University of Pennsylvania Hip
Improvement Program) uses a radiographic
technique to assess the quality of the canine
hip and quantitatively measures canine hip
joint laxity. Only PennHiP? trained member
veterinarians are qualifed to take radiographs to
submit for evaluation. Three views of the hip are
taken with the patient under general anesthesia.
The first view, the standard hip-extended view,
is used to evaluate for DJD. The second view is
used to evaluate hip joint congruity with the hip
 in a compression view. The third view is used to
make quantitative measurements of the hip joint
laxity in a distracted view. This set of 3 films is
submitted to the University of Pennsylvania for
analysis, providing results in a numeric format
called a "distraction index." This is based on the
Figure 2-4.
theory that a joint with greater laxity (i.e. a higher
Lateral shoulder view, OFA shoulders normal.
distraction index or a number closer to 1) will
This diagnostic procedure may be done on patients as young as 16 weeks of age to produce
reliable results. Unlike OFA, all patients who undergo a PennHlP? evaluation must be under general
withholding flms to PennHiPe on affected dogs.
In 1997, PennHip@ completed a study to assess for laxity of the hips of female dogs related to
measured by PennHIpe. However, hormones released during the birthing process and during lactation
can increase hip laxity and hip evaluation at this time is therefore not recommended. PennHIpe
Additional information regarding training to become a PennHip? certified veterinarian, equipment
A
Figure 2-5.
A. PennHip Compressed view - the second of 3 PennHip views required. B. PennHip Distracted view - the third of 3 views
required.
24 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Echocardiographic (Echo) exam
There are some breed clubs which recommend an Echo be performed instead of or in addition to
For most veterinarians, the Echocardiographic exam will be a referral case. Board certifcation
by the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Specialty of Cardiology, is considered by
the American College of Veterinary Medical Associations as the benchmark of clinical proficiency
for veterinarians in clinical cardiology, and examination by a Diplomate of this Specialty Board is
recommended. Other veterinarians may be able to perform these examinations provided they have
must be able to perform two-dimensional, pulsed-wave Doppler, and continuous wave Doppler
examinations of the heart. The availability of color Doppler is valuable but not essential for most
examinations. Echocardiographic studies should be reported on videotape for subsequent analysis
and a written record of abnormal tndings should be entered into the medical record.
Laboratory test findings for enzyme or hormone levels
Thyroid testing
Autoimmune thyroiditis is the most common cause of primary hypothyroidism in dogs. If the dog
develops autoantibodies at any time in the dog's life, this is an indication that the dog probably has
to the onset of clinical signs, thyroglobulin autoantibody ( I GAA) becomes detectable on a blood test.
first 4 years is recommended. The majority of dogs that develop autoantibodies have them by 3 to
4 years of age; however, affter age 4, biannual retesting Is recommended. A negative test at any one
the status of the dogs lineage, breeders and genetic counselors can decide which matings are most
appropriate to help reduce the incidence of autoimmune thyroiditis in the offspring.
Dogs being should be examined by a veterinarian and have serum drawn and sent only to an OFA
estrus cycle. lt is important to use a plain red top tube without a serum barrier for sample collection.
Details for sample handling and shipment are available at http://www.offa.org/thyvetinstruct.html.
Under separate cover, the OFA application and appropriate fee must be submitted for certification.
a a o  po  a  paad     s hh sn so po 
database number will be issued to all dogs found to be normal at or after 12 months of age. Ages
will be used in the certification process since the classification can change as the dog ages and the
autoimmune disease progresses. lt is recommended that reexamination occur at ages 2,3,4,6, and
8years.
All data, whether normal or abnormal, should be submitted for purposes of completeness. There
is no OFA fee for entering an abnormal evaluation of the thyrcid into the data bank. Information
on results determined to be positive or equivocal will not be made public without explicit written
permission of the owner.
Thyroid abnormalities fall into several categories. Two types will be defined by the registry: 1.
autoimmune thyroiditis and 2. idiopathically reduced thyroid function. Autoimmune thyroiditis is
candidates for breeding stock.
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 25
von Willebrand's blood coagulation testing
von Willebrand's disease (vwD) is the most common inherited bleeding disorder of both animals
of normally structured vWF protein); Type Il (low concentration of an abnormal vWF), and Type Ill
(complete absence of vwF). Different breeds exhibit different variations of the disease.
spontaneous bleeding, usually from the mucosa of the mouth, nose, or gastro-intestinal tract. Injury
that is accompanied by bleeding may require administration of a transfusion. A buccal mucosal
bleeding time is an easy and quick test to perform in a suspect pre-op patient but is not a definitive
diagnostic test to screen for vWD.
the percentage of vwF protein present in an individual patient. This test was developed by Dr. Jean
Dodds and is still run in the lab at Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine. It is the only
test available that will screen dogs of all breeds for vwD. Because the test measures a protein in
the dynamic system of the dog's body, it is expected the result will vary from one test to the next in
will still be reported in the same category (normal, carrier or affected) on subsequent tests unless
the patient has a change in their health status or estrous cycle from one testing date to the next.
This variation has caused some confusion in the interpretation for some breeders but this should not
undermine the value of the test results.
The second screening test available is a DNA test for vWD. It has been marketed as a test for
multiple breeds but this author is not aware of any published reports that support the accuracy of
use in breeds other than the Scottish Terrier.
Sebaceous Adenitis skin biopsies
inflammed, often leading to progressive loss of hair. SA symptoms can mimic other diseases
including allergles and endocrine disorders. Some dogs affected with SA are asymptomatic
Diagnosis Is based on histopathologic evaluation of skin biopsles.
findings on the application form. A minimum of two 6mm punch biopsy samples are taken from the
skin of the dog's neck between the top of the head and the withers. If there are areas of scaling and
hairloss,samplesshouldbetakenfrom thoseareas.
To collect the sample, a local anesthetic such as lidocaine may be used. General anesthesia may
be used as determined by the attending veterinarian. The area should not be scrubbed or otherwise
Cleaned, however gentle clipping of the area may be necessary. When obtaining the sample with a
local anesthetic, use of a colored marker or white liquid correction fluid is helpful in finding the area
The lab results are classified aseither:
·No Evidence of Sebaceous Adenitis (at the time of the evaluation)
+Affected
+ Affected without Clinical Symptoms
26 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The lab results and final diagnosis are returned to the OFA and to the owner. The minimum age for
registration in the OFA SA database is 12 months.
It is believed that SA is inherited as a simple autosomal recessive. There is currently no DNA test to
determine a dog's status with regard to SA. As enough phenotypic information on families of dogs
is entered into the database, breeders will be able to make educated assumptions about a dog's
incidence of the disease.
Two factors make SA particularly diffcult for breeders to control: the possible late onset of the
disease, and the subclinical state of the disease. with late onset, the dog may have already been
unaware that the animal is affected since it shows no visible signs of the disease.
OFA certificates
Some of the OFA submission forms include a line for dog owners to initial to allow the release of
abnormal findings to a public database. This should be discussed with the client in advance of
submission as some owners prefer to limit results to their own use.
Any questions on how to read an OFA certificate can be clarified by visiting http:/www.offa.org/
numberkey.html.
Genotypic screening
Tests available
mutation-based tests, linked marker tests, and tests to identify the breeds but not the individual
evolving. Although many DNA tests have been available up to now, the completion of the canine
genome in 2004 and research at both commercial and non-commercial facilities is expanding the
number of DNA tests available exponentially. Because tests are becoming available so quickly, it is
not possible to include an allinclusive list of DNA tests here. It is also not likely that veterinarian will
be able to stay current with the available tests. Breed clubs will have recommendations regarding
the tests available for screening. Careful and current research into each test should be done to be
certain the test was evaluated for the breed in question prior to recommending the test. In some
The laboratory selected for the analysis should be a university based laboratory, or one with an
excellent reputation, have a PhD geneticist on staff and be recommended by the parent breed club.
cytology brush or a whole blood sample. Serum is not a suitable sample as it contains very little
DNA. Frozen semen can also be used in some cases by extracting whole cells from the frozen
sample. However, it is an expensive way to obtain DNA, both from the actual financial cost ot
sacritcing the sample and from the aspect of the loss of valuable semen which is usually limited in
quantity. Each lab will have very specific sample and paperwork requirements. Ihe most up-to-date
information should be used prior to collecting and submitting the sample. A visit to the website or a
current available as this is likely to change frequently.
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 27
General types of DNA tests available
 1. Disorders of blood or blood cells: hemophilia A and B, vWD types I, Il, and Ill, factor Vll
deficiency
 2. Storage diseases: copper toxicosis, cystinuria, renal cystadenocarcinoma and nodular
dermatofibrosis,
 3. CNS and skin: Lafora type epilepsy, narcolepsy, epidermolysis bullosa (two forms)
4. Eye: Collie eye anomaly, progressive retinal atrophy/PRA
5. Drug sensitivities: malignant hyperthermia, multi drug resistence gene (MDR-1)
Parentage DNA tests
respective registry. The only value in parentage genotypic screening applied to screening for genetic
disease is for use when a DNA test used to clear a parent is used to clear offspring as genetically
disease-free.
Mutation-based tests or Gene-specific tests
develop a DNA test, this test is preferred over the linked-marker test when it is available. The test
disease will be identical fo a disease in human or mouse (genomes more heavily researched than the
canine genome). If the mutant gene has been identified in either of these species, researchers can
mmediately test whether the same gene Is involved in the canine disease. When it is, researchers
it must be assessed fo be the same gene in each breed of dog as in the mouse, human, or other
dog breeds. On occasion, there can be different mutations that cause similar diseases in different
breeds. When the scientific literature can show the defect is testing for the correct mutation in a
specific breed and the parentage can be confirmed, the test is considered to be 100% accurate.
These gene-based DNA tests can be used to analyze an individual dog's DNA to determine how many
the Newfoundland. http://www.thekennelclub.org.uk/item/315.
Linkage or Linked-marker tests
   n   s     e    s 
uses an identified marker that is always inherited by an affected dog but is not inherited by
clinically normal dogs. Using special DNA markers developed by the Canine Genome Research
mutant gene that causes the disease on one of the chromosomes. Here, the marker is determined
have all been mapped to their unique location on one or other of the chromosomes, identifying
a linked marker will identify a relatively small region of just one chromosome where the mutant
gene will be found. Scientists can then scan this region for potential candidate genes that can be
screened for their involvement in the disease.
The presence of the linked marker is usually diagnostic for the presence of the associated mutant
gene. However, linked-marker tests are rarely 100% accurate (realistically 95 to 99% accurate)
28 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
recognizes a false allele that is not linked to the disease gene. Therefore, inaccurate diagnoses can
meiosis. As technology allows, this type of test will be replaced by mutation-based tests. Be sure
you or your client has checked the internet for the most current and reliable tests available prior to
submission of samples.
pue Aoi un u vad pue nzi us aun ui eiseldsap jeuan apnjou ssat jo adk sun jo salduexa jaun
Miniature poodle. http://www.thekennelclub.org.uk/item/315
Breed identification
[esting is available commercially to identify the breed(s) an individual dog is derived from. This will
not identify specific individuals as parents, rather the breeds contributing DNA to an individual. Pet
owners can submit blood samples through their veterinarian to this commercially-available service for
a fee. This testing is more than a novelty: it is thought this can assist pet owners and veterinarians
 individual is not the purebred dog the breeder selling the dog represented it to be.
Use of test results
Most DNA tests currently available are tests for single gene, autosomal recessive diseases. This
type of test is accurate and affordable.
These tests can distinguish between:
1. Normal (a clear dog, with two normal alleles at gene of interestxNN).
 2. Carrier (a dog with one normal allele, one disease-causing allele but without symptoms of the
disorder) (Na).
 3. Affected (a dog with two disease causing alleles, clinically affected or at risk of showing
clinical signs) (aa)
DNA test results have many applications. First is to detect affected dogs prior to the onset of
developing. Third is to diagnose affected dogs when they become clinically abnormal. Fourth is
affected dogs to be bred to clear mates, leaving these dogs in the gene pool so that their "good"
genetics can be perpetuated without compounding the "bad" genetics. In doing so, genetic diversity
Counseling the breeder
While DNA testing is useful, it cannot stand alone as a diagnostic tool. Merely finding that a dog
signs of neurologic disease, but there are other causes such as intervertebral disc disease that may
produce a similar clinical picture.
dogs who carry a genetic defect from the breeding pool is neither practical nor recommended. Our
purebred dogs have been described as "endangered species" by Dr. Anne Iraas. If we eliminate every
dog with a defect, we will have no purebred dogs left (or any dogs left as there is no dog. purebred
or mixed breed without a defect). Instead, we can apply these test results to breed phenotypically
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 29
recessive; sex-linked recessive; autosomal dominant; and polygenic
Including a dog with a simple autosomal recessive disease into a breeding program when a
genetic test is available
To produce an affected pup (aa), both parents of an affected puppy must be carriers of the abnormal
or simple recessive trait results when a matched pair of genes is present on any of the dog's 38
pairs of autosomes. An autosome is a non-sex chromosome.
Dogs that carry only one simple autosomal recessive gene (Na) may be used in a breeding program
if matched carefully with a genetically screened (NN) mate. Even an affected dog may be included if
bred to a genotypically normal dog.
First, a Punnett square should be drawn to illustrate the risks of the planned breeding to the owner.
Second, a diagram of a scientific pedigree of the dogs involved should be constructed, identifying
known carriers in the pedigree. There are computer programs and articles writfen on how to
  g  se       
identify both parents of affected offspring as carriers. (Standard Pedigree key: Males are identified
as squares, females as circles; affecteds are colored in; carriers have a small mark through the
square or circle; and clears are a clear square or circle). Identify which dogs the breeder would like to
incorporate as breeding stock. Start testing with the foundation dogs as this may reduce the number
tests are necessary. If affected and carrier dogs are found, testing of offspring is necessary.
Third, if indicated, test all potential sires and dams. If only normal/clear (NN) dogs are mated, no
affected dog will be produced. When an x-linked gene carried by an (unaffected) male is bred to a
clear female, all offspring from this mating must be tested to assess their carrier (male or female)
or affected (female) status. When an affected male is bred to a clear female, ALL offspring must be
carriers and need not be tested.
detect carrier (Na)/affected (aa) status prior to placing pups in homes.
If an affected dog (aa) is to be included as a breeding dog, the breeder should be counseled that
the dog must be outstanding in many other ways to merit this. This may include temperament,
performance, and physical traits but this should be in line with objective goals established for
affected dog willbe carriers (Na) and need not be tested (or affected (aa) if the gene is carried by
both parents - this is NOT advised). In future generations, the affected (aa) breeding stock can be
replaced with their offspring that are clear (NN) or carriers (Na) with cutstanding qualities. These
Used correctly, these DNA results will allow veterinarians and breeders to select potential breeders
with greater insight.
With all of these test findings available to the breeder, the breeder may look to the veterinarian for
input on how to interpret the data and how to put it to use in their breeding program. This is a great
challenge for us as veterinarians. There is no genetically perfect dog, whether purebred or hybrid;
clients is to assist them in making the best genetic choices they can.
30 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Option #1
2 NORMAL PARENTS (NN) → 100% NORMAL OFFSPRING
PARENTS
N
N
N
NN (normal)
NN (normal)
N
NN (normal)
NN (normal)
Option #2
1 normal (NN) and 1 affected (aa) parent = 100% carrier OFFSPRING but 0 affected pups
PARENTS
N
a
Na (carrier)
Na (carrier)
a
Na (carrier)
Na (carrier)
Option #3
Both carrier parents (Na) -> 25% normal and 50% carrier and 25% affected OFFSPRING
PARENTS
N
a
N
NN (normal)
Na (carrier)
a
Na (carrier)
aa (affected)
Option#4
1 carrier parents (Na) x 1 affected (aa) parent → 50% carrier and 50% affected OFFSPRING
(Not recommended)
PARENTS
N
a
a
Na (carrier)
aa (affected)
Na (carrier)
aa (affected)
Option #5
Both affected parents (aa) →> 100% affected OFFSPRING (Not recommended)
PARENTS
a
a
a
aa (affected)
aa (affected)
a
aa (affected)
aa (affected)
Use of this visual tool with help veterinarians and breeders alike make better decisions on who to
include and exclude, or who to combine genetically for breeding when breeding dogs with known
traits with known genetic tests when an autosomal recessive gene is believed to be involved.
Incorporating a dog with a simple autosomal recessive disease into a breeding program
when a genetic test is NOT available
Known carrier dogs should not be used for breeding. We can only counsel clients by using
advise the client using prcbabilities of inheritance.
Counseling for X-linked recessive diseases
Sex-linked genes can be either dominant or recessive and always appear on the X-chromosome,
making the female the carrier. By definition, males cannot be carriers (they have no X chromosome),
cnly affected or normal. In the male, as he has only one X chromosome, the single recessive gene
that is part of that chromosome expresses itself, expressing the trait that requires two genes to be
expressed in the female. The mothers of all affected males must be either a carrier or affected; they
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 31
their breed.
and Border Collies.
Counseling for autosomal dominant diseases
one parent must have the defective gene for the disorder to cause the trait to occur in the offspring
This type of disorder is easy to eliminate from the gene pool if the onset is early in life, as it is
 s  s a sa d a  ii  a e o su  n os
save money. If a DNA test is available, affected animals should be de-sexed and never included in the
gene pool. If a DNA test is unavailable, affected dogs should be de-sexed. If the onset is later in life
and there is no DNA test available, dogs with the potential of being affected should NOT be used for
are young and reserved for use until they are past the age of onset of the disorder to improve the
likelihood they areclearbeforebreeding.
If this type of disorder is found to be a new mutation in the germ line, the mutation may appear for
the first time in this generation with neither parent affected. It may be possible to have more than
one affected offspring in this generation.
Examples of these diseases are Severe Combined Immuno-deficency (SCID) in Pembroke and Cardigan
Welsh Corgis, Ehlers-Danlos Collagen deficiency, and dominant PRA in Mastiffs and Bull Mastiffs.
breed population is affected by an autosomal dominant disease. Elimination of all affected dogs will
allow a faster decrease in the number of affected puppies produced. However, the trade-off is a loss of
incidence of another genetic disease due to increased inbreeding coefficients. Ihe other is the loss of
in future generations.
The alternative to elimination of all affected breeding dogs is to continue to breed affected dogs. Even
if an affected dog is bred to an affected bitch, statistically only 50% of their offspring will be affected
The dilemma is how the breeder is to manage finding homes for affected puppies. The breeder would
Once a DNA test becomes available, testing can be applied to determine which dogs should be
maintained in the breeding pool.
to the total phenotype.
There are many diseases suspected to be inherited but either the inheritance pattern has not been
established or it is suspected this is inherited on multiple genes. These include hip dysplasia, many
forms of cancer, allergies, gastric dilatation and volvulus, and immune-mediated diseases
32 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
from OFA or PennHIP? and analyzing not only the results of the proposed breeding pair but also
including the information from the grandparents and siblings of the parents, it is possible to lower the
incidence of the disorder. It must be remembered to factor the other traits of the dogs to be mated
 into the decision and not to breed for one trait alone.
The future of DNA testing
Progress in DNA profiling has made testing for genetic disorders a rapidly evolving process.
Fortunately, internet research allows us to keep up with the advances. A search by dog breed allows
information to the veterinarians - what samples to collect, how to submit them, the fees, and how
and where to ship the samples.
to a company which provides this service. By banking DNA, clients can access the DNA of dogs
and bitches important to their breeding program later and evaluate these dogs as new DNA tests
become available in the future.
Soon, tests for polygenetic diseases and DNA profles including thousands of genes will become
available. Using DNA profiles and computer programs, we will not only be able to calculate the
probability of individual offspring inheriting desirable or undesirable traits, but we will also be able
to predict the effect of changing cne or several gene frequencies in a dog population over time. As
new mutations arise, they have the potential to be singled out and eliminated from the gene pool
efficiently. Until recently, many breeders were advised to "outcross" a dog with an unknown defect.
"Instead of controlling a trait when there are one or two dogs, or one or two families involved, we
cutcross the dogs and spread the trait throughout the breed." "This advice has messed up breeds of
cut, they inadvertently spread it throughout their breed, infiltrating many pedigrees with this new
for causing harm. Until we understand this power more thoroughly, we must take great care in how
we advise clients.
Line breeding
There are two broad categories of mating schemes: inbreeding and outbreeding (or cutcrossing). To
some degree, mating any two dogs of the same breed is inbreeding. Mating closely related animals
is classified as inbreeding - this includes breeding parent to offspring, or breeding full brother to
full sister. Here, the breeding coeffcient is 50%. Mating less closely related animals together is
outbreeding. There is disagreement on how distant a relationship between the two animals needs to
be to classify it as an outbreeding. Line breeding is the term used when individuals to be bred have
one or more common ancestors on one or both sides (sire or dam's side) of the pedigree in the last
Line-breeding is a technique used in many species by breeders. Although not a new technique, it
dogs homozygous for a hopefully desired similar characteristic. The desired cutcome is to produce
several generations. The advantage of line breeding, especially of having the same dog on both the
sire and dams side of the pedigree, is that genes can then pair up and produce a more uniform litter
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 33
offspring when breeding siblings to one another or breeding a female back to her father's father. If
the breeding co-efficient becomes too high, the breeder may then look to a less closely related dog
and breed to produce an "outcrossed" litter
The disadvantage of line breeding is, at times, it can uncover or magnify traits that were not
foreseen. Inbreeding does not cause a mutation that results in an inherited disease, but once such
a mutation has occurred, inbreeding will increase the frequency of the mutant version of the gene in
the breed more quickly than other more random breeding programs. Until all genetic diseases have
and safely line breed a litter, the breeder must be very familiar with individuals in the preceding five
generations. Therefore line breeding is not recommended for the breeder who is not experienced or
the weak-at-heart breeder. Should a line breeding lead to an unexpected and unfortunate outcome,
difficult decisions may need to be made pertaining to the future of the offspring produced.
Line breeding may be necessary to perpetuate a breed with a very small gene pool. AKC records
consecutive years (1997 to 2002).
Most experienced breeders will use some degree of line-breeding to produce consistent appearing
or consistent performing dogs.
"Founders effect" or "Matador"
o god au a uo paa aeuoodsi e ay uo ay Aanba os pasn si op ps e 'sa n
but that he can concentrate undesirable traits in the breed. lo minimize this possibility, some people
have suggested a stud dog should not sire more pups in his lifetime than a bitch could produce.
the offspring he produces. If a stud dog has been used heavily and has produced few pups with
undesirable traits, this dog is likely to be more
valuable to include in a breeding program than
a unknown or unused stud dog with no track
record of what they produce.
The breeding program
A great challenge, but great tool, in selecting
dogs to be used in a breeding program is to
follow the pups produced for their lifetime.
Encourage your breeder clients to do the
following:
have bred have reunions. At these events, have
someone (not the breeder) videotape the dogs
in attendance.With this method, the breeder can
speak to the owners of the pups to learn of health
histories, temperaments, and accomplishments.
and later view video showing their conformation
Figure 2-6.
At a puppy party, the breeder has an opportunity to assess
movement, and behavior (Figure 2-6).
offspring for breed type, soundness, temperament, and
overall what their breeding program is producing.
34 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
On a weekly to yearly basis, suggest the breeder write, e mail or call owners of their pups just to stay
in touch. Christmas cards with photos from puppies sold to families can be an invaluable source of
information to the breeder.
Arrange to have the offspring's hips (and other joints as indicated) radiographed and have eyes
examined, as well as have other screening tests done as dictated by the prevalence of disorders
xd asn ui ali sdnd aun ji dna e se a op oi ape a re saau aa a u
to the breeder, when a group discount may be negotiated. OFA offers a significantly reduced fee
to read films when they are submitted (not taken) together. This will provide valuable data to the
these tests or examinations completed. This is usually a fee included in the purchase price of the
dog, and terms of the reimbursement and testing required are written into the contract at the time of
purchase. lt is not enough to know the results of the tests from only the dogs kept by the breeder
assessment of the breeding program.
The perfect dog
Should you use this dog or bitch in your breeding program?
There is no perfect dog! All dogs in breeding programs carry one or more undesirable traits.
Yet, to prevent extinction of the breeds we know today, some of these dogs need to be included as
breeding stock.
lt is critical to recall that dog and cat breeds are closed populations with no new genetics available
However, selection based upon only one trait willimit genetic diversity and ultimately will be
detrimental to a breeding program. Therefore, harsh elimination of individuals from a breeding pool
must be avoided and should not be recommended without discussion of the pros and cons. Instead,
with careful selection, carriers can be bred to other carriers or clears, the offspring tested and
breeding stock can be replaced with clears.
Summary for counseling clients in genetic selection
e saldsexg aposip algeno no p e uo ae an ssaun sop paioae paag ou oa 
umbilical hernias and disticihia.
 2. Screen all breeding stock for as many disorders as is feasible, based on the tests available
and the associated costs.
3. Breed clear to clear whenever possible.
4. Breed clear to carrier when there is a 30% or less incidence of disorder or if this is otherwise
a very desirable dog.
 5. Test all offspring, not just breeding stock.
 6. Select clear in next generation.
7. Do not select only against one disease as this ignores other diseases and willimit the gene pool.
There are many highly qualified breeders who are skilled at evaluating pedigrees and genetic testing.
genetic diversity of the canine populaticn. Used well, we have great potential to improve the health
decisions.Understanding the basics of genetic selection is an invaluable service we can provide to
breeder-clients.
Chapter 2: Genetic Selection and Screening 35
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER3
Preparing to Breed
Preparing to breed
Planning the breeding
To successfuly orchestrate a breeding, the breeder and the veterinarian must achieve a delicate
balance of advance planning for months to years in advance of the breeding and yet retain the ability
breeder and their veterinary staff needs to pay great attention to detail and communicate well.
Most commonly, the breeding is planned by the bitch owner. The bitch owner will approach the stud
or her colleagues. She or he has pored over breed magazines, visited websites, and scrutinized
pedigrees. The breeder has watched the pups produced by the potential stud dog. They have
researched and evaluated the health clearances of the stud dog, his get, and other relatives
The veterinarian's and their staff 's role in planning
Clients will find that using a veterinarian who is experienced in handling breedings or one who is
in making a breeding successful.
It is helpful to train your clients to alert you to their potential needs for your reproductive services
so they will notify you and your staff well in advance. This allows staffing arrangements to be made
Very few emergency and referral veterinary hospitals (unless they have a theriogenologist on staff)
are in a position fo assist with weekend breedings.
evening, weekend and holiday calls. This will endear you to your clients, but there is a trade-off in
personal time. Therefore, you should charge a fair, but increased fee for after-hours reproductive
services. It is appropriate to charge an additional fee for services offered outside of regular hours.
Ihis will probably remind clients not to wait till evening hours to call if they are unsuccessful in
achieving a natural breeding and need an emergency artifcial insemination. Most clients would prefer
to pay a slightly higher fee for weekend services than to miss a breeding opportunity that cnly rolls
around twice a year.
and services you will need to purchase or arrange for in advance:
1. Artifcial insemination sleeves, pipettes, and semen extender.
2. Boxes and media for fresh chilled semen shipments.
3. A laboratory with rapid turn-around times for progesterone testing.
Unopette) or sperm counter.
 5. Brucellosis test kit or reference laboratory support.
 6. Veterinary assistant to aid in blood and semen collection and inseminations.
The breeder's role in planning
Well in advance, often years, the breeder has been evaluating the line or individual dog that will best
suit the line or individual bitch to be bred. If the breeder owns or co-owns the stud dog, the process
may be much less complicated. Of course, if they own the stud dog, there is no need to ask consent
be available (not living elsewhere or at a show/event when he is needed), in good health, and be
reproductively sound.
38 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
If the stud dog is owned by another breeder, the bitch owner must be in contact with the owner,
preferably in advance of her estrous cycle, to alert them that the bitch is going to be ready to breed
soon. Of course, they first must agree to allow the stud dog to be used for this bitch. All necessary
stud must be available, in good health, and still reproductively sound. If he is not available, frozen
semen is a great option.
The stud dog owner should be available to receive the bitch for breeding if she will be traveling to
the stud dog. If the stud dog is to travel to the bitch, these arrangements must also be planned.
In some cases, both the stud dog and bitch will travel to a mutually agreed-upon location for the
breeding. Veterinary assistance should be arranged for in advance if intervention is anticipated.
If frozen semen is to be used, paperwork for this must be signed by the stud dog owner and
shipping arrangements made. If semen is to be collected and shipped as fresh chilled semen,
staff that will be collecting and shipping the semen should be alerted in advance to allow for
stafhing arrangements. lf a holiday or weekend shipping and/or breeding are anticipated, these
arrangements must be planned.
In most cases, progesterone results will require a 24 hour turn-around time. Arrangements for
receiving and communicating results should be made so there is no delay in arranging travel of the
dogs or shipment of the semen. Invariably, some of this must take place over weekends. Exchanging
cell phone numbers and e mail addresses with the veterinary staff, stud dog owner and bitch owner
will expedite communication.
All three parties involved, the veterinary staff, the stud dog owner, and the bitch owner need to pay
routine veterinary hours. As little as a 1 day delay in receiving progesterone results or a semen
shipment can jeopardize years of careful planning.
In spite of careful advance planning, bitches ovulate when they find it convenient, lab results get
delayed, and shipments get lost. Sometimes stud dogs fail to "perform" as expected. with all the
players and variables involved in a breeding, there are times that carefully made plans need to be
altered and last minute arrangements made. Breeders and veterinarians alike must be prepared to
as rescheduling an appointment to another day if the bitch is slow to ovulate. But changes may be
Stud dog selection
Ordinarily, stud dog owners will have completed most or all health clearances prior to
veterinarian. This should include palpation of the prostate and testes, evaluation of the penis
and external genitalia, and include an ejaculation with sperm count, morphology and motility.
He should also be evaluated for his physical ability to mount a bitch if a natural breeding is
12 and the litter willbe registered with AKC, the examining veterinarian must issue a letter
stating he is capable of siring the litter. He should have a health history taken. Any medications
such as steroids (oral or topical) that could interfere with his sperm production should be
discontinued if medically appropriate.
of dogs within a breed has a different set of potential inherited disorders. The attending
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed 39
Proper genetic screening for selection of breeding stock can minimize inherited congenital
defects. See Chapter 2 for a detailed description of screening tests
Hips and Other joints: Regardless of size or breed of the dog, there are a variety of joint
a malformation of the ball and socket of the hip joint, found primarily in large breed dogs,
of individuals may be affected. Either OFA hip screening or PennHIip? evaluation should be
done prior to breeding. Results are usually not available for up to 4 weeks, so this should be
scheduled well in advance of the time semen is needed. Shoulders, elbows, and stifles are
Other Genetic Testing: Some breeds may be candidates for other health screens. These
include testing for thyroid disease, von Willebrand's disease (a bleeding disorder), heart
Temperament: We feel it is important to advise breeders to only include dogs in breeding
programs that are happy, contdent, well-suited to their function, and cbedient, as research
indicates temperament is a highly inherited trait. Suggest that the breeders be honest with
themselves. Ask them "is this the type of dog YOU like to live with"? "ls the temperament
suitable for a dog to be placed in a "pet" household?
The BlG Picture: No stud dog is perfect. Assist the client in determining selection of the
inherited health problems may be life-threatening, difficult to live with, or expensive to control
or correct. The puppies produced will be the responsibility of the bitch owner, not the stud dog
owner and the breeder should be counseled on this prior to the "production" of a litter.
 3. Have a current negative Brucella test report. Brucellosis is a bacterial disease which is
most frequently transmitted between dogs by sexual contact. There are still active cases of
Brucella canis in many parts of the United States. This disease has not been eradicated. It is
easily screened for on a blood test. Both the male and female dog should be tested prior to
EVERY breeding. Brucellosis not only can cause health problems for the adult dogs, but it can
canine disease is transmissible to humans. In most cases of Brucellosis, euthanasia of all
affected dogs is still recommended. Our responsibility to our clients is to educate and inform
them that this infection would devastate their breeding programs and could pose a threat to
human health (See chapter 9).
4. Vaginal cultures are not indicated for routine breedings of healthy bitches with normal vaginal
cytology and no history of infertility. It is normal for all bitches to have bacteria in the vagina
A study done by Patricia Olson published in 1978 showed the following microorganisms were
commonly isolated from the caudal vagina of adult bitches: staphylococci spp., streptococci
spp., E. coli, Pasteurella, Proteus, and Mycoplasma spp.
bitch and serve as a barrier to pathogenic bacterial infections. Routinely administering
antibiotics to bitches prior to breeding has been proposed to be harmful, as eliminating normal
flora may allow pathogenic bacteria to establish themselves and may allow infections that
cannot be treated successfully with antibiotics.
Aso to be discussed with the owner of the bitch, if a vaginal culture is mandated by the stud
dog owner, is that the stud dog's prepuce is not a sterile environment; normal flora resides
there too. There are only rare reports suggesting venereal transmission of bacteria, other than
Brucella canis, that caused disease in the dog or bitch.
response. One is to also require culture of the prepuce of the stud dog prior to breeding
40 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The other is to proceed with the culture and include the results of the vaginal cytology in the
culture report, with the interpretation that "a culture of normal bacteria without evidence on
cytology of infection or inflammation is a normal finding and does not merit treatment of the
bitch with antibiotics prior to breeding"
Should the bitch have a history of infertility, it may be appropriate to do a guarded cranial
vaginal culture in early proestrus. If one bacteria cultured is found to predominate over normal
time to breed the bitch on this cycle. Culture only during proestrus. Cultures collected during
proestrus allows the culture collected from the vagina to include bacteria from the uterus
s  s   e  g    s  s 
or TCl approach.
Anytime the owner is concerned about transmission of any disease or injury to the bitch or
stud dog, artificial insemination (vaginal Al) is a reasonable alternative. This will protect only
the stud dog, not the bitch, from bacterial disease transmission, but may be sufficient to
satisfy a stud dog owner that is adamant about having a "negative" vaginal culture prior to use
for natural breeding.
 5. Issue a contract to the bitch owner - A complete legal discussion of contracts is beyond the
scope of the veterinary relationship and this book. However, a few words of advice can be useful
for a novice breeder and help assure that you receive payment for your veterinary services. It
of the breeding, especially if they are friends! For example, stud fees, which client pays the
veterinary fees, and the number of pups guaranteed, are a sampling of topics that need to be
defined prior to breeding to avoid any misunderstandings. A contract with the stud dog owner
usually will include health clearances the bitch must have completed prior to allowing her to be
bred to the chosen stud dog.
6. Arrange for a veterinary appointment or for frozen semen to be released.
 7. DNA will need to be on file or collected if the stud dog is a frequently used sire or if fresh
chilled or frozen semen is to be used.
Preparing the bitch for breeding
 Ordinarily, the bitch owner has completed all of her health clearances prior to the start of her estrus
cycle.
The role of the bitch owner in most cases consists of:
Several weeks to months prior to the bitch's heat cycle during which the breeder intends to
breed her, the bitch should be examined by her veterinarian. She should be in good general
health, current on core vaccines, have good parasite control, and be free from orthopedic
problems. Her dental health should be addressed by dental procedures as indicated. Particular
attention should be paid to her external genitalia. Mammary glands should be palpated and
counted. Mammary tumors, if found, should be removed without removal of the associated
nipple if possible. Bitches can still lactate and raise a normal litter if most of their mammary
tissue can be retained. If she appears to have a vulva that is small or tips forward, artificial
insemination should be discussed. A vaginal digital examination should be attempted at this
time. However, anestrous bitches tend to be uncooperative about a thorough evaluation and
it can be difhcult to fully assess them for strictures or septa at this time. A more complete
vaginal examination can be done digitally or with a scope during proestrus. She should not be
overweight and should be on a moderate exercise program.
 2. Complete any health clearances not current or completed to date. Each breed and family
of dogs within a breed has a different set of potential inherited disorders. The attending
veterinarian andbreedershould identifywhichgeneticdisordersshouldbescreenedfor
defects (See Chapter 2)
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed 41
taken near the onset of estrus as some females show laxity of the hips around the time of
estrus and whelping. It is not recommended to take radiographs of pregnant females during
Regardless of size or breed of the dog, there are a variety of joint problems found in most
breeds. Hip dysplasia is probably the best known problem. This is a malformation of the ball
and socket of the hip joint, found primarily in large breed dogs, which leads to premature
development of arthritis in the hips. In many breeds, 30% and up of individuals may be
affected. Either OFA hip screening or PennHIPe evaluation should be done prior to breeding.
Results are usually not available for up to 4 weeks, so this should be scheduled well in
advance of the time semen is anticipated to be needed. Shoulders, elbows, and stifles are
Other genetic testing: Some breeds may be candidates for other health screens. These
include testing for thyroid disease, von Willebrand's disease (a bleeding disorder), heart
disease, deatness, eye disorders and so on. lesting for thyroid disease and von Willebrand's
disease should not be done during estrus as these test results may be altered during this
time. In addition, dogs exhibiting or carrying genes for certain health problems felt to be
(seeChapter 2).
that are happy, confident, well-suited to their function, and cbedient as new research indicates
Ask them "is this the type of dog YOU like to live with"? "ls the temperament suitable for a dog
to be placed in a "pet" household?
The BlG picture: No bitch or stud dog is perfect. Assist the client in determining selection
of the genetics they want to include in their breeding program. Guide them in assessing if the
potential inherited health problems may be life-threatening, diffcult to live with, or expensive to
a e jo uonpod, au oi lod syn uo paasunoo ag pnous apaag aui pue saumo sop pns
report. Brucellosis is a bacterial disease which is most frequently transmitted between dogs by
sexual contact. There are still active cases of Brucella canis in many parts of the United States.
This disease has not been eradicated. It is easily screened for on a blood test. Both the male
and female dog should be tested prior to EVERY breeding. Brucellosis not only causes health
 problems for the adult dog, but it can also cause sterility, abortion and early puppy death.
Of highest concern is that this incurable canine disease is transmissible to humans. In most
cases of Brucellosis, euthanasia of all affected dogs is still recommended. Our responsibility
to our clients is to educate and inform them that this infection would devastate their breeding
programs and pose a potential threat to human heath.
4. Health care: All necessary upcoming (within the next 4 months) core vaccines should be
given prior to the start of her estrous cycle. No vaccinations should be administered near
the time of the breeding. She should have a negative fecal analysis or be treated if positive.
Good parasite control measures (both individual and environmental) should be discussed.
Most heartworm preventives and topical/oral flea control products currently on the market are
labeled as safe during lactation and pregnancy. Permethrin containing products should not be
 o o  n a s o n a e o ad a n pn
the pups. However, the label on all products should be evaluated pricr to prescribing.
5. Locate a stud dog or contact the owner of the dog you plan to use, and arrange the
breeding or semen shipment: locating an eligible stud dog with all desired health clearances,
Brucella testing, current semen evaluation, and is available when needed for breeding, is
the full responsibility of the owner of the bitch. If fresh chilled semen is to be used, the bitch
42Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
owner will need to arrange for the availability of the stud dog, make shipping arrangements
appointments to time the bitch, and arrange for the inseminating veterinary clinic to be
available and capable of managing the fresh chilled semen shipment and breeding.
If frozen semen is to be used, the bitch owner will need to be certain the semen release
forms have been signed by the stud dog owner, the semen shipment has been arranged,
the receiving veterinary clinic is aware of the semen shipment, the receiving veterinary clinic
is available and capable of handling the frozen semen. Additionally the semen shipping tank
needs to be returned in a timely manner to the shipping veterinary clinic, appointments made
to time the breeding of the bitch, and ensure that the inseminating clinic is available and
capable of managing the frozen semen breeding.
The owner of the bitch is also responsible for completing AKC or other registry forms and
arranging for signatures of the stud dog owner(s) and veterinarian to be included.
6. Sign a contract with the stud dog owner. A complete legal discussion of contracts is beyond
the scope of the veterinary relationship and this book. However, a few words of advice can
services. lt is recommended that the stud and bitch owners have a written agreement defining
the details of the breeding, especially if they are friends! For example, stud fees, which client
pays the veterinary fees, the number of pups guaranteed, and the health clearances the bitch
must have completed prior to considering her for breeding are a sampling of topics that need
to be defined prior to breeding to avoid any misunderstandings.
7. Arrange veterinary appointments for timing the breeding and breeding assistance. Many
bitch have a history of reproductive problems, or if the breeding will be done with shipped or
insemination services will be necessary.
ae aan nng algissod se aae-anp se aq pinus ueuad aouead unp suoneopa d
a few exceptions.
In a life-threatening situation, medications may be indicated. The risks versus the benefits
must be determined on an individual basis. There are a few notable exceptions in the use of
medications and vaccines. Panacur? to control parasite migration in the bitch and minimize the
is used during pregnancy to be effective (See chapter 9).
All medications should be handled on a case by case basis. Resources such as Plumb's
Veterinary Drug Handbook, The Harriet Lane Handbook (a human book published by Johns
Hopkins Hospital), VIN.com, the internet, and package inserts from the pharmaceutical
companies are available. In general, if the package insert doesn't say you cannot use a
manufacturer's technical services department. Even over-the-counter and topical medications
can affect fetal development and well-being and should be researched before use.
Although most heartworm preventives and some topical/oral flea control products currently
on the market are labeled as safe during pregnancy and lactation, all labels should be evaluated
prior to prescribing. As the first trimester in the bitch is 3 weeks long (this is the stage of fetall
cell differentiation - the period where a teratogenic drug would generally have most of its
effects) and heartworm and flea control products only need to be administered every 4 weeks,
with a little manipulation, even these medications do not need to be administered during this
NOT be used during pregnancy and praziquantel (Drontal?, IverhartMax?) is labeled as unknown.
If the bitch develops a life-threatening condition and medications are necessary that
proceeding. In most cases, the owner will elect to treat the bitch and gamble on the pups.
In particular, preparations containing corticosteroids should be avoided. This includes
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed 43
injectable and oral steroids as well as topical medications such as ear and eye medications. In
some individuals, sufficient amounts of topical medications including steroids can be absorbed
through the skin, eye, or ear to lead to teratogenic effects or abortion. Hydrocortisone is the
Other products to be avoided, unless the bitch's life is at risk are (See also Table 9-1):
Anesthetic agents of all kinds;
Antibiotics: metronidazole, aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, tetracycline and doxycycline;
Anti-convuisants: primidone and diazepam;
Antifungais: griseofulvin and ketoconazole;
Ant-inflammatory agents: aspirin, DMSO, corticosteroids
Anti-neoplastic agents of all kinds;
Anti-parasiticides: Imidacloprid (Advantage?)
Hormones: mibolerone and other testosterones, progestins such as megestrol acetate
prostaglandins such as Lutalyse? and Estrumate@ (cloprostenol), progesterones, estrogens
    '   s  s  e a s 
9. Nutrition and dietary supplements: The bitch should not be overweight and should be on a
diet prior to breeding. Research has shown that it requires a minimum of 8 months for a
on back-to-back heat cycles (See Chapter 9), a performance diet can be fed continuously.
Calcium in particular should NOT be supplemented during pregnancy as it will produce
negative feedback to the parathyroid glands and limit calcium mobilization during lactation
producing mid-line defects.
There are conflicting reports on the use of products containing raspberry tea leaves. These
products are marketed to increase fertility and ease labor and delivery. However, there
are anecdotal reports suggesting some of these products can cause premature labor and
abortion. When in doubt, it is better to avoid the use of products without FDA approval for use
in the pregnant bitch.
Homemade and raw meat diets are a particular challenge. The concerns are multiple. First
is the increased risk of food-born bacterial and parasitic diseases that can affect not only the
bitch but also the fetuses. Second is the concern that the diet may be unbalanced - excesses of
some nutrients and deficiencies of others; deficiency of Vitamin D is of particular concern. There
are anecdotal reports of increased rate of dystocias associated with non-commercial diets
Zoonotic diseases pose a risk to humans handling the food and dogs. Many clients who are
devoted to these diets cannot be swayed to feed commercially prepared diets. If however, your
client is open to discussing diets, a high quality commercially-prepared pregnancy, performance
or puppy diet should be recommended.
Dietary modifications can be made mid-pregnancy at the time an ultrasound confrmation of
pregnancy is made.
P      s   s     s  
so this is seldom severe enough to require veterinary intervention. At this time, the owner
can feed canned dog food or add yogurt, cooked meat or eggs to the diet until her appetite
returns. Unless the appetite loss is long-standing or she vomits to the extent that she may
dehydrate or suffer from nutritional insuffciency, no intervention is necessary.
44 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
10. Exercise: For bitches bred naturally, or by vaginal or transcervical inseminations, during the
first 5 weeks after breeding, no significant changes need to be made in their activity level. The
primary limitation should be to keep them from overheating. Sometimes even light work in the
 i s  s o g       o 
beavolded.
During the last 3 to 4 weeks of pregnancy, exercise should be more restricted as the uterus
is heavy, most bitches willbe mildly anemic, her lung capacity diminished and the blood
supply is diverted to the uterus. Swimming should be avoided close to term to reduce the
chance of introducing organisms into the reproductive tract. Avoid activity that may cause
overheating or potential abdominal trauma.
u pous pue do-isod sep g oi e iog psa pnous aus 'pang Aeoians uaag sey yog aue t
swim for 14 days post-op.
12. Pregnancy diagnosis: Even prior to the breeding, the owner of the bitch should be advised
performed when needed.
for this to be performed is approximately 4 weeks after ovulation. This can vary with the
ultrasound equipment and veterinarian performing the diagnostics and should be scheduled
according to each veterinarian's preferences. Ultrasound can be performed from the 4th week
of pregnancy until the date of delivery.
Radiographs prior to whelping: This is the single most accurate way to assess litter size and
predict dystocias. These should be performed 55 to 59 days after ovulation.
13. Veterinary care at the time of whelping. Although it sounds like there is plenty of time to
arrange this between the time of the breeding and the whelping, the breeder is well-advised to
make arrangements for possible or necessary veterinary intervention prior to the breeding.
14. Veterinary care in the immediate post-partum period. Many whelpings and neonatal care
require little veterinary intervention. However, the veterinarian and the client may wish to
arrange for a contingency plan well in advance of the time of the whelping.
15. Veterinary care of the litter prior to sale. Pups should have individual physical
examinations with complete written reports of findings, vaccinations, and parasite control prior
to their placement in new homes. This appointment can take an hour or more and it may be
helpful to the veterinary staff and client to schedule this appointment well in advance.
If pups are being sold out of state or cut of the country, government issued health
certificates may be required. If the pup will be transported by air cargo, a letter of acclimation
should be provided.
Timing the bitch for breeding
Bitches usually reach puberty between 6 and 9 months of age, but this may occur as early as 4
months in small breeds and as late as 24 months in giant breeds. It is often recommended that a
female not be bred until her second or third heat cycle, and older than 2 years if OFA certification is
expected. Waiting until the bitch has had several heat cycles assures she has reached her full size
and maturity prior to breeding. Most dogs have two heats or estrous cycles a year, approximately 6
months apart, usually in spring and fall.
The estrous cycle can be divided into 4 parts. The first, called proestrus, is the part where the vulva
neither fertile nor will she accept the male during this time. However, males, especially those without
experience, are frequently attracted to the bitch at this time. The second part, called estrus, lasts
5 to / days. During this stage, there is usually a straw colored discharge (sometimes with blood).
Ovulation occurs at this time, the bitch is fertile and will usually accept the male for breeding. The
third and fourth parts are called metestrus and diestrus respectively. During this time, the bitch is
not fertile and is not interested in the male
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed 45
and 14 after the cnset of vaginal bleeding. At this time, the vaginal discharge is straw colored and
the vulva lips are softer. Two or possibly 3 natural breedings are ideal and adequate for a good
conception rate.
When is it necessary to time the breeding?
It is often important to evaluate the bitch in order to estimate the ideal time for breeding. This is
necessary if the dog or bitch will be traveling a long distance for breeding, if fresh chilled or frozen
semen is to be used, or in dogs that have a history of being difficult to breed. Accurate timing of
ovulation is essential when a C-section is planned. Testing at the time of ovulation can increase
conception rates and save time, money and pupples at the end of the pregnancy.
Vaginal cytology
A vaginal cytology is an evaluation commonly done. For many years, this was our only practical tool
with which to time breedings.
To do this procedure;
1. A 6 inch clean cotton swab (this does not need to be sterile) moistened with saline is gently
placed dorsally well up into the vagina while the bitch is being restrained,
2. the cells are carefully rolled onto a microscope slide,
3. the slide is stained with a Dif-Quik@ type stain, and
4. the slide is examined microscopically for cell types in the vaginal fluid.
The cells seen at the ideal time for breeding are a high percentage of cornihed epithelial cells
with few red blood cells (RBC's), white blood cells (WBC's) or debris. The vaginal smear may als0
indicate the presence of other problems such as vaginitis. The test is simple, safe, inexpensive, well
folerated by the bitch approaching estrus, and very helpful in timing breedings.
Examination of a single smear canprovide useful information, but can also be misleading. For
example, it is often difficult to differentiate proestrus and diestrus from an isolated smear. It is most
useful to evaluate multiple smears taken of the same bitch. These slides can be labeled with the date
collected and stored for evaluation sequentially as she moves through her estrus cycle to monitor
trends in cellular cornitication.
Proestrus
The bitch develops swelling of the vulva with variable blood-tinged vaginal discharge. Males may
become interested, but she is usually not receptive to mounting at this time.
As serum concentrations of estrogen rise during prcestrus, red blood cells leak through uterine
a change of epithelial cells from round faintly staining epithelial cells to intermediate and parabasal
cells which stain more intensely and are more angular on the edges. Iypically, red blood cells
bacteria are also often present.
Estrus
The period of behavioral estrus is variable; it may last several days before and after cytologic estrus
or it may never occur. Typically, the bitch will have a softer vulva with a straw colored discharge, and
she will probably flag (hold her tail to one side, if she has one) and stand solidly when pressure is
applied over her rump.
As estrogen levels begin to drop and progesterone levels begin to rise above 2 ng/dl, the vaginal
46 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
without an identifiable nucleus. Some bitches will undergo full cornification,that is 1o0% of the cells
red blood cells on the cytology throughout estrus. Ihis is one reason vaginal cytology is not specific
enough to be used exclusively for challenging cases. The other reason vaginal cytology alone is
insufhcient for timing breedings is that the cytology will remain cornihed for up to / days, but the
        si    s    o s   s
blood cells should be seen.
few hours of an alleged breeding is a fairly reliable means of confrming such an incident. However,
not identifying sperm on a vaginal cytology cannot be used to assure a breeding did not take place.
As estrus progresses, progesterone levels rise from a baseline of to <2 ng/dl to 5 ng/dl at ovulation
and continue to rise.
Metestrus 
The onset of metestrus is marked by a rapid decline in the number of superficial angular cells
and reappearance of rounder nucleated intermediate and parabasal cells. White blood cells may
commonly, the cellular profle changes within a single day from essentially 100% superficial cells to
less than 20% superfcial cells. However, it is best to confirm the onset of metestrus by examining
a smear prepared on metestrus day 2. Identifying the onset of metestrus is a considerably more
accurate predictor of the time of ovulation than the onset of cornifcation, and hence gestation
length. Dogs ovulate 5 to 7 days before the onset of metestrus so gestation length is calculated to
usually 20 ng/dl or higher.
However, this change is not helpful in determining the ideal time to breed because it only provides
Diestrus or Metestrus IIl
are noncornifed with some white blood cells, bacteria and debris, similar to those seen in anestrus
60 days.
Anestrus
The bitch should not be attractive to male dogs and typically is not receptive to his advances.
Non-cornified cells are the predominant cell type present. Other cell types are present in small
anestrus should be less than l ng/dl.
Progesterone testing
test is reported as a numeric result, usually in ng/dl. Combined with cbserving the behavior of the
dog and the bitch, vaginal cytology, LH testing and vaginoscopy, ovulation can be pinpointed with
great accuracy in most bitches (Figure 3-1).
reference labs. The results are very accurate and easily interpreted.
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed 47
Vaginal
Cornification
laturatio
Fertile
Period
G
Proestrus 9 days
Estrus 9 days
Diestrus
Days Relative to Day 1 of Estrus
Figure 3-1.
Progesterone Graph, courtesy of Dr. Bruce Eilts
An exact progesterone level is also needed when the dog or bitch will be traveling a long distance for
breeding, when fresh chilled or frozen semen is to be used, or when breeding dogs or bitches that
have a history of being difficult to breed. In addition, an exact progesterone level for timing ovulation
     i      s     
needs to be assessed.
in timing bitches for breeding is essential.
They include:
1. Availability of semen, particularly frozen semen, is often very limited.
2. Frozen semen has a short life-expectancy once thawed - probably 12 to 24 hours or less.
 3. If a breeding is unsuccessful, the stud dog and bitch will be at least 6 months older by the
next opportunity to breed. Both the bitch and stud dog's fertility diminishes every year
4. Bitches normally cycle twice a year, not as frequently as other domestic species such as cats.
 5. Bitches often have only 4 to 8 available fertile cycles in their reproductive lifetime.
 6. Every breeding and pregnancy carries with it some risk to the bitch so we need to make every
7. Breedings can be expensive when calculating shipping dogs or semen, paying stud fees,
paying for inseminations and veterinary consultations.
8. Veterinarians and breeders prefer to be successful in their breeding attempts.
quantitative progesterone testing throughout the United States and other countries. (See appendix
A-4} Many of these commercial labs have courier services. If this service is not available, the
    a p e  a  e       
enough volume of progesterone samples that they have purchased equipment (lmmulite, Tosoh, or
Mini-Vidas) to run quantitative progesterone samples in their veterinary clinics. In these veterinary
hospitals, results are typically available within a few hours. This service is valuable when courier
48 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The sample should be placed in a plain red top non-barrier tube (not an SST tube), spun down within
30 minutes of clotting, and the serum transferred into a labeled transport tube. The serum should
be refrigerated and kept chilled until it is received by the lab. If the sample is not going to be run
immediately, the sample can be kept stable by freezing. Progesterone appears to be stable during
shipping. (Personal conversation with Dr. Fran Moore at Marshfield Veterinary Laboratory)
A semi-quantitative test to estimate progesterone levels can be done in many veterinary offices.
These commercially available test kits are run on serum in wells or on membranes. Unlike the
quantitative results from reference labs, they are read as a color change, not as a number. They are
useful for estimating breeding and whelping, but are not specifc enough to use for frozen semen
breedings and more challenging cases (Figure 3-2).
WITNESS?
LETA7/28+
Figure 3-2.
LH test showing a line in the “positive" position
specifically pinpoint the time of ovulation. Unlike progesterone which can be run as a human sample,
this is a canine-specific test and can only be run on the commercially available canine LH kit. In the
dog, LH is the hormone that causes ovulation. However, this peak is very short-lived. Because of
  a a a    a  e   p s  e 's
this is the most specific way to determine the date of ovulation, for many dogs and many clients
testing is frozen, and when ovulation is detected based on progesterone rise, the serum from 48
done 5 to 6 days AFTER the LH surge, if the progesterone level is also high enough (over 20 ng/ml).
If the first LH test does not pinpoint ovulation, the samples drawn at 24 and 72 hours prior to the
 progesterone rise are run one at a time in an effort to determine the ideal time to breed.
Progesterone interpretation
(See figure 3-1)
part of canine reproduction. Many breeders and many veterinarians do not understand the cycle
well until they see it graphed. Once you understand that progesterone rises slowly and stays high
throughout the cycle, it all becomes clear. The letter in Appendix C-9 can be used to communicate to
At the start of the estrous cycle, prcestrus, the estrogen levels are rising. The hormone of interest,
progesterone, of the bitch is at a very low level, less than 2 ng/ml. This is often referred to as
baseline." During proestrus in a normal bitch that has started estrus spontaneously (without drug
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed 49
For bitches who have had their cycles initiated with drugs or hormones (see Chapter 8) or those with
a history of infertility, it is recommended to start progesterone testing on day 3 of the cycle. The
common to see the level rise and fall in the range of 0.4 ng/ml and 3.0 ng/ml. IThis does not indicate
that you have missed her progesterone rise. (Once the progesterone reaches 5, it will continue to rise
into double digits so don't worry yet.
As the bitch enters estrus, she approaches her fertile period and her progesterone level will rise above
2 ng/ml. She will become increasingly attractive to the male and receptive to his advances. This slight
estrus, not for the entire time they are in estrus.
As the progesterone rises above 2 ng/ml, continue to draw serial serum samples for testing, usually
every 1 to 3 days.
s an q  se tu g sn l asad a   oi n si 
most important concept regarding breeding in this book. Ihe bitch's ovary responds to LH from
the pituitary, which allows the release of one egg from each of many multiple mature follicles.
But stop: it is too early to breed if you are using fresh chiled or frozen semen. When the bitch
over next 48 hours before they are ready to fertilize. The timing of the breeding must occur when
     s s       a  sa  
long the semen is anticipated to survive in the reproductive tract (Figure 3-3).
mature yet, most fresh semen is viable enough to survive in the bitch's reproductive tract until the
eggs are ready.
Breeding with fresh chilled semen should be delayed until approximately 48 hours after ovulation
Fresh chilled semen usually will not survive as long in the reproductive tract as fresh semen. If the
should be fertile when the semen appears in the oviduct
occurs when the progesterone is at 5 ng/ml). It is thought most frozen semen will only live 12 to 24
2
Figure 3-3
Timing is everything - 10 pups from one well timed vaginal insemination
50 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
 into the uterus, usually by surgical insemination but in some cases by transcervical insemination.
Once the progesterone level is 5 ng/dl we are still not done testing. Although it is believed that
 ansse ol u n jo jaaal auaisaod e si agunu pun agnu ao uo uo aa no da
the final or the surgical insemination until the progesterone level has reached or exceeded 20 ng/ml
After ovulation and breeding are completed, the progesterone level will continue to rise. The level
typically rises to 40 to 50 ng/ml (the normal range can be 10 to 90) whether the bitch is bred,
ovarian or uterine pathology.
Vaginoscopy
Vaginoscopy is the visual evaluation of the lining of the vagina with a lighted scope. This can be
endoscope, either rigid or flexible
Anestrus: There are few folds at this time-the mucosa is thin, red and relatively flat, with no
discharge normally noted.
sad pn a a si a  snaa pe n nd 'd si   aui sa
present.
more pink color. There Is lifle fluid present.
d g  ss          n si s
such as strictures.
Chapter 3: Preparing to Breed 51
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER4
Orchestrating the Breeding
Natural and Special Breeding
Scheduling the breeding appointment
(Appendix B-1)
Table 4-1 Important scheduling considerations
Reason for Appointment
Request for assisted breeding or unsuccessful actempts to
breed male and female
Ask client and pet name
Name of both male and female owners - including co-owners
who may need permission to access information
How soon to schedule Appc/Urgency
Often need to schedule for same day, at least to test female's
 progesterone level so che breeding is not missed.
Length of Appointment
Advise che client that chey may be at the hospical for a long
ejains jo sunsan auouasasoid asnou-uj - juanuiodde
breeding is to be done the day of the appointment.
Time to Schedule
Ifa progescerone level is needed, schedule accordingly o 
allow for test resulcs and breeding is to be done prior to che
end of the day.
 Dr to Schedule wich
Request Client to Bring with chem to Appt
IF THEY ARE PLANNING TO BREED THE DAY OF THE
APPOINTMENT, THEY MUST BRING BOTH THE MALE AND
FEMALE WITH THEM.
Recent Progesterone and Brucella test resulcs.
History of past breedings for boch male and female
To Ask Client Before Appt
Special lnstructions Client Should Know About Their Appt
If we are unable to collect the scud dog's semen, the scud dog
owner must give us consent to administer medicacion to aid
him.
If the stud dog proves to be unsuitable, do they have a "back
up" stud dog they can access or bring along?
New Client
10 minuces in advance to complete paper work.
Finalizing
Repeat time, date, phone number, and doctor
The "Normal" breeding
The "normal" breeding generally takes place outside of the hospital with no veterinary intervention.
are personally involved in breeding dogs. Nevertheless, it is important to know something about this
so that you are in a position to assist clients if veterinary intervention is indicated.
Timing the breeding without veterinary intervention and
progesterone testing
The usual recommendation for breeding the female is to breed her on days 12 and 14 after the onset
of vaginal bleeding. At this time, the vaginal discharge changes from blood-tinged to straw colored
and the vulva lips soften. Two or possibly 3 breedings are considered to be ideal and adequate for a
good conception rate when breeding a young healthy bitch to a young healthy stud dog.
The best guideline based on observed behavior (without using timing tests) is to introduce the male
to the female daily starting day 9 after the onset of bleeding. Allow them to breed as soon as the
female will accept the male and repeat at 24 to 48 hour intervals until the female will no longer
documented with progesterone testing.
54 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
When selecting a male for an inexperienced female, it is best that he be experienced but not overly
breeding, but not to allow them to become too familiar as this may diminish the chance that they will
breed.
When initially introduced, the male and female will usually check each other out, sometimes with
caution and sometimes with great enthusiasm. This should be supervised to protect either from
with the other dog appropriately.
Conventional wisdom told us the male did all the approaching and all of the "work" of breeding.
a critical role in foreplay, positioning herself, and intromisslon.
After some introductions and attempts of the female mounting the male and the male mounting
a spuy iseal ie sop pns aun pe lao sayen Ainsn an nao 'aleat aun jo pua suom as
(move her tail off to one side, if she has one), she should stand steady, and he should attempt to
(owner or veterinary staff) to assist them, others will quickly dismount or even become aggressive if
approached.
The tie
a sns e   a  i aa  a a a , e s
occurred. The tie occurs because the bulb of the male's penis engorges with blood once inside the
the male ejaculates and does not maintain a tie,can still be a fertile breeding
Problems with natural breedings
If the stud dog is incapable of intromission or is tiring, is at risk from an aggressive bitch, or the
Intervention should occur before the stud dog is too exhausted to use for an Al, before one of the
Several possibilities exist for difficulty in achieving a tie:
failure.
 2. Incompatibility of size: The stud dog is mismatched in size to the bitch, even when both are
the same breed.
3. Incompatibility of temperament: Sometimes one doesn't like the other.
 4. Physical limitations: Back pain, other orthopedic pain, phimosis, prostate or other male
genital pain, penile frenulum, small vulva, vaginal stricture, vaginal septum, vaginal hyperplasia,
vaginal tumor, or other vaginal disorder.
5. Low libido: Low libido of either the stud dog or bitch.
6. A bitch or stud dog who has been trained to overcome their natural tendency to breed.
Chapter 4: Orchestrating the Breeding-Natural and Special Breeding 55
When to intervene to assist in breeding or "The phone call from
a desperate client'
Often, the first contact your receptionist will have with a client is after they have made several
unsuccessful attempts to do a natural mating. At this point, the dogs and owners are usually
frustrated and tired.
The best recommendation your staff can make is to schedule an appointment to bring both the bitch
may not sound like an emergency, but if you fail to schedule the appointment ASAP, the breeding
    s  aa            
failed attempts to breed, so should both be presented at the appointment.
The bitch
(Appendix A-10)
1. Complete physical examination (Appendix D-6) including visual, which could include scoping, and
digital examination of the vagina to assess for size of the vulva, position of the vulva and for
vaginal strictures or septa. If an abnormality is present, a vaginal Al can be performed. If there
is a structural abnormality, the client should be advised that a C-section may be necessary - this
should be discussed BEFORE the Al is completed.
 2. Comparative size of the bitch to the stud dog - she may be too tall or too short. If so, a vaginal
 Al may be all that is necessary to complete the breeding.
4.Progesteronetesting
If the vaginal cytology suggests she is in proestrus and this is supported by a progesterone
level of less than 5 ng/ml, simple patience and perhaps another visit for progesterone testing
may be all that is necessary.
 gu g aa si aisad a pe ssa ui si us sisns a gaa a i
25 ng/ml, a vaginal Al is indicated soon to be certain the breeding is completed.
If the vaginal cytology suggests she is in anestrus, you can assess if she has been in estrus in
the last 60 to 90 days. If so, the client can relax until she starts her next cycle. At that time, she
should be presented early in her cycle for timing.
in an abnormally small litter. This concern should be discussed with the client prior to the
5. Some bitches, regardless of their physical structure and phase of their heat cycle, will not breed
with the selected stud dog. This can be due to her temperament, or caused by her particular
dislike for the individual male selected by a human to be her mate. In this case, unless it is too
 s     s           
3op pns au
(Appendix A-9)
1. Complete physical examination (Appendix D-6) including a visual examination of the penis,
palpation of the prostate, and palpation of the testes and scrotum. (See chapter 10 for
a complete discussion of these abnormalities.) The male should also have an orthopedic
evaluation to determine if his back and rear limbs are capable of supporting his weight to allow
mounting the bitch.
2. Comparative size of the bitch to the stud dog - she may too tall or too short relative to the
male. If so, a vaginal Al may be all that is necessary to complete the breeding.
 3. Some stud dogs, regardless of their physical structure and phase of the bitch's heat cycle, are
not willing to breed the selected bitch. This can be due to low libido, a fearful temperament, a
56 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
the individual female selected by a human to be his mate. In this case, unless it is too late in her
cycle to do the breeding, a vaginal Al may be the solution IF he can be collected. If the individual
female is the limitation to the collection, finding a different female to use as a teaser bitch, in
estrus if possible, may allow the stud dog to relax and allow semen collection (Figure 4-1)
Some of your clients have a microscope and the skills to accurately evaluate semen and vaginal
cytologies. The information they gain may be of great value to your ability to assist them. Even without
a microscope, you may have clients make their own vaginal cytology slides and deliver them to your
office every 3 or 4 days for evaluation. This
allows you to follow the estrous cycles on
bitches who have been historically difficult to
breed.
Vaginal artificial inseminations
(See chapter 10)
Vaginal insemination of the bitch in standing
heat is a relatively easy procedure to perform.
All that is required is a stud dog that is
cooperative to collect, a few simple pieces
of equipment, and a willing assistant to aid in
positioning the bitch (Figure 4-2).
Supplies and equipment
Figure 4-1.
1. Al sleeve and labeled tube, preferably
Semen collection.
disposable. If this is not available, a clean
plastic bag will do. Plastic baby botle liners on a roll are a readily available substitute. If a
Ziploc bag is to be used, turn it wrong-side cut so the ridges cn the bag do not irritate the
penis. Avoid the use of any latex-containing products.
2. 6 to 12 cc syringe, preferably one without a latex stopper.
3. Al pipette, small animal size for most dogs. These are approximately 6 inches long. They
should be clean, and disposed of after each use, but do not need to be sterilized. If this is not
available, a large animal pipette can be used and not fully inserted. The longer version should
not be cut off as it will leave a sharp edge. As a third choice, a soft tube such as a new sterile
red rubber feeding tube can be substituted.
4. Semen extender - not essential but helpful for compromised semen.
5. Microscope slide, cover slip and
microscope - to evaluate semen motility.
 morphology, and to estimate numbers.
6. Exam gloves - non-latex gloves, with the
outer surface rinsed free of glove powder
beforeuse.
7. A non-slip surface - for good footing for
the bitch and stud dog.
8. A short flight of stairs or stool - to
keep the bitch's rear quarters elevated.
9. A unopette (or other suitable diluent) and
hemocytometer - if a sperm count is to
be performed.
Figure 4-2.
Vaginal artificial insemination with hind quarterselevated.
Chapter 4: Orchestrating the Breeding-Natural and Special Breeding 57
Step by step vaginal insemination in the bitch
(Appendix D-1)
1. Allow the bitch to urinate before beginning
 2. After the semen is collected, with as lile prostatic fluid collected as possible, the volume
with a warm coverslip. The semen sample should be evaluated for motility while warm. After
 3. Add the semen extender in a 2 to 1 ratio of extender to semen, not to exceed 4 cc in a small
bitch and 8 cc in a large bitch.
4. Aspirate the semen into the syringe through the pipette. Avoid bubbling air through the semen
while handling.
 5. Position the bitch on a short flight of stairs, stool, ramp, or an assistant's lap while the assistant
is seated, to elevate the hindquarters of the bitch while allowing no pressure on her ventral
abdomen.
 6. The veterinarian or veterinary technician handling the semen should wear non-latex gloves that
have been rinsed with tap water and dried.
7. Cleanse the vulvar lips with a small amount of chlorhexidine, then rinse, only if there is cbvicus
contamination. No lubrication is normally needed for a bitch in standing heat. Only if needed,
use non-spermicial lubricant.
8. With one hand, part the lips of the vulva. Hold the syringe with the pipette attached with
the opposite hand. Slip the pipette between the lips of the vulva at the dorsal commissure,
in an upward direction, then when the pipette is approximately half-way in, redirect the
pipette more parallel with the floor. In all but very small bitches, the pipette should advance
nearly its full length into the vagina. Stop and redirect if resistance is met or the bitch seems
uncomfortable. It is important to enter the vagina dorsally to avoid placing the semen in the
urethra (you would never hit the urethra if you needed to, but of course you will if you are
inseminating.)
 9. Slowly depress the syringe plunger to deliver the semen into the cranial vagina. If the semen
flows out around the pipette, stop and reposition the pipette.
10. Maintain the bitch in the rear quarters elevated position for approximately 5 minutes. While
she is in this position, stimulate her around the perineum by rubbing the area with a gloved
hand. Avoid latex contact with semen. An Osiris Catheter may be used to aid in blocking
11. Have the owner return the bitch directly to the car without allowing her to stop to urinate and
without lifting her with pressure under her abdomen.
Handling fresh chilled semen
Step by step fresh chilled semen collected at your veterinary clinic to be
shipped to a recipient veterinary clinic
(This is available as a client handout in Appendix C-1)
 1. Remind your client to contact both the shipping and receiving veterinary clinics as early in the
bitch's estrus as possible to assure that staff, supplies, and shipping methods are available
when needed. Be sure the recipient veterinary clinic's address is available and accurate.
2. Confirm that the dog and bitch are both in good health, have had health screening, such as OFA
and eye exams, completed in advance, negative Brucella tests in the past 3 months, and are
current on immunizations and preventive worming. Consider having a semen analysis with test
chill done on the male to be used to assure he is currently fertile and his semen ships well.
 3. Upon confirmation of the date(s) the semen is to be shipped, call to schedule an appointment.
58 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
health and extender used; delayed insemination reduces the chance of a breeding resulting
      s o   ri  e 
insemination.
using fresh chilled semen, two collections are made and shipped.
 5. DNA testing of the stud dog is required (if not previously done) to register the litter with the
AKC. This test is a simple cheek swab, collected at the appointment. The owners signature
and payment are required for submission to the AKC. A color DNA certifcate, which includes
the dog's DNA profile number, will be mailed directly to the owner of the stud dog.
6. The collecting veterinarian may sign the AKC paperwork (should be completed prior to this
by the stud dog owner) for insemination with fresh chilled semen at the first shipment. The
stud dog owner will need the dog's registered name and AKC number and, if previously DNA
name and number of the bitch.
7. The owner of the bitch usually pays fees for the service of collecting and shipping the semen.
as follows:
Fee to collect the stud dog, handle and evaluate the ejaculate;
Fee for specialized packaging and shipping media;
Fee for shipping, usually FedEx, UPS, or U.S. Postal Service overnight shipping. If the owner
of the bitch requests an alternative courier, they will need to make arrangements. If same day
bitch must make arrangements to transport the semen to the airport and select the airline and
flight to be used. Known shipper status is required. The airline should be aware that the box
contains canine semen and ice packs (not dry ice), as not all airlines will accept these contents.
The stud dog owner and the owner of the bitch are responsible for travel to and from the
airport. This is the least expensive and fastest way to transport semen. Other same-day courier
services may be available but are usually very costly and may not be as reliable.
8. Collecting and Packaging Semen (See Appendices A-2 and C-1)
Collect only the sperm-rich fraction, the second fraction, if possible. If fractionation cannot
be accomplished, the semen can be centrifuged at 2500 rpm maximum for 5 minutes
The prostatic fluid can be carefully pipetted off and discarded. The semen pellet can be
resuspended and 2 to 5 ml of extender added.
aa pinous agn aue jo doi ayi Aianoas seas pee agn e ui paoeid ag pnous uaas au
wrapped with 2 pieces of Paraflm? to prevent leaking. The tube should be labeled with the
donor dog's name, dog's owners name, AKC number, breed, date, and time of collection. The
aeg doi-diz no ayediua e se yons - seg onseid paeas e ui paoeid ag pnoys agn
The shipping box, produced specifically for this purpose, is a cardboard box with a Styrofoam
s    s    n se   a
for this use). Next layer is a chilled but unfrozen gel pack. The third layer from the bottom
should be several sheets of newspaper folded. The fourth layer from the bottom is the bagged
tube containing the semen, laid on its side in the box. The top layer is crumpled newspaper
in a quantity adequate to keep the packing from shifting in the box. The top of the Styrofoam
box should be placed securely on top. In extreme temperatures, a stainless steel thermos
temperature extremes during shipment (Figure 4-3).
of the Styrofoam.
The box should be taped closed.
The appropriate courier information should be applied to the outside of the box. This includes
Chapter 4: Orchestrating the Breeding-Natural and Special Breeding 59
the shipping label and any special delivery instructions.
The package should be sent with the client to deliver to the shipper (DO NOT use a drop box for
the shipper) or the shipping service should be contacted for a pick-up at the veterinary hospital.
The recipient should be contacted by phone or email with the tracking number of the
package. This is especially important if your hospital staff will not be available at the time of
the anticipated delivery.
9. Delays in receiving the semen can occur due to problems with inclement weather, lost
or misdirected shipments. This is an inconvenience and may interfere with a successful
pregnancy, but at least it is only a box and not your valued dog which was lost or delayed.
It is always possible to arrange for an additional shipment. If a replacement shipment is by
counter-to-counter service, you can often make up for the lost time of the original next day air
shipment. It is the responsibility of the stud dog or brood bitch owner to track the shipment
and make sure it arrives on time. The veterinary clinic shipping should provide the clients (both
shipping and receiving) with the tracking number at the time of the cutgoing shipment.
Linus`Gntr
qat/o
Shanpie.
B
Figure 4-3.
A. Shipping box for semen. B. Labeled tube reduce errors on
receipt of semen. C. Semen packaged for shipment.
Step by step fresh chilled semen collection to be shipped to your
veterinary clinic
1. Prior to the expected estrus, the bitch owner should have the bitch's vaccinations updated,
worming completed, and a complete physical examination. A breeding history should be taken,
and vaginal exams and cultures done if indicated. A Brucella test should be run within the 3
months prior to breeding. Health screening tests such as OFA and eye exams should have been
completed in advance. At the time estrus begins, it is too late to initiate testing and receive
results in time for a breeding.
The same should hold true for the stud dog - Brucella testing, OFA and eye exams. If he has not
60 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
recently had semen shipped successfully, a semen analysis and test chill should be performed.
 2. The bitch or stud dog owner should contact both the shipping and receiving veterinary clinic
at the first sign that the bitch is in estrus. The receiving veterinary clinic will often recommend
cycle and has not come into estrus silently. They will plan sequential vaginal cytologies and
 3. Either the receiving veterinarian or owner of the female can contact the collecting veterinarian
to plan how the semen will be shipped, received and stored and provide them with your
  ' s   o n   sa s 
veterinary clinic will have supplies (specially made shipping box, ice packs, and extender) in
stock at their hospital. In other cases, you may prefer to have the receiving veterinarian or
These charges will be put on the bitch owner's credit card.
4. Inquire if the collecting veterinarian has experience in collecting semen. If they are
inexperienced, request the receiving veterinarian to contact them with detailed information
labeis the TuBE with their name, the dog's name, AKC number, and date and time of
colliection. Veterinary clinics receive a number of sampies uniabeied and when muitipie
semen shipments are received on the same day, the recipient veterinarian will need to
be able to identify that the correct semen is being used on the correct bitch.
 5. At the time ovulation is about to occur (based on a progesterone level of 4 to 8 ng/ml), the
owner of the recipient bitch or receiving veterinary clinic will advise the owner of the stud dog
to arrange for collection and shipment. On weekdays, an overnight courier service such as
FedEx, UPS, or U.S. Postal Service can be used. On holidays and weekends, airline counter-to-
counter or the U.s. Postal Service needs to be used. At shipment, you should request the air
bill or tracking numbers in case a shipment needs to be tracked.
 6. The receiving veterinary clinic will arrange an appointment for the bitch to come in for
insemination. BE CERTAIN THE STAFF IS EXPECTING THE PACKAGE AND HANDLES IT
TO KEEP THE SEMEN COOL BUT NOT FROZEN UNTIL USE. The semen usually arrives at
mid-day. The insemination is usually done vaginally or by TCl (or surgically in some cases) and
is best repeated in 24 to 48 hours to improve the chances of conception. The inseminated
bitch should be encouraged to urinate prior to insemination and kept quiet/crated for 2 hours
post-insemination.
7. The collecting veterinarian may have a regular courier service they prefer for overnight delivery.
If so, it is probably easiest to use their preferred service. If they do not routinely use one
consider are FedEx (1-800-463-3339), UPS (1-800-742-5877), or the US Postal Service (local
numbers). On holidays or weekends, counter-to-counter at the airlines may be an option. The
stud dog or bitch owner will need to arrange to have the shipment at the airport at least 2 hours
prior to departure to get the shipment loaded. Some airlines will not accept canine semen, so
each airline needs to be individually checked. The shipper must have a known shipper status
travel to and from the airport unless alternative arrangements are made in advance.
Be sure to state, if you are questioned, that you are shipping canine semen in a Styrofoam
shipper on ice packs (no dry ice is used - this is a hazardous material). In some situations,
the UsPS will do weekend and holiday pickups and deliveries, but this is not available at al
locations, so you need to call ahead to assess service availability.
8. Twenty four to 28 days post-insemination, palpate or ultrasound the bitch to establish if she
b  e      a  si se 'd si  t s 
to be available for whelping assistance.
Chapter 4: Orchestrating the Breeding-Natural and Special Breeding 61
9. Fees for the services may be structured as follows:
Serial vaginal cytologies and progesterone levels per sample.
Fee for insemination(s) of the bitch for the first and subsequent OR
Fee for transcervical insemination (TCl) per insemination or surgical insemination.
Fee for palpation/ultrasound/x-rays to confrm pregnancy
Fee to the collecting veterinarian for collection, shipping medium and packaging, and shipment.
Brucella test to draw and run the sample
10. The semen should be evaluated upon receipt if possible to assess motility and quality. If the
semen evaluation is not of the quality the shipping veterinarian represented it to be, call as
soon as possible for an additional shipment.
11. Vaginal insemination, TCl, or surgical insemination can be performed as detailed in this
chapter. The semen should be handled according to the intormation the shipping veterinarian
included in the package. Different extenders are handled differently at receipt and insemination.
Some require warming all or part of the extender, others are inseminated without warming.
inclement weather or lost or misdirected shipments. This is an inconvenience and may
additional shipment if notified of this minor catastrophe. If the replacement is shipped counter
to-counter, lost time may be regained. It is the responsibility of the stud dog or brood bitch
owner to track the shipment and contact the courier if it is delayed or lost. The shipping
veterinarian can provide the stud dog and bitch owners with the tracking number at the time of
the outgoing shipment.
Frozen semen handling and use
Frozen semen to be used for breeding has very specific shipping and storage requirements. The
of use. If the dry shipper will also be used for storage of the semen until use, arrange for additional
liquid nitrogen in advance. There is no alternative - freezers or dry ice cannot be substituted.
paperwork enclosed) to be certain the semen is from the stud dog intended. Each unit of sperm - vial
The semen should NoT be thawed until ready to use immediately. If using for a surgical Al, the uterus
should be exteriorized prior to thawing. If using for TCl, the cervix should be canulated with the
catheter prior to thawing.
Each freezing center has their own specific techniques for thawing and resuspending frozen semen.
The instructions from each freezing center should be followed precisely.
Equipment
1. A water bath that can maintain temperature from 90° to 95° F.
 2. A thermometer to monitor the temperature of the water bath.
3.Amicroscope
4. A slide warmer or way to warm slides.
 5. Microscope slides and cover slips.
6. Disposable pipettes.
 7. WhirlPaks? to thaw semen in - a sterile tube or zip top bag can be used as an alternative.
 8. Pair of sponge forceps for handling the vials.
9. Pair of leather gloves with good flexibility (not too stiff).
62 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
10. Thaw media as specified by the freezing center OR Sterile saline, freshly opened bag.
11. Tom cat catheter.
12. 20 g IV catheter 1-2".
13. 20 g needle 1".
14. 2 10cc syringes (without black plunger).
Surgical insemination
Surgical insemination of the bitch is an elective, frequently used, valuable, very successful but
invasive approach to breeding, allowing intrauterine deposition of the semen, which requires general
compromised (frozen, fresh chilled shipped semen that arrives late or in marginal condition, or
semen from a stud dog with poor fertility.) In some veterinary hospitals, laparoscopic insemination or
transcervical insemination ( I Cl) is preferred.
Prior to anesthesia, the bitch should be appropriately timed using progesterone levels as described
in Chapter 3. She should also have appropriate pre-surgical screening as done routinely in the
practice. This may include CBC, chemistry profile, coagulation testing, and EKG.
The sequence of events:
1. Receipt of Semen: Log in, contact owner of bitch. Billfor storage.
 2. Confirm time and date of insemination based on progesterone levels.
 3. Owner signs consent form for procedure after informed consent is done with the attending
veterinarian. Have the owner contact information available if the owner is not staying, in case
questions arise.
4. Pre-op physical exam on bitch.
5. +/- Pre-surgical blood work and EKG; may include Brucella test on bitch.
 6. Pre-med bitch with sedative and post-op pain medication.
7. Place IV Catheter.
8. Anesthetize with propofol or preferred agent, intubate.
9. Surgically prep abdomen.
10. Move to surgery table and prop up rear quarters with towels, position on v-tray.
11. Hook up to monitors and anesthetic machine.
12. Make incision, EVALUATE UTERUS.
 13. Thaw semen and inseminate bitch OR thaw semen immediately prior to anesthesia based on
owner and surgeon's preferences. Use thaw instructions from freezing center.
14. Complete the surgery.
15. Recover bitch from anesthesia, remove IV catheter when ambulatory.
16. Discharge instructions, medications, staple remover, recheck appcintment.
Surgical procedure
(Appendix D-10)
The bitch receives pre-operative medication for sedation and pain management. An IV catheter is
Anesthetic monitoring and IV fluid support is initiated. She should be prepped by clipping the hair
She should be moved to the surgical suite. She should be positioned on the surgical table with
nipples 3 to 6 cm long with a #15 scalpel blade or laser. The subcutaneous fat is dissected off the
uterine horns were partially exteriorized so as to visualize them. The ovaries can be palpated for
Chapter 4: Orchestrating the Breeding-Natural and Special Breeding 63
cystic structures but should not be exteriorized or otherwise disturbed. The uterus should be gently
thawed. (ln some cases, the semen or a portion of the semen may be thawed prior to anesthesia to
guidelines. The semen should be evaluated and the motility recorded. lf using fresh, fresh chilled, or
syringe for insemination.
While the semen is being thawed by one technician, the surgical technician who is monitoring the
  ( ad x   ss    a   (   n ()
catheter, access to a freshly opened bottle of sterile saline and suture to close the abdomen.
The fresh/fresh chilled semen or the thawed semen should be in a sterile tube or sterile Whirl-Pak?
bag. The surgeon should place the tom cat catheter on the syringe, and aspirate the semen from the
auy oi seq e suisn uaum 'ansodxa yie aaissaoxa pioae oi aen sunyet 'aauss aui ou seq no agn
semen, avoid using a sharp needle or catheter to retrieve the semen as puncturing the bag will risk
to contamination of the patient or instruments as the semen and extender are not sterile. The second
syringe should be filled with FRESH sterile saline and also set aside. The total volume of extended
a ot jw t di dn pue spaag Aol ot ju g'n paaoxa pou pinoys snan aui oui paioalui ag oi uaas
breed dogs or dogs who have previously had successful pregnancies.
The uterine body should be held off with digital pressure encircling the cervix distal to the puncture
site. No incision is made into the uterus. The IV catheter should be inserted into the lumen of either
the uterine body or each uterine horn, with the bevel up and tip aimed cranially toward the ovary.
The uterus should be reflected to assure that the catheter is in the lumen and did not puncture
through to the opposite side. The area around the catheter should be packed with moistened sterile
semen should be slowly injected into the uterine body as one dose or divided into two doses and
injected into each horn near the ovary. The syringe may be removed from the IV catheter and
replaced by a syringe containing only sterile saline if the surgeon believes a small volume to flush
the semen cranially into the uterus would be beneficial and not lead to excessive uterine volume
The catheter should be removed from the uterus, taking care to avoid any excess from causing
abdominal contamination of the site. Digital pressure with gauze should be held over the puncture
site for 3 minutes. The area should be carefully wiped with gauze moistened with sterile saline. While
maintaining a digital barrier around the cervix, the uterus should carefully be repositioned into the
abdomen, taking care to avoid excessive pressure on the uterus as the cervix is patent and semen
can easily be lost if excessive pressure Is placed on the uterus.
The abdominal wall should be closed using absorbable suture of the surgeon's preference in a simple
interrupted pattern in the linea. The subcutaneous layer should be closed using absorbable suture
in a simple continuous pattern. The subcuticular layer should be closed using absorbable suture in
post-op care. Appropriate pre-natal care instructions should also be prepared for the owner
(AppendixC-14).
64Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C
Figure 4-4.
A Surgical insemination supplies. B. Surgical insemination with uterus exteriorized for evaluation and insemination. C.
Surgical insemination:catheter and syringe positioned for insemination.D.Surgical insemination post op with incision closed.
Transcervical insemination
Transcervical insemination (TCl) describes the use of a rigid endoscope to deposit semen into
vaginoscopy to assess the stage of the bitch's estrus cycle, to look for strictures, masses, and
other anatomical abnormalities, and to flush the uterus when affected by pyometra (TECT procedure
as described by Dr. Verstegen).
motility, when the breeding is delayed past the ideal date, or the bitch has a history of infertility. The
 not necessary. TCl also allows for multiple inseminations to be performed on the same estrus cycle.
specialized training to become proficient, the bitch must be cooperative when the rigid endoscope is
passed into the cranial vagina and the appearance of the uterus cannot be assessed.
Minimum equipment needed
1. (1) Hopkins telescope, 3.5 mm x 36 to 43 cm working length, 30 degrees or Minitube scope.
2. (1) cystoscopy/reproductive sheath with obturator, 22 Fr.
3. (1) bridge with instrument channel.
4. (1) light source, halogen or xenon.
5. (1) light guide cable.
6. (6 and 8) French urinary or TCl catheters (disposables) or Minitube TCl catheters.
Chapter 4: Orchestrating the Breeding-Natural and Special Breeding 65
In addition, a video camera, medical grade monitor, and insufflation can be added to aid the operator
and to allow staff and clients to also visualize the procedure. The total purchase price for new
n an aa piy seas ne pe aa a aii si ui li asn ras srn os
 and distributors of the endoscopic equipment.
There is a small risk to the bitch of uterine or vaginal perforation or other trauma, sSo care must be
staff should be advised to be patient (Figure 4-5).
Figure 4-5.
Transcervical insemination
Procedure for TCl
1. while preparing for the TCl, have the owner walk the bitch to allow her to relieve herself.
 2. Have all of the endoscopic equipment assembled, with the light source on including the
sheath, obturator, endoscope, light source, bridge and camera.
 3. The fresh or shipped (do not thaw frozen until the catheter is positioned in the cervix) semen
should be prepared for insemination, with a 2 cc maximum volume in a 5 cc syringe.
4. The bitch should be held in standing position, with her back feet near the edge of the table, on
a non-slip surface. The table should be at a comfortable working height.
 5. With the operator wearing gloves, the lips of the vulva are gently cleansed and parted.
6. If using the MiniTube TCl Shunt System, this should be inserted and the balloon inflated prior
to inserting the scope.
7. The assembled equipment should be introduced through the lips of the vulva and gently
advanced dorso-cranially, avoiding the opening to the urethra. The dorsal median fold of the
vagina should be followed cranially until the cervical os is located. Locating and canulating the
cervical os is the most technically difficult aspect of the procedure.
 8. If using the MiniTube TCl Shunt System, the vagina should be insufflated.
9.Thecathetershouldbe introduced.
10. The cervix should be canulated with the catheter
11. If using frozen semen, thaw the semen now, with the volume not to exceed 2 ml.
12. The fresh, shipped, or frozen semen should be gently and slowly deposited into the uterus.
13. The semen should be followed with 1 cc of saline or extender to flush the semen into the
uterus, so it is not retained in the lumen of the catheter.
14. The equipment should be removed from the cervix and vagina and the bitch carefully placed
on the floor, avoiding excess pressure on the abdomen during lifting.
juawdinba aui 'gsnldxaplo se yons uognjos aeudoidde ue ui pauealp aq pinous juawdinba aul 'gt
should be rinsed in sterile water, dried well with a soft sterile cloth and stored carefully.
66 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
CHAPTER5
Managing the Pregnancy
Managing the pregnancy
(AppendixC-13)
As soon as a bitch is bred, she should be treated as if she is pregnant unless proven otherwise. This
includes management at home as well as medical care provided by the attending veterinarian
She should be fed a commercially available high quality performance or pregnancy diet at a quantity
to maintain her weight.
the likelihood of excess weight gain, poor muscle condition, and dystocia. Avoid overheating.
swimming, or situations that could cause trauma to her abdomen.
Environmental management and housing the pregnant bitch
Many of the bitches in breeding programs are housed in homes or kennels with other dogs.
Frequently, these other dogs are in and out of the home or kennel to attend training classes, dog
shows, and other dog events. This can result in the introduction of infectious diseases to the
environment of the pregnant bitch. In some cases, even the pregnant dog is attending dog-related
events. One of the most feared contagious diseases for pregnant bitches is Canine Herpes Virus
(CHV). CHV has been shown to cause no symptoms or only mild symptoms of upper respiratory
disease in the nonpregnant adult dog. CHv infection often mimics kennel cough in adult dogs
However, infection with CHV during pregnancy attacks the placenta, and can lead to abortion, stilbirth
and/or resorption of the fetus. Because this can occur in early pregnancy, before a pregnancy can
be diagnosed with palpation or ultrasound, it may appear only as infertility, not fetal loss. The only
preventive is through vaccination, but the vaccine is not currently available in the United States.
As a result, the owner or handler of these bitches may question how to manage her environmental
exposures. Ideally, the pregnant bitch should not be exposed to other dogs during the pregnancy.
the veterinary clinic could be interpreted as a risk to the bitch.
Common sense comes into play here. Several months prior to breeding, all necessary vaccines
should be updated. Many breeders are familiar with the newer less-frequently administered vaccine
protocols. Each household or kennel should be evaluated and the principles of risk assessment
applied on an individual basis when developing a vaccine protocol. Should there be a report of an
infectious disease outbreak, the breeder or handler would be well-advised to avoid large-scale dog
events. A short period of isolation of the pregnant bitch from others in the household or kennel after
return from a dog event should be instituted if feasible. Good hygiene should be practiced in parasite
and feces management. Most infectious diseases are carried in feces or other body fluids, not on the
As a practical matter, a bred bitch cannot be maintained in isolation throughout her pregnancy any
year, it could mean months of restricting dog-related activities. Even the most careful breeder will
herpregnancy.
Drugs and vaccines during pregnancy
Herpes Virus (CHV). If this vaccine is available to you and indicated for the bitch, it may be helpful as
it has been shown to improve weaning rates, increase puppy birth weights and reduce early puppy
68 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
pup. Bitches that already have the virus can be vaccinated. Two doses of the vaccine are given
to the bitch, the first dose at or soon after mating followed by a second dose six to seven
antibody to CHV, which she then passes to the puppies in their first feeding of colostrum. Because
immunity to CHV is not life-long, the vaccination series should be repeated at each pregnancy.
(Merial product literature.)
Pregnancy should be as drug-free as possible. That being said, if the bitch was surgically
inseminated, she will benefit from post-op pain medications for the first 2 to 3 days. There are no
veterinary non-steroidal medications labeled for use in the pregnant bitch. The author has used
meloxicam (Metacam?) and others have used Tramadol safely. See the appendix for drug information
resources. Other prescription and over-the-counter medications should be researched and
condition (see Chapter 4).
There are conflicting reports on the use of products containing raspberry tea leaves. These are
marketed to increase fertility and ease labor and delivery. However, there are reports suggesting
that some of these products can cause premature labor and abortion. When in doubt, it is better to
avoid products without FDA approval for use in the pregnant bitch.
Avoid supplements or food containing excessive levels of calcium, vitamin D and vitamin A
Plumb's Pharmacotherapy Pontifications:
aa apis aay sanp le se oot Aouuandou pue ouuand ui sanp pio 1
 2. Be particularly cautious using drugs with a narrow therapeutic index - if you can't avoid drugs,
 watch them carefully
3. There is no such thing as a 100% safe drug - anything can cause anything.
4. Drugs which are more toxic in adults are also more toxic in fetuses.
 5. Drug therapy comes with no guarantees.
Antiparasiticides during pregnancy
One exception to this drug-free proposal is the use of anthelmintics. There are several published
reducing transplacental and transmammary transmission of T. canis and A. caninum. The Toxocara
iel un uunp pean ae sasn sg said au u paisua ae yrm aei su
fetus. After birth, the pup can cough up and swallow larvae, which then become mature in the pup's
intestine. In addition, the larvae enter the bitch's mammary glands and pass through the milk and
into the pup's intestine. These parasites are then ingested by the bitch when she is licking the pups,
4 weeks. Prepatent infections in the pups are common, meaning the pup can have an active parasite
load but have no eggs present on the fecal sample.
The Center for Disease Control and Companion Animal Parasite Council recommends the protocols
below as well as beginning worming pups and mothers starting every 2 weeks when the pups are 2
zoonotic transmission may occur. Current guidelines can be reviewed at www.capcvet.org
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy 69
There are 4 established protocols that can be used to reduce parasite transmission from mother
to puppy or kitten. All the following protocols are off-label uses. 1. Fenbendazole (Panacur) dosed
at 50 mg/kg P0 once daily from the 40th day of gestation to the 14th day of lactation is the most
commonly used protocol. (37 consecutive days total) 2. The use of ivermectin weekly at 200 mcg/kg
with ivermectin at 500 mcg/kg, with one given 4 to 9 days before whelping and one treatment 10
days later. Although considered safe during pregnancy, dogs who carry the MDR-1 gene should not
be treated with these ivermectin protocols. 4. The use of selamectin topically at 6 mg/kg applied to
pregnant bitches and queens 6 weeks and 2 weeks before delivery and 2 weeks and 6 weeks after
delivery reduced roundworm burdens in the offspring and egg shedding in the mothers.
By carefully calculating timing, heartworm preventive and flea control products can be used shortly
before the breeding and not need to be repeated for 4 weeks, which will fall just past the first
trimester of the bitch. In some areas, heartworm, fleas, and other internal and external parasites
are a great risk so these preventive medications should be continued throughout pregnancy and
lactation. Most manufacturers have studies showing if their products can be used safely during
not be used during lactation (Table 5-1).
Nutrition
(See Chapter 9)
diet at a quantity to maintain her weight. This is not the time to reduce her caloric intake if she is
overweight. She also should not gain weight during the tirst 4 weeks of pregnancy unless she is
underweight (Body condition score should be 3 out of 5, allow her to gain only if she is a 1 or a 2 on
a scale of 1-5).
Changes to expect during a normal pregnancy
generally no visible physical changes Approximately 3 to 5 weeks after breeding, many bitches
lose their appetites, and some will vomit. This is usually a short term change and does not need
treatment. After the 5th week, the bitch's appetite will usually increase. At this time, her food intake
can be increased by approximately 20%, but should be tailored to her nutritional needs based
on her body condition and size of her litter. As the bitch approaches whelping, her appetite will
often diminish. She may still have an appetite, but her stomach capacity may not allow her to eat
normal size meals. Additionally, the pregnant bitch has a lower pH in her stomach contents than
effort should be made to encourage her to eat until the day she is expected to whelp. If the litter is
exceptionally large, some bitches may eat very little and need to be monitored for ketosis. Another
common tinding in a normal pregnancy Is a clear mucoid vaginal discharge
By about the 5th week, past the time she could tirst be ultrasounded, she will start to look fuller
abdominal expansion.
 a si ae   l  aa m s   m o   
how close to whelping this will occur. Although this alone cannot be used to predict whelping, it is
preferred to delay a C-section if possible until after the bitch is ready to lactate
lemperament can change during pregnancy. Many owners note that their bitches become more
affectionate, some clingy, when pregnant. Late in pregnancy, they may become aloof and can
70 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Drugs considered safe during pregnancy
 Drugs considered unsafe or of unknown safety during
 pre gnancy-avoid if bitch is not in a life-threatening state and
owner does not approve of use
Amoxicillin
Acepromazine
 Amoxicillin with Clavulanic Acid and other beta lactams
 amikacin, kanmycin
Azithromycin
Cephalosporins
Anesthestic agents ofany kind
 Clindamycin
Anti-neoplascic agencs ofal kinds
 Erychromycin
 Aspirin
Famotidine
 Barbiturates and primidone
 Fenbendazole
Bromocriptine
 Fluorquinolones while pregnant and laccacing co 4 weeks
Cabergoline
of age
 Ivermectin
Chloramphenicol
 Metoclopramide
Cyclosporine
Milbemycin
Oxime Diazepam
Nystatin
DMSO
 Penicillins
 Enalapril, benzepril, captopril & other ACE inhibitors
PyrantelPamoate (Nemex)
 Glucocorticoids, including tcopical (eye and ear drops, skin
preparations)
 Praziquantel (Drontal)
Griseofulvin
 Selemectin
 Hormones including mibolerone and ocher testosterones, pro-
gestins, prostaglandins including Lutalyse and Estrumate,
progesterone, estrogens including diechylstilbestrol
Sucralfate
Ketamine
Thyroid supplemencs 
Ketoconazole,Itraconazole, Fluconazole
 Metronidazole
 Misoproscol
Mitotane, o'DDD
 Omeprazole
Organophosphates
Fhenobarbital
 Raspberry tea leaves and other non-FDA approved preparations 
Salicylates (aspirin) and producs including salicylates such as
PeptoBismol@
Sulfonamides
Tetracyclines including doxycycline
Theophylline
Vitamin A analogs
 Vitamin D supplements
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy 71
Near term, many bitches become exercise intolerant: they are both anemic and have decreased
thoracic capacity as the uterus expands. Most bitches become uncomfortable and restless when
resting or sleeping as they near term. Bitches with very large litters may have difficulty breathing
even when they are resting. It is advisable to minimize stress and keep mandatory activity to a
minimum in near-term bitches.
As the uterus expands, there is increasing compression of the bladder. Most bitches will need to
urinate more frequently.
Diagnostic lab work may be indicated during pregnancy or prior to C-section.
are "typical" during pregnancy:
1. The WBC often increases moderately. The change is important to distinguish from the
elevation seen in pyometra. It tends to be a more subtle elevation and tends not to have a left
shift. Remember a pregnancy can co-exist with a pyometra.
2. The platelet count tends to increase.
3. The RBC wiltend to decrease. The bitch's blood volume expands, but the RBC tends not
normochromic, normocytic form starting at day 25 and lasting throughout the pregnancy.
W. Concannon, PhD, Dipl ACT (Hon) Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA)
4. The cholesterol tends to increase.
 5. The total protein increases early in pregnancy, but tends to be lower as does the albumin in
late pregnancy.
 6. The calcium tends to be slightly lower late in pregnancy, but this may reflect a decrease in
thealbumin
7. SAP (serum alkaline phosphatase} frequently increases for many reasons. If the other liver
enzymes are normal, this is not reason for concern.
 8. Progesterone is elevated after ovulation in the range of 15 to 80 ng/ml, whether she is
pregnant or not, so cannot be used to distinguish pregnancy from other disorders.
9. Other lab values should remain normal. This includes RBC and WBC morphology, and
other chemistries not noted above. If changes are seen in the other chemistries (BUN,
creatinine, glucose, liver enzymes) or electrolytes (including calcium), this should be
Diagnosing the pregnancy
Palpation
Careful and thorough palpation of the uterus through the abdominal wall between days 28 to 35
remains the most frequently utilized pregnancy diagnostic tool.
There are several limitations on palpation as a diagnostic tool:
1. The body type and level of relaxation of the bitch can make diagnosis difficult. If the bitch is
short-bodied or thick-bodied, or is tense, this procedure may not be reliable.
 2. Experience is required to develop a "feel" for this procedure.
 3. Clients may be anxicus because they may have been told there is a risk to the pregnancy
from this procedure.
4. This is an allor-none answer; pregnancy can be confrmed, but cannot be ruled out.
 5. An approximaticn of litter size cannot be determined by this procedure.
 6. Viability of the pregnancy cannot be assessed, nor can other uterine pathology such as a
 unilateral pyometra.
7. The accuracy and repeatability are low; so if a bitch fails to carry a litter to term, there is no
way to go backwards in time to assess whether she was really pregnant or if the pregnancy
was one without viable fetuses.
72 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The advantages are also multiple. Palpation requires no specialized equipment; the procedure can be
done economically. The procedure is as portable as the veterinarian - it can be done in the office or
The technique is simple but requires practice to distinguish fecoliths, segmental pyometra, and the
bladder from amniotic vesicles. There are several approaches to palpation and each veterinarian will
but very small bitches, both hands are used. with the bitch facing away from the person palpating,
'sassanoid snouids jeatel aun molag isnl sueis 'uasoge aun jo apis yoea uo paeid si puey auo
"slip" of the amniotic vesicle, a round to cblong turgid structure. This can be done several times in
rapid succession, but no pressure should be put on the vesicles. The size of the vesicle varies with
the size of the dog. Some have described this as "a string of pearls." Often, you can feel several,
but an accurate count cannot be done. After day 35, the amniotic vesicles enlarge and become
too confluent to distinguish so diagnosis of pregnancy based on palpation from day 35 until late
of the fetus can often be felt or seen.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is the most useful method of pregnancy diagnosis. It is useful for assessing the uterus
purchase of ultrasound equipment. Affordable used ultrasound equipment is available through
Additionally, there are several companies now manufacturing portable ultrasound machines.
B mode ultrasound is done transabdominally in the bitch using either a sector or linear transducer
taking the size and temperament of the bitch into account. Most are done in lateral or dorsal
recumbency, but can be done standing if necessary. Positioning in dorsal recumbency will reduce the
likelihood of counting the same fetus more than once. At best, ultrasound provides an estimation of
litter size. Even the most accurate ultrasound cannot be used to assure there is an accurate count
of fetuses. Approximate counts can be useful in detecting evidence of fetal death or fetal resorption.
Clipping the hair is preferred but not allowed by many clients of bitches being actively shown. In this
case, use of rubbing alcohol and ultrasound gel in enough volume to remove air pockets from the
hair will allow assessment but not as accurate a count as bitches that have hair clipped. Ultrasound
is considered 94 to 98% accurate for diagnosis of pregnancy from day 24 post-ovulation. Accuracy
in counting the number of fetuses present is far lower. Fetal viability can be monitored from day 24
post-ovulation to term.
The urinary bladder can be a useful landmark and helpful in assuring that the ultrasound machine
fluid they will see if fetal vesicles are present. The non-pregnant normal uterus is difficult to identify
and follow on ultrasound. Once the bladder is identified, the probe can be moved cranially just off
ring, the fetal membranes. In some views in early pregnancy, the fetus can be identified as a small
ou sua Aensn tl se 'uau sof uosea Aiid pu si sr - anss leao snoum paya
 '  e     s g n  g      
approximate count of embryonic vesicles can be made. In early pregnancy, the flutter of the fetal
heart may be difficult to note on ultrasound. Often, the first indication of abnormal fetal development
is the lack of a uniformly round vesicle. If the vesicle appears misshapen or collapsed, there may
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy 73
be an arrest of fetal development with resorption occurring. Typically, the ultrasound of a pregnant
  s     o i  e    s    
is placed on the abdomen, with correct positioning and adequate equipment, the fetuses will almost
jump onto the screen. If this is not the case, look thoroughly and consider a repeat ultrasound in 7
to 10 days to assure that an early pregnancy or small number of fetuses is not misdiagnosed as a
non-pregnant bitch.
As the pregnancy advances, the fetuses become larger and easier to identify on ultrasound.
Crown-rump length or diameter of the fetal membranes in two dimensions is measured by
progressive development and activity indicate normal fetal development is progressing. As this
occurs, crowding makes it more difficult to accurately count the number of fetuses present.
Changing the magnification on the ultrasound machine can make seeing individual fetuses easier. At
this time, assessment of fetuses on ultrasound has not progressed to the point that fetal sexing or
fetal defects can be determined.
The only techniques that can be used to assess for fetal viability are audibly by fetal Doppler and
visually by abdominal ultrasound. Ultrasound allows each fetus to be visualized for general size and
shape of the fetal vesicle, a heartbeat, or fetal movement. Fetal Doppler can be more diffcult to use
beats per minute. Heart rates in the range of 160 to 180 beats per minute may indicate normal
quiet fetuses. Heart rates consistently below 140 to 160 beats per minute indicate fetal distress.
Additionally, with ultrasound, the uterus can be monitored for evidence of pyometra. In some cases,
pregnancy until day 45 when the fetal skeleton becomes visible radiographically. Radiographs are
ovarian pathology.
equipment avallable in general veterinary hospitals or expertise of the general practitioner. More
detect other pathology.
Blood tests
implantation and placental formation, there are many other causes for it to increase including
pyometra. An elevated fibrinogen level only indicates that an inflammatory process is occurring, but
does not specifically indicate pregnancy. Relaxin is a hormone produced by the canine feto-placental
unit. The test is available as a commercially available in-house assay. The test is most accurate
when used 28 or more days after breeding, particularly when the bitch is pregnant with a small
litter. The results are read as positive (pregnant) and negative (not pregnant). Although this hormone
is produced by the placenta, it is unknown how long the test will remain positive after fetal death,
resorption, or abortion. The relaxin test's primary value is for use when ultrasound is not available.
Since neither of these tests can assess for fetal viability, ultrasound remains the most valuable
method of assessing for the presence of fetuses and their viability
Neither progesterone nor human early pregnancy tests can be used to diagnose pregnancy in the
dog. Progesterone levels rise at ovulation and remain high (between 10 and 80 ng/ml) for 60 days
after ovulation regardless if the bitch is pregnant or not. The human early pregnancy test detects
any form of chorionic gonadotropin during pregnancy.
74 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Radiography
Pups are visible after day 42 to 45 from ovulation on radiographs as their skeletons mineralize
Prior to this time, the enlarged uterus is visible radiographically, but it is not possible to distinguish
Radiographs from day 55 to 61 from ovulation are very useful in determining fetal maturation, fetal
H painban si uouae Aeuaan ou pue uog uaag aay saiddnd an le peui wau ansse d juadsi
is also invaluable information if labor stops with pups left behind. The client will know that veterinary
assistance is needed before it is too late to save the pups. If a particularly small or large litter
scheduled during hours that are convenient.
or gas in or around the fetus. Fetal distress can be detected prior to fetal death if ultrasound or
fetal Doppler (hand held unit available through WhelpwiseTM) is used to monitor the bitch daily or if
she shows signs of not feeling well
Table 5-2 Radiographic findings two to thirty five days following whelping
Number of days prior to whelping
 Structures visible
Comments
35 days
General uterine enlargement
No mineralization of fecuses visible
 24 days
Uterus changes from circular to tubular
No mineralization of fecuses visible
shape
20 days
Faint mineralization of fecal skull and
backbone
14 days
Skull
7-10 days
Skull and backbone
 5-7 days
 Skull, backbone, and ribcage
3-5 days
Skull, backbone, ribcage, femur, shoulder
blades, and teeth
48 hours
Skull, backbone, ribcage, femur,
Teech and toes can be diffcult co see in
humerus, shoulder blades, tibia, ulna,
large litcers and large bitches due to scat-
teeth, and toes
ter of the x-ray beam.
from ovulation, it can be difficult to determine with 100% accuracy a "puppy count" when the liter is
larger than 8 to 9 puppies. Not feeding a large meal prior to the appointment and allowing the bitch
to relieve herself prior to taking the radiographs can be helpful in minimizing loss of detail. A lateral
abdominal radiograph from the diaphragm caudal to the pubis is the preferred view. The KVP should
interpretation difhcult. Use of a grid if she measures over 10 cm at the 12th rib will reduce scatter.
Radiographs can help determine fetal maturation when exact ovulation dates are unknown. Skeletal
maturity, presence of colostrum in the mammary gland, progesterone level as the bitch nears term (if
snd = au  u ssal 'sdnd aap oi as = iau g u ssa 'dop auosaod gid e sy auss
must be delivered within 24 hours to improve viability), the bitch's rectal temperature (variably reliable)
and the bitch's behavior and appetite are all factored in to predicting parturition. When the ovulation
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy 75
Remember to assess the integrity of the diaphragm. On rare occasions, trauma or congenital defect
can lead to a diaphragmatic hernia, and the uterine horn and contents may slip into the thorax during
E
Figure 5-1.
A and B. Puppy count. Accuracy is essential and walking and fasting before radliography helps. C. Dystocia radiograph
malpresentation. D. Emphysematus fetus on radiograph - note the air around the head of the deceased fetus. E. Emphyse-
76 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Managing the abnormal pregnancy
llness in the bitch
There are 2 major categories of illness in the pregnant bitch. One is illness unrelated to pregnancy:
the other is illness related to pregnancy. Almost any infectious or metabolic diseases that occur
in the non-pregnant bitch can occur in the pregnant bitch, including pyometra. Probably the most
pregnancy. Look for both - look at her frst as a sick dog that is also pregnant, then as a pregnant
dog that is sick to avoid overlooking a disorder unrelated to her pregnancy.
When presented with an intact bitch, before proceeding with any diagnostics, take a good history
including her reproductive history or possible exposure to male dogs. Early pregnancy can be
confused with many disorders including pyometra. Missing the diagnosis of possible pregnancy and
and get exposed to diseases just like the non-pregnant bitch
Possible diagnostic work-up on the pregnant or bred (potentially pregnant) bitch based
on history and clinical signs can include:
1. CBC.
 2. Chemistry panel including electrolytes.
 3. Progesterone level.
 4. Urinalysis - DO NOT collecte by cystocentesis.
 5. Ultrasound.
6. Radiographs.
to expect" earlier in this chapter). A CBC and chemistry panel +/- a urinalysis should be included if
you would ordinarily run these tests. However, collecting the urine by cystocentesis should be avoided.
An ultrasound to assess fetal presence, viability and development is recommended. Additionally, a
quantitative progesterone level should be run as soon as possible. Progesterone levels can drop
either because of luteal failure (primary hypoluteoidism) or as a result of illness in the bitch (secondary
hypoluteoidism) and it should be monitored in a bitch that is ill or with a history of infertility.
llness not related to pregnancy
 Pregnant bitches often present with all the typical illnesses and traumas of the non-pregnant young
to middle-aged dog. Most common is a mild gastroenteritis, with varying degrees of vomiting and
diarrhea. Causes include hormonal changes and physical alterations related to pregnancy; dietary
indiscretion; foreign body ingestion; parasites; and bacterial and viral causes. Also common are
Virus (CHV), which will be discussed later in this section. Skin and allergic disorders can be seen.
Once a diagnosis is made, a treatment plan must be developed. Investigation of which drugs are
safe during pregnancy can be done on www.vin.com, in Plumb or in the Harriet Lane handbook.
Whenever possible, avoid the use of medications. Other treatment such as dietary manipulation
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy 77
can be used. when not possible, drugs known to be safe during pregnancy should be used. Even
over-the-counter medications and nutritional supplements can be harmful to the pups and should only
be used when researched and found to be safe. Medications and other treatments that may harm
the puppies or duration of the pregnancy should only be used when the bitch has a life-threatening
condition and the client has given informed consent.
Illness related to pregnancy
Hypoglycemia
generally do not have the body resources of fat, muscle, and carbohydrates necessary to support a
(Addison's disease) can become stressed and profoundly hypoglycemic during pregnancy.
Presenting signs may be vague; Gl distress, or seizures may be noted if the hypoglycemia is
profound. Diagnosis is made on laboratory testing: hypoglycemia, ketonuria without glucosuria.
and if Addisonian, with an abnormal sodium/potassium ratio. Differentials include hypocalcemia.
Short-term treatment requires IV fluids containing dextrose; long-term treatment requires nutritional
prevent the development of this serious disorder that can signitcantly affect neonatal survival. In rare
circumstances, termination of the pregnancy may be necessary to save the bitch.
Hyperglycemia
Although common in human pregnancy, gestational diabetes, or hyperglycemia due to insulin
resistance during pregnancy is rare in the dog. This can manifest as a transient disorder that
mellitus may be aggravated by pregnancy. Diagnosis is made on laboratory testing. Differentials
include any disorder that can cause PU/PD including renal disease, pyometra, leptospirosis, and
monitoring glucose levels to assess response. The stresses of pregnancy make regulation of
gestational diabetes diffcult. If the bitch develops this condition during one pregnancy, it is likely to
be recurrent, so repeat breeding is not recommended. Finding a surrogate bitch to raise the pups or
hand-raising the puppies may be necessary.
Fetal resorption, abortion, and late term fetal death
Fetal loss can occur anytime from conception to delivery. In most cases, the bitch will show no
symptoms or may have a vaginal discharge but feel and act clinically normal.
 suoedied Aq pasouaep ag Auo pinoo uuad Aea 'algeiae Aapim sem punosen anoa
palpation, diagnosis was either pregnant or non-pregnant. Partial loss of a pregnancy could not be
determined. Ultrasound is now used routinely, and we are increasingly aware of fetal loss after 28
days of pregnancy, with up to 33% of fetuses lost between pregnancy diagnosis and whelping
It is not uncommon to see many pups on ultrasound (although exact counts are difficult to do
accurately) only to find a small litter at term. C-section can confirm partial loss of a litter when
raised yellow plaque of solid tissue or a non-descript mucoid fluid found inside the uterus.
78 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Pregnancy loss may manifest as one of the following:
1. Embryonic death and resorption
2. Abortion of a live or dead fetus
 3. Stillborn pups that appear to be full term
4. Fetal death, mummification, and retention of the pup inside the uterus or abdominal cavity
after term.
If fetal loss occurs early in the pregnancy, prior to diagnosis with ultrasound, abortion or resorption
is the usual result. If fetal loss occurs in the latter half of the pregnancy, either the pup(s) are
aborted spontaneously or carried to term and delivered as stillborn or underdeveloped pups. The
time at which the insult occurred will be reflected by the maturity and degree of degradation of the
'ai oi lapuan aun ao pue sdnd ao no auo jadxa re yg e 'sase as u 'dnd uoas
At times, the bitch may consume the fetuses and membranes, and the owner to be unaware of
the loss. Some pups will be nearly normal with little degradation, whereas some may be necrotic,
emphysematous or mummified. Some bitches show no ill effects from this and others may have a
foul discharge and become ill.
Fetal loss can result from infectious and noninfectious causes. Determining the etiology can be
difficult, even when diagnostics are completed. Diagnostics require submission of fetal, placental
and if a Caesarean was done, uterine tissues, for histopathology and culture (aerobic, anaerobic
and mycoplasma). Collecting sterile samples can be very difficult if the bitch has delivered the pups
vaginally because the fetuses are probably already contaminated by the time it is determined that
samples should be submitted. The fetal stomach contents can be a good uncontaminated sample
source for bacterial culture. Tissues should be refrigerated, not frozen, and placed in formalin.
Refrigerated samples should be delivered to the diagnostic lab within 24 hours if possible.
Bacterial causes of fetal loss
Brucellosis - this disease is caused by Brucella canis, a zoonotic bacterial infection that can cause
infertility in the dog and bitch, as well as loss of pups close to term and puppies that do poorly after
disease should be tested for in males and females prior to all breedings because of its zoonotic
potential and the general recommendation of
euthanasia for all infected dogs. Dogs and
bitches with infertility should be tested for
brucellosis. Brucellosis is still seen in many
regions of the United States (Figure 5-2).
In-office screening may be done quickly and
with great sensitivity, if the rapid card/slide
agglutination test (RSAT) is available.Because
of the sensitivity of the test, any dog that tests
negative is negative unless in the early stages of
the disease. There is a relatively high incidence
of false positive results. A second test is in the
Brucella test kit using 2-ME - this screening
can be done if the RSAT is positive. Any dog
testing positive on both the RSAT and 2-ME tests
should have a detinitive diagnosis made at the
Cornell Diagnostic Laboratory on the AGID test
or lowa State on the PCR Brucella test. The
gold standard is multiple blood cultures, but a
Figure 5-2.
negative culture does not rule out the possibility
yPupsabortedduetoabacterialinfectionintheuterusdring
of disease.
pregnancy.
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy 79
A number of other bacterial diseases have been found associated with spontaneous abortion and
stillborn births in the dog. These include Campylobacter. Beta-hemolytic Streptococci. Escherichia
coli, and many other bacteria. It is challenging to determine if bacteria normally found in the lower
Good hygiene in the kennel and care in handling food, especially raw food diets, are important in
minimizing bacterial diseases.
It is inappropriate to routinely use broad-spectrum antibiotics without supporting evidence based
on culture prior to breeding. Pre-breeding antibiotics should only be used when there is a history of
infertility, a cranial vaginal guarded culture was done in early pro-estrus (with the culture suggesting
a bacterial cause of infertility) when there is one predominant bacteria, and the antibiotic choice is
based on sensitivity testing.
Viral causes of fetal loss
Canine Herpes Virus: CHV can cause fetal resorption, stillborns, and the birth of weak or sick
puppies. It is possible to have an assortment of these conditions in the same litter. Some pups
will be born healthy, contract CHV in the first few weeks of life, and succumb to it quickly. The only
treatment currently available for affected or exposed pups is to keep the ambient temperature high
enough to keep the pup's rectal temperatures above 101° F. CHV replicates in tissues that are
cooler than 10l° such as the oral and vaginal areas and neonates. The use of commercially available
fresh frozen plasma (Hemopet) or serum collected from dogs in the affected household with a CHV
positive titer may support the pups through the disease.
Adult dogs with CHV may be asymptomatic or may have signs of upper respiratory disease (kennel
cough). Some may have vesicles visible on the mucus membranes of the oral cavity, vagina or
A CHV vaccine is available in some countries. The vaccine (Eurican? Herpes 205) is administered at
Diagnosis in the bitch is based on a positive titer (suggesting recent exposure) or a positive PCR or
DNA test (showing evidence of the organism actively present in her body). Presumptive diagnosis in
pups is based on a description of their illness and acute death - when ill the pups cry incessantly.
testing for CHV by a pathologist at a reference laboratory.
Mycoplasma and ureaplasma causes of fetal loss
Ureaplasma and mycoplasma cultured from inside the bitch's uterus or the stomach contents of the
deceased fetus suggests these organisms as a possible cause of pregnancy loss.
Parasitic causes of fetal loss
Neospora caninum is a protozoan proven to be transmitted to fetuses by crossing the placenta. Little
is known about the incidence in naturally occurring infections. The organism causes an ascending
neurologic disorder in affected pups. Ihe increasing popularity of raw meat diets may cause an
increased exposure to this parasite. This parasitism may be detected with serology testing
80 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Premature labor and hypoluteoidism
Hypoluteoidism is the inability to maintain an appropriate progesterone level needed for
pregnancy. There are 2 causes: 1. a primary inability to maintain adequate progesterone levels
due to inadequate progesterone production by the bitch and 2. a secondary inability to maintain
progesterone levels, initiated by fetal distress or death. It is rare in dogs. The primary cause is
treatable with hormonal support. The secondary cause may be treatable with a combination of
hormonal support, antibiotics and tocolytics (Figure 5-3).
Diagnosis is based on quantitative serum
progesterone levels. A minimum serum
progesterone level required to maintain late
stage pregnancy is 2 ng/ml. Progesterone
levels during a normal pregnancy in the 2nd
trimester (or post-estrus in the non-pregnant
bitch) range from 15 to 90 ng/ml. Prior to
the start of the 3rd trimester,a progesterone
level below 15 ng/ml is typical. During the
3rd trimester, progesterone levels normally
decrease to 4 to 16 ng/ml. The progesterone
level should remain above 5 ng/ml with more
than 5 days to go. Just prior to labor and
 coinciding with the rectal temperature drop.
the progesterone level drops to 2 to 3 ng/ml.
Serial serum progesterone levels should be
recommended for bitches with a history of late
Figure 5-3.
term pregnancy loss, infertility, or symptoms
Hypoluteoidism - litter resulting from careful management of a
of the early onset of labor. These symptoms
bitch who had previously lost a litter due to hypoluteoidism.
will include an assortment of but perhaps not
all of the following: appetite loss, bloody or
of less than 160 bpm, decreased fetal movement on ultrasound or premature fetal expulsion. Many
experienced breeders will detect subtle changes in activity level and behavior and will present the
are above 20 ng/ml. Progesterone testing should be done daily if the progesterone levels are 5 to
10 ng/ml.
not the placenta as in other species. The cause of primary hypoluteodism in the bitch has not been
One theory is that this may be an immune-mediated disorder. Secondary causes of progesterone
pue sanp :ssans pue wnen yieap eiaf apnjoui sueuaaid poddns ot mol oot ane peu siaaal
    aa   a   s s
disease; genetic mistakes or mismatches; placentitis; and infectious diseases that affect the bitch
and/or the pups (brucellosis, CHV, CPV).
If the bitch's progesterone level is under 5 ng/ml with more than 5 days until she is due to whelp.
can be dosed at 0.088 mg/kg PO daily. However, because this product is synthetic, it will not
show up on progesterone testing, making it more difficult to monitor response but easier to assess
Chapter 5: Managing the Pregnancy 81
the bitch's actual need. One challenge in documentation and treatment of this disorder is the 24
and initiation of treatment. In these cases, a slightly higher progesterone level may need to be
These products (progesterone in oil and altrenogest) should only be used when prcof of a low
progesterone level is documented. Both feminization of the male fetus and masculinization of
bitches with placentitis; or bitches with uterine infections, pyometra and septicemia.
When used, the last dose of progesterone should be administered 2 to 3 days prior to the puppy's
Supplemental feeding or surrogate care of the pups may also be indicated.
To effectively monitor progesterone levels and predict parturition, the bitch must have been timed
with progesterone levels and/or LH peak to know the exact date of ovulation and thus accurately
know the date the pregnancy should end. Use of progesterone levels late in the pregnancy as the
only predictor of parturition will not be accurate in either bitches with smallitters (1 to 2 pups) or
bitches who have hypoluteodism
When faced with a bitch showing evidence of premature labor, there are limited
treatments available:
 1. Progesterone level monitoring and pharmaceutical and hormonal support as indicated by
bloodtesting
2. Antibiotic therapy for the bitch (Amoxicillin, enrofloxacins, Cephalexin or Clavamox? are safe)
and should be used until delivery of the pups. Antibiotics should be used if bacterial disease is
suspected or the cervix is suspected to be open. Digital vaginal examination cannot detect an
open cervix.
 3. Tocolytics such as terbutaline to inhibit premature uterine activity. Terbutaline and other drug
doses can be titrated using uterine contraction monitoring. Ihis drug must be discontinued
When presented with a bitch showing signs of premature labor or fetal distress, clinical judgment
CHAPTER6
Managing the Whelping
and C-section
Managing the whelping
The whelping at home
Pregnancy in the bitch is relatively short. By the time it is confirmed, your client will have only a few
fewdays.
Iherefore, it is recommended that they plan for whelping PRlOR to the breeding.
There are 2 things that require time to plan:
1. Building a whelping box and arranging an area to house the mother and puppies. Having a
good whelping box in an appropriate area makes an enormous difference in the husbandry.
and the amount of work the breeder must put into the whelping. A well-built box that keeps the
pups at the correct temperature, keeps them safe, and allows for good hyglene makes the
veterinarian's and breeder's job easier. Whelping boxes are also available commercially.
period. It is strongly recommended that there be an experienced person with the bitch during
the time she whelps and in the early post-natal period. Many breeders mentor new people in
their breed or have a network of friends to assist them during this period.
items, like a whelping box and stethoscope that they will use for each liter. Others are supplies that
need to be replenished. lt is ideal to have the veterinary technician or assistant spend a few minutes
home and know when veterinary intervention is needed.
The whelping room and puppy nursery
This room should be quiet, away from the activity of other dogs in the household. This will
significantly reduce the stress level of the new mother. It is very upsetting to many bitches to have
mothers are so protective that it is not advised to have more than one bitch and litter in each area.
        -    t    e    
the room around them. Cold floors and drafty areas are not suitable areas in which to raise puppies.
to be done prior to the whelping. when built from or sealed with impermeable material, it is easy to
Clean and disinfect between litters. There are as many whelping box designs as there are breeders.
Larger dogs require larger boxes. Some breeders include rails (pig rails) along the sides to protect
     s  s      s   s 
n his sdnd aun se uo pappe aq ue jeun sapis ay aos aois nof umop yeat aos 'woou a
escape. Some have an area for the pups to use to eliminate when they are a few weeks old. Some
breeders use a round flat-bottomed rigid plastic children's wading pool. Some unheated boxes can
 pue uea pue 'aes 'm sdnd an day on spaau xog udiaum aui enaoo paseund ag
mother comfortable so she can be the mother she was meant to be.
84 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Breeders tend to be resourceful and many try using heat lamps or other heat sources or substandard
Substandard puppy nurseries and inappropriate heat sources may seem like an economical way to
raise puppies, but in the long run they lead to high puppy morbidity, mortality and/or veterinary costs.
A small room, bedroom, office, den, or area of a larger room can easily be converted temporarily
flooring) or impermeable sheeting (vinyl tarps, shower curtains, and flannel-backed vinyl tablecloths.).
Another great advantage of housing the pups in the breeder's home is the social experiences they
receive from this. Pups need to see and hear normal household activities, they need to be looked in on
many times a day, and they need to be handled by lots of different people. When isolated in a remote
pets into the puppy buyer's household.
There are a few items you may want to stock or know where to purchase to be sure that clients have
them on hand (Figure 6-1) (Appendix C-7). These include:
1. Bulb syringe - to suction mouths of newborns - available at most stores with a pharmacy
department.
 2. DeLee Mucus Trap - to suction newborns' airways - available on-line from suppliers of
midwives or from WhelpWiseTM
3. Exam gloves, latex or vinyl - to protect breeders from vaginal discharges and placental fluids
and the bitch from ascending infections- available OIC in many places.
4. K-Y Jelly? - to lubricate gloves if vaginal examination is indicated - available OTC in many
places.
OTC in many places.
7. Tincture of lodine - to treat the umbilicus at birth, 2 and 8 hours post partum - available from
your suppliers.
 8. Chlorhexidine disinfectant solution - to disinfect surfaces in the whelping and nursery areas -
available through your veterinary suppliers or local farm stores.
9. Heating pads, rice bags, or Snuggle Safe? - to keep pups warm during transport - heating
pads often either overheat or have safety shut-offs so are difhicult to keep the correct
microwaved to warm pups. Snuggle Safe? - a microwaveable disc made to warm puppies,
available on-line.
au uo sauo pooa Auew ane aaun - pateoipui si supaaf leuawalddns t! - einwoj Addnd 'ot
market - available through your veterinary suppliers or on-line
11. Feeding tube - for tube feeding puppies - there are red rubber feeding tubes and silicone
tubes - available through your veterinary suppliers.
12. 25 gauge hypodermic needles - used to perform acupuncture for pups that do not breathe
than losing a pup) - to administer to pups that cannot be resuscitated by clearing airways and
14. Pyrantel Pamoate - to deworm the bitch and pups at 2, 4, 6, and 8 weeks post-partum as
recommended by CAPC - available through your veterinary suppliers.
15. Stethoscope - to assess newborns for a heartbeat - available through your veterinary
suppliers or on-line.
16. Fetal Doppler - to monitor fetal heart rates during late pregnancy and whelping - available
on-line at whelpwiseTM or some clients have their own.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 85
17. Hair blow-dryer to aid in drying wet puppies.
18. Ice cream - vanilla for the dog, any other flavor for your friends
19. Friends with common sense, and have the ability to drive anywhere under any conditions.
Figure 6-1.
Whelping supplies.
The remaining items, kitchen scale, towels, and thermometers are easy for clients to purchase on
their own. They should be reminded to have these supplies readily available and organized. The
clients will be ready to start care at home if they are able to monitor temperatures, weights and
urine color, while arranging veterinary assistance.
The breeder should be shown how to keep good records on each pup. Each puppy should be
permanently identified by color (permanent markers, fabric paint and nail polish - not neck bands
please) and have their temperature, weight, and urine color evaluated and recorded at least once
daily at the same time every day to allow for cbjective assessment of each newborn.
Labor and delivery
The normal delivery
So few clients call for assistance when they have a normal whelping that many veterinarians and
veterinary staff have never seen a normal whelping. So how do you help your clients when they
call to ask if what they are seeing is normal? A checklist for you and your front desk staff will be
very helpful. After all, you don't want to have them run to your office with a whelping bitch if it isn't
necessary. A puppy born in the car on the freeway is stressful for everyone. But waiting at home
too long is a problem too. Veterinarians too often tell clients just to wait it out, but in doing so,
puppies are born dead or too weak to survive. The list in the following section should assist you and
your staff in making a decision about what is normal and what is not (Follow section called "How to
determineif a bitch has a dystocia") (Appendix B-4).
A normal whelping may look different in every bitch. If you or your staff have the opportunity to visit a
breeder with a bitch in whelp, you can learn a great deal about "normal" (Figure 6-2).
86Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure6-2.
A Cervical plug passing spontaneously - a sign of impending delivery. B. Labor - a Pembroke Weish corgi bitch nesting in
stage1labor.C.Vaginal presentation of fetal membranes.Stage 2 of labor.D.Pup delivered vaginally in membranes.Stage
2 labor. E. Clearing membranes from the face so the pup can begin breathing.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 87
Whenthebitchishavingpuppiesnormally
she:
1. Should have the frst puppy in less than 2
hours from the start of labor (pushing). If the
bitch is not yet pushing or has been pushing for
less than 2 hours, she is probably OK unless
there is a green vaginal discharge or excessive
blood. If the owner and bitch are calm, she is
probably OK (Figure 6-3).
2. Should not be in hard labor (pushing) for
more than 1 hour before delivering each
 subsequent puppy.
 3. Can go up to a maximum of 3 hours
 between puppies if she is resting and not in
Figure 6-3.
hard labor (pushing).
Green colored vaginal discharge indicates placental
4. Should go into labor (pushing) within 4 hours
separation. Discharge is normal if one or more pups have
 of a rectal temp rise from the pre-labor (under
dleliveryof anypups.
5.Should whelp on schedule.A normal
pregnancy should be 63 days (+/- 1 day) from
a progesterone rise over 5 ng/dl, signaling ovulation. When calculated trom the breeding date
without the benefit of ovulation timing, the pregnancy can appear to be 58 to 65 days long. If the
pregnancy exceeds 65 days from the ovulation date or breeding date, the bitch should be seen
that day at the veterinary clinic for evaluation.
 6. Should have vigorous puppies that actively attempt to nurse.
delivery of the pups and Stage ll or delivery of the placentae.
In stage I, the uterus begins to contract, but there is little evidence of this unless the bitch is on
(found only in 33% of monitored bitches) from normal to 98 to 99 degrees F. She may begin to nest,
be reluctant to eat and/or vomit, and seek seclusion. Some have a faraway look in their eyes or
look frequently at their own flank, and some become "clingy". When evaluated cn visual observations
alone, this stage can appear to last a few hours to a full day. Sometimes the breeder will see the
cervical plug, which consists of a thick plug of mucus, pass vaginally. Typically, pups should start
labor extends beyond 14 to 16 hours, fetal mortality and C-section rates increase signifcantly. With
careful whelping management, rates as low as 1.5% fetal loss have been reported.
In stage Il, the bitch will deliver her pups. She will often show signs of external abdominal wall
contractions. She may appear to push and/or hold her breath. Bitches will show their own preference
as pue apis iau uo kel lm aos 'pnbs pue puis m aos - sdnd aun aaap oi suuoisod oy
push up against a hard surface like the side of the whelping box. Most wish to have their owner with
them or even want to be held in their owner's lap.
Stage Ill is the expulsion of the placentas.Most bitches alternate back and forth betweenStage Il
This is normal and is not reason for concern. If it is possible to count one placenta per pup, this is
ideal. However, the bitch may have cne or more unaccounted-for placentas; retained placentas are
rarely a cause of clinical disease in the bitch
88 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Managing a whelping at the veterinary hospital
(Appendix D-12)
In general, assume that the client will put saving the bitch ahead of saving the pups if a decision
between the two needs to be made. Fortunately, this decision rarely needs to be made because care
that is good for the mother is usually also good for the pups. Also assume that you have at least 1
viable pup when making medical decisions (Figure 6-4).
A radiograph upon arrival of the bitch with dystocia should be the second procedure when she walks
in the door - the first is a vaginal evaluation to be certain a pup is not presenting in the vagina and is
tragically forgotten while paperwork, history, and radiographs are handled.
will be very willing to move to C-section if the first pup is not easily delivered upon arrival at the
veterinary hospital. Some clients will be reluctant to proceed to C-section regardless of the higher
 Pregnant Female in 
Labor
 Complete physical
exam and vital signs
of bitch 
Vaginal digital
examination to
Discharge patient(s)
triage upon arrival at
Deliver with vaginal
to finish delivering at
hospital
and/or
Deliver pup(s)
home if bitch not too
rectal manipulation
tired and breeder is 
Fetus palpable in
Yes
competent
birth canal?
No
 Episiotomy if fetus is
Discharge bitch
X-Ray/Ultrasound to
Complete delivery
Suture Episiotomy
caught in vulva
and pups
1. confirm pregnancy
2. determine if fetuses
 Fetal or maternal 
 are still present or
distress Bitch 
3. to assess size/
exhausted Fetal HR
<180 bpm
position/viability/
Green vaginal
num ber/maturity
of fetuses present
discharge prior to
Bitch at full term
birth of 1st puppy
 Confirm progesterone
based on ovulation
Fetuses
levels and breeding
date/progesterone
level/breeding date/
malpresented
C-section
dates
fetal maturity
oversized or dead
(gut'skeleton)
 Progesterone level
 Fetal size relative to
if pre-term labor is 
 pelvic size/position.
suspected
and vaginal canal OK
Whelpwise if possible
Number of fetuses
Antibiotics
1-2 or over 9
3-9 fetuses
tocolytics +/-
C-section
Oxytocin/Calcium/5%
progesterone
No success/Bitch
supplement if bitch
DextroseIV
tiring
is in pre-term labor
 Delivery of 1 or more
pups
Home if doing well
 Continue monitoring
and breeder is 
J0
and fluids till all
competent
pups delivered
Figure 6-4.
Dystocia algorithm.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 89
ethical problem to deal with.
If the bitch is showing productive contractions and the pup is advancing quickly, there may be no
need to intervene. When the bitch is delivering a pup, in most cases the chorioallantoic membrane
becomes visible as a bubble through the lips of the vulva. It may rupture spontaneously or may be
delivered intact. If the pup does not seem to be presenting or the bitch is tired or painful, some
gentle assistance can help both the bitch and the puppy.
If time permits, prior to performing a vaginal exam, the lips of the vulva should be cleansed with a
disinfectant such as chlorhexidine. If there is excessive hair on the perineum the hair can be clipped.
If the tail is heavily haired, the tail can be temporarily wrapped with gauze or tape. Either exam
protect the examiner from possible zoonotic diseases such as Brucellosis or Q fever.
along with calcium, oxytocin, and Iv D5w fo assist the delivery of pups.
an assistant holding her head as she may resist vaginal examination. Iry fo do this where
the flooring surface and surrounding walls are easy to clean (the green of the placenta
for several minutes. Placing a large blanket or rug under the bitch is very useful. Once the
 ao pue paed a ag pinous ena ajo sd au 'uo ae sao pue paddand si ena
two fingers inserted carefully into the vagina, sliding upward. If a pup is easily grasped, with
not straight back). Try to pull gently in coordination with the bitch's pushes to maximize your
 2. If only the tip of a pup can be reached, one of two maneuvers can be attempted. First is to
rotate the examiner's hand and stroke the underside of the sacrum from inside the vagina -
thisIsa
 3. Ferguson maneuver and many bitches will push with this stimulation.
 4. If this is not successful and the pup cannot be palpated, have the examiner insert their gloved
fingers into the rectum and by directing their hand ventrally, gently direct the pup through the
rectal tissues and slide it caudally. with the other hand, another person's assistance, or a
 freshly changed glove on the examiner's hand, grasp the now accessible pup and attempt to
delliverit.
 5. In some cases, the pup is just a little too far up inside the vagina to reach vaginally or
assistant; gravity may assist moving the pup cutward enough to be grasped and delivered.
 6. If the pup cannot be reached, taking the bitch out for a walk to urinate and move can assist
moving the pup. In the dark, a flashlight and towel should be taken along as some bitches will
deliver a pup while squatting.
7. At home or at the veterinary clinic, vanilla ice cream (orally administered) can improve the
hydration, energy and calcium balance of the bitch. The bitch should not be allowed to ingest
any other food or placentas in the event she needs a C-section.
90 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
8. If no progress is being made, IV 5% dextrose in water, oxytocin administered by SQ or IM
route in low doses, and SQ 1o% calcium gluconate can aid in coordinating and strengthening
uterine contractions. The IV 5% dextrose in water can be given at an appropriate dose based
on the patient's condition. The minimum dose would be her maintenance level, and can be
increased as indicated. This will improve her energy balance (not a complete replacement,
but it helps), and improve her hydration status. Most bitches in labor have gone many hours
with litle to eat or drink and simple fluid replacement therapy boosts their efforts to labor.
Other fluid therapy may be indicated based on the bitch's condition. For instance, if her blood
pressure or physical findings suggest she is showing signs of shock, colloidal or crystalloid
therapy should be administered according to your veterinary hospital's protocol.
9. Calcium gluconate 10% can be administered at a range of 0.5 to 1.0 ml per 10 pounds body
weight SQ only. The calcium preparation MUST be 1o% calcium gluconate to administer
SQ and should be split into at least 2 injection sites to reduce the risk of a skin slough. IV
administration is risky and should be reserved for bitches with eclampsia (see Chapter 7).
10. Oxytocin can be administered on a conservative basis (most published or label doses are too
body weight SQ or IM, 2 doses maximum per pup delivered.
This should not be done without first assuring that there is no obstruction to delivery (radiography
and palpation), making certain the bitch is not already having strong contractions, and discussing
the risks of administering oxytocin and of delaying a C-section with the owner.
Oxytocin is an amazing and powerful hormone. It is the natural hormone that creates both uterine
contractions and release of milk from the mammary gland. But it must be treated with a healthy
the pups and bitch at risk. Smaller doses create more effective waves of contraction, and are safer
   snd ae a  si s     i   
with caution Is appropriate
Ideally, uterine contraction monitoring (tocodynamometry) is used to assess the safe use of
 crdered in advance of the delivery. If this is not available, a radiograph and clinical judgment can help
that her uterus can rupture, leading to the development of the life-threatening conditions of shock
and peritonitis. The risks fo the pups are restricted blood supply fo the placenta and premature
disruption of the placental attachment to the uterus, increasing the risk of fetal death.
The situations in which to avoid the use of oxytocin are:
1. Prior to the delivery of the first pup - if the cervix is closed or there is a malpresentation of a
pup
2. The bitch is already in hard labor.
3.When 2 doses in 20 minutes have alreadybeen administered.
4. When 2 doses do not succeed in delivering a pup, C-section should be recommended to the
Client.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 91
The lower doses shown above are more effective and safer for the pups and bitch
Some but not all veterinary clinics are comfortable dispensing oxytocin to their clients. This is best
done in combination with uterine contraction monitoring using titrated doses based on the existing
uterine activity pattern. Again, oxytocin is contraindicated in the presence of fetal distress or in
possession and would benefit from instruction in its use. The following guidelines can be included
and labeled in syringes to minimize the use of the drug and reduce the likelihood of client error. A
Summary - Oxytocin rules
+ When and How can I use Oxytocin? With GREAT care
start low and increase if necessary
● Maximum 1 cc regardless of size of the bitch
+ Do not exceed 2 doses in 20 minutes
· If 2 doses are unsuccessful, proceed to C-section
+ Do NoT use if the bitch is in hard labor or no pups have been delivered
· Risks include uterine rupture and “shrink wrapping" the pups
electrolyte replacement) and sQ calcium injections can be used along with attempts
to manually deliver the pups (Table 6-1).
Table 6-1 Drug doses
Oxytocin
8op Jad n dSn 0'y on Sz'0 Jo (uosuonh) Os uaiam Apog jo spunod o1 Jad ju 10
SQ or IM, repeated in 45 to 60 minutes (Copley) . Best used wich uterine contraction
Calcium: Calphosan SOLUT1ON (not
0.5 to 1.0 cc per 10 pounds of body weight every 4 to 6 hours. SQ divided into 2
Calphosan suspension) or 10%
locations, not to exceed 5 cc per location
Calcium Gluconate ONLY
IV fluids: D5w
Maintenance fluids: 50 ml/kg daily maintenance plus additional for deficit and
ongoing loss
Oxytocin: (Hutchison, Robert: "Canine Reproduction, Whelping and Neonatal Care." Lakeshore Pembroke Welsh Corgi Club. Crystal Lake, IL. 25
March 2005)
Oxytocin and Calcium: (Copley K: Parturition management: 15,000 whelpings later: An outcome based analysis. Theriogenology 2009; Vol. 1,
Number 2: 297-307.)
Episiotomy
Anatomically, the vagina or lips of the vulva may be so restrictive that it is obvious the head or
episiotomy may facilitate the delivery of the pup. In most cases, if the pup is already in the vagina, it
will need to be delivered vaginally, not by C-section. This will need to be done quickly enough to save
lodged vaginally.
This procedure can usually be done with a local anesthetic. If it appears this is indicated, the bitch
should be shaved in the perineal area (from the top of the vulva to the rectum) in a 2 to 4 inch
wide strip. This area should be prepped with your routine surgical scrub. Lidocaine with sodium
bicarbonate should be intused into the area above the vulva. An assistant should be prepared to
use a sterile large pair of straight Mayo scissors, serrated if possible. With the bitch in a standing
92 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
one open blade of the Mayo should be gently slipped into the vulva at the dorsal commissure with
the tip of the blade directed upward toward the rectum. The technician doing restraint should be
advised the procedure is about to start, the scissors in one stroke frmly closed, and incision made.
The incision should not exceed 50% of the distance between the vulva and rectum. Care should be
taken to avoid damaging the rectum. with this in mind, extend the incision as necessary to release
paiadan Auag aq pinous dnd aun 'uoisioui aun suyeu alum dnd au suunui pioae ol Xddnd au
There will be some bleeding but it should be minimal if the incision is on the midline. The pup should
be delivered and resuscitated as indicated.
The incision should not be sutured until the entire liter is delivered. If this procedure has allowed her
restraint. It should be a 2 layer closure - with absorbable suture in the mucosa and non-absorbable
(not staples) in the skin. lf the bitch is to deliver the rest of her pups at home, she can return
for closure - the local anesthetic should be re-infused, prep repeated and a new pack of sterile
time for the bitch and the attending veterinarian to complete the process. The suturing can be
abdominal procedure.
Oral antibiotics (known to be safe during lactation such as amoxicillin or amoxicillin and clavulanic
uncomplicated C-section.
Knowing when to intervene
If the owner is concerned enough to call, the best practice is to have the owner bring the bitch (and
puppies already delivered in a warm box) infor an evaluation. In a practice that takes its own calls
waiting too long to allow for safe delivery of the pups.
Determining if the bitch has a dystocia is useful in assisting the client and doctor in determine if
 an n sp e s ' a 'g aei u s a sn aa e si a
best judgment to determine the likelihood that the bitch has dystocia.
with the normal whelping. This is always a tough call to make. Most experienced breeder-clients
e Kaun 'lio Kaun h pinoys hl se suo tusi suaos uaum mouy oi waas isnl pue aanui ane
inexperienced client calls and fulfills the above criteria or calls more than once, they also shoulc
life-threatening concern, not just one patient. In a practice with a large breeder-client base, most
Stillbornpuppies
Many puppies that are stillborn were viable until shortly before the delivery. Neonatal death is caused
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 93
mous no 'paogap padoaaap-lapun Aieauaa ae Aaul 'auop uaag aaey pinoo no ueo uuou pue
snogo aay ing paseaap kuaan ag on eadde pue wai-lng pe uog ae aos sisooau jo suais
auo e aa pinom lens wai-auo ieun saia i ueu sinaap jo suais pemino
Most stillborns are fully developed normal pups who should have been born alive. Either the pup was
delayed in its travel from the uterine attachment to outside the fetal membranes, or the efforts to
pups without human intervention. But this is not always the case. With an appropriate degree of human
intervention to aid the bitch in delivery, removing fetal membranes and clearing the airways, the pups
shep maf e oi sanoy mat e Aquo aauns Aeu sauaaap pauoloud pey aaey inq aaje uioq ane jeun sdnd
Some clients would rather lose a few puppies than to subject the bitch to a C-section. Some clients
expect the highest puppy survival rate they can achieve; in most cases, this can be provided by offering
a C-section before there is fetal and bitch distress. Pro-active or elective C-sections have been shown
udiaum-isod sep / pue sanou z 'ua ne saien jeiuns Addnd isauiy aun ot moe oi saipns u
However, to maximize Caesarean success, advance planning and staff training are mandatory.
Managing a dystocia
Dystocia means abnormal or difficult birth. It can include maternal and fetal causes, and failure for
labor to start (Figure 6-5).
Maternal dystocias
Maternal causes account for approximately 75% of dystocias. Maternal dystocia includes either an
obstruction of the birth canal or uterine inertia. There are several types of cbstruction; these include
Figure 6-5.
A. A bitch with a high risk pregnancy. B. Dystocia pup
sideways. C. Dystocia pup from previous photograph. Born
dead from prolonged labor.
94Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
a narrow pelvic canal; vaginal stricture, septa or other restriction; uterine torsion; uterine rupture;
Some causes of dystocia can be determined at C-section and some remain mysteries. Most causes
are not believed to be inherited. Because there are so many causes including fetal and unusual
causes that are unlikely to recur, it is not possible to say with certainty that a bitch who needs
a C-section should not be allowed to breed again. It may be possible for a bitch who has had a
Csection to have a vaginal birth at a subsequent pregnancy.
Primary uterine inertia is failure of the uterus to contract adequately to expel the fetuses. This is
not fully understood in the dog and is considered rare. Secondary uterine inertia is the inability to
progress from stage I to stage Ill labor, and is common. Some breeds are predisposed to primary
uterine inertia; other causes include overstretching of the uterus with very large litters or oversized
pups; insufficient hormones to initiate labor in
very small litters; uterine torsion; hypocalcemia;
obesity: and when fetal obstruction due to
oversized or malpositioned pups causes
exhaustion of the uterus and failed delivery
(Figure 6-6). Torsion See Chapter 9.
Fetal dystocias
Fetal causes account for approximately 25% of
dystocias. The causes include mal-presentation
(fetal position that is not linear with the birth
canal) and fetuses that are too large relative to
the size of the birth canal. There are multiple
positions that cause fetal dystocia. Puppies
A
may present sideways, neck first, head flexed
back, breech, head in one horn and torso in the
opposite horn, or in pairs. Puppies that are too
large relative to the size of the birth canal include
those that are simply too large and puppies that
have deformities that prevent normal delivery.
There are many breeds that are predisposed to
fetal oversize. Some, such as the brachycephalic
breeds, have high rates of dystocia because the
head of the puppy is oversized relative to the
size of the mother's pelvis. For these breeds, a
scheduled C-section is a good option.
B
Most causes of dystocia will require medical or
surgical intervention. Some causes of dystocia.
such as relative oversize, cannot be resolved by
 medical therapy. When medical therapy fails, or
is destined to fail, proceeding to C-section may
save the bitch and the pups.
Breech delivery
With a breech delivery the pup is born tail
not rear feet first. It is considered normal for
C
approximately 40% of puppies to be born in
Figure 6-6.
posterior presentation, this means the back
A Normal birth position shown with the pelvis cut away (60%).
B. Breech presentation. C. Posterior presentation (40%).
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 95
feet are presented first. This alone is not a cause of dystocia; it is only a dystocia if there are other
dystocia and make it difficult to manipulate the pup.
Tocodynamometry
Tocodynamometry is a computer-based method of uterine contraction monitoring. There is currently
bitch in premature labor, the bitch with a history of dystocia, the owner with litle experience, or for
the bitch in a breed or line of dogs with a predisposition to dystocia. Since the availability of the
equipment is limited, reservations must be made upon confirmation of the pregnancy.
The service includes 2 pieces of equipment: tocodynamometer and fetal Doppler and the associated
interpretation of the data. The tocodynamometer is used to assess uterine contractions and the fetal
Doppler is used to assess trends in fetal heart rates. In routine cases, data is collected by applying
a transducer to the clipped abdomen for one hour twice daily. This can be done from home or the
service, located in Colorado. A phone call is made to the breeder and/or attending veterinarian with
an interpretation of the data. This data includes information about the onset of labor; timing and
medical or surgical intervention is indicated. High risk cases or bitches in active labor will have more
combining data pertaining to the uterine contractions and fetal viability.
All medical therapy is based on the objective data collected and the attending veterinarian's
treatment plan.
A study involving Guide Dogs showed a reduction of fetal death from 9% to 2% when using
Whelpwise TM (Figure 6-7).
A
B
Proper sensor placement
Figure 6-7.
A.Whelpwise equipment-a uterine contractionmonitor usecd for tococynometry during labor.B.Whelpwiseequipment
shown showing correct sensor position on the bitch's abdomen.
96 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Managing the C-section
Procedure
In this section, we will lay out one suggested set-up and sequence of events. In the beginning, your
staff will find this guideline will make their job in a busy practice faster and less stressful. After you
become more experienced in this process, you and your staff will likely have modifications which will
make this protocol suit your hospital.
Prior to induction for the surgical procedure, the doctors and staff should briefly discuss their plan
for managing the puppies and bitch to be certain they are familiar with equipment location, have
adequate drugs and supplies, and all staff is familiar with their duties to maximize efficiency.
C-section set up
(Appendix A-5)
Paperwork
● Patient Record, including breeding dates and ovulation timing and medical history
● Surgery consent form - signed by the owner, after informed consent is given.
● Anesthesia form (Appendix D-8)
●C-section surgical report (Appendix D-9)
● C-section discharge sheet (Appendix C-12)
●Patient ID band
Induction/IV setup
●Mouth Gag
●Endotracheal tube
●Ties for Endotracheal tube
·Laryngoscope
●Bland eye cintment
● IV Catheter
● IV injection port
● 1" white tape for IV catheter
· Saline flush for IV flush
●Sterile skin prep for catheter placement
Surgery room set-up
● Lactated Ringer or fluid of the doctor's choice, kept warm for abdominal flush
● Colloids - hetastarch if necessary
●Surgery table
●V-tray or surgery table with V capability
● Heating source for bitch - be careful to avoid anything that could cause thermal burns
●Towels ready to support rear of bitch if needed
 Sterile Lap towels - 2 large and 4 small
● Surgery gown - 1 per person scrubbing in
● Surgery caps and masks for all in the surgical suite
· Scalpel blade
· Suture for closing the uterus, abdominal wall, subcutaneous tissue and skin
●Surgery pack, large - with a system for an instrument and gauze count
Suggested surgical pack with accurate instrument count
4 to 8 towel clamps
1 Metzenbaum scissors
1 Mayo scissors
 1 thumb forceps
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 97
1 scalpel handle
 2 straight carmalts
 2 curved carmalts
 5 curved Kelly forceps
 3 curved mosquito forceps
1 needle holder
Serrated straight Mayo scissors for episiotomy
Surgery gloves - 2 pair for each person scrubbing in
Duct tape to keep long coated hair away from the incision site
Puppy ID towels - 1 set of each colored sterilized/non-sterilized
Drugs to set-up for the bitch
+Atropine injectable
● Butorphanol injectable
+Buprinex injectable
● Calcium for SQ injection
●Famotidine
· Lidocaine or bupivicaine
·Metoclopramide injectable (Reglan?)
● Oxytocin from refrigerator
●Post-op pain medication injectable as preferred by attending veterinarian
●Propofol injectable
●Solu-Medrol 1 to 24 hours pre-op
 Drugs to set-up for the neonate
● Caffeine *
● Ceftiofur - keep in freezer reconstituted until use *
+ Dexamethasone
Dextrose
● Dopram - 0.01 cc per pup
● Epinephrine diluted 1:10 *
●Lasix injectable
●Vitamin K injectable
*Predilute just prior to anesthetic induction
Puppy set-up
●Non-sterilized set of colored towels matching sterilized set in the surgery suite
●Heating pads
●Puppy scale (weight in kilograms preferred)
●Stethoscopes
●Laryngoscope to aid in neonatal intubation
● Otoscope with large tip to aid in neonatal intubation
· Sterile umbilical pack (needle holder and hemostat)
●Suture for umbilical cords
● Laundry baskets or large styrofoam boxes for pups
●Bulb syringes
● Delee mucous traps
● Endotracheal tubes suitable for puppies - Cole tube, tom cat catheters, red rubber feeding
tubes cut and end smoothed to allow for ventilation or large bore IV catheters (prepare these
in advance, clean and can be reused)
·Stylet for endotracheal tube
· Face masks, small fitted with diaphragm for neonatal ventilation
 98 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
· Tincture of iodine, in contained to dispense to client - to dip cords in, disposable
· AmbuBag, pediatric
● 02, with regulator turned cn
·Fish tank or O2 chamber/incubator
●Hair blow-dryer to aid in drying off wet neonates
●Dog dish, disinfected, for warm water bath to use to warm neonates
Additional set-up to keep work area clean and safe:
● Place non-slip mat in under surgery table
● Place towels in work area and around surgery table
Seguence of events
(Appendix A-5)
● Confirm the bitch's due date prior to proceeding to C-section and that there are pups present
● Arrival of the bitch with possible or confirmed dystocia
● Exam room with blanket for bitch to nest on during evaluation
●Palpation/vaginal digital exam
● Episiotomy if indicated (pup trapped in vagina by stricture) should be done ASAP
· Technician to take history and assist with examination
·Assess the bitch
PE/TPR/Blood pressure of bitch
Preparation for possible radiograph
Radiograph and or ultrasound as indicated
Examination glove and lubricant (KY jelly?, Nolvalube?, or J-lube?)
●Incubator or basket with heat source for pups
●Towels
● Supplies and drugs as listed for neonatal resuscitation
● Owner signs consent form to allow anesthesia and surgical procedure after informed consent
with doctor, discussing options and risks
· Pre-surgical blood panel with protime if available/progesterone if available
● +/- Doppler or abdominal ultrasound to assess pups heart rates if available
● Place IV catheter and start fluids - stabilize before proceeding if indicated
· Administer drugs to the bitch:
● small animal atropine injectable (1 cc per 20 pounds SC or 0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg (0.01 to
0.02 mg/Ib) IV, IM, SC, using atropine 0.54 mg/ml),
● Metoclopramide injectable at 0.3 cc per 10 pounds SC, (dosed at 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg, using
metoclopramide 5 mg/ml),
· 10% calcium at 0.5 ml per 10 pounds SC and
● Solu-Medrol? SLOwLY IV (at 1 mg/Ib based on the bitch's body weight, using 125 mg/2 ml).
Give Solu-Medrol first to provide maximal time from administration to induction.
· Shave abdomen before anesthesia
·STOP!LOOK AROUND TO BE SURE ALL SUPPLIES AND STAFF ARE IN PLACE AND READY TO
MOVE QUICKLY
·GO!
●Move bitch to surgery room
● Induce anesthesia with Propofol? at 1 cc/5 pounds (start with 1/2 to 2/3 and give as needed)
● Bland eye cintment apply to protect her eyes
·Mouth gag
● Intubate and inflate cuff/secure tube with tie
● Place bitch on surgery table with left side slightly rolled down
· Attach anesthetic machine and monitors
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 99
· Continue IV fluids at rate on chart per hour (see chart in appendix)
●Scrub the site with Nolvasan and alcohol alternating preps or routine surgical prep per your
hospital protocol while the doctor is scrubbing in
· Roll her onto back and secure in final position as doctor prefers - be sure she is in a
comfortable position with her head, neck, and back level, avoid tipping head down (avoid
● Prep again in case final positioning contaminated surgical field
● Open supplies - gown/gloves/surgery pack/blade/towel clamps/drape/suture/lap towels/
puppy towels (Table 6-2). Preform instument count prior to making incision.
Table 6-2 Caesarean section procedure
Bitch
Pups
Increase gas anesthestic iflight or titrate wich Propofol
Clear membranes off the face ASAP, keeping pup tilted head
down and face out of pooled fuids. Hand co waiting tech in
sterile colored towel to start rubbing.
Metacam (at 0.18 ml/10#sq) or Rimadyl (ac 4.4 mg/kg sq)
Suction wich bulb syringe and/or DeLee mucus trap
after last pup is out
Suture uterus
Monitor/assist with respirations
Oxytocin p r n
Stethoscope and Doppler to check for heart beat if not obvious
Belly flush and eliminate soiled lap towels
Oxygen as needed - face mask or chamber
Re-glove
Acupunccure if needed 25 g needle in upper lip
 Closure ofabdominal wall,sq and skin
Dopram? and/or Caffeine to stimulate respirations (contro-
versial). Dopram? must not be given unless the airway is
open, oxygen is being administered and che pup is at least 10
minutes old if needed
Wash disinfectant off skin with saline along mammary chain s0
Use "accordion" cechnique if scill not breathing
pups can nurse wichout ingesting Nolvasan
Assist pups in nursing
Intubate trachea if needed, or use face mask ventilation, begin
ventilations with O2
 Apply DAP collar
Check for cleft palates and other defects/treat
Prepare discharge instructions
Ligate umbilical cord/treat with tincture ofiodine
Make up meds for owner to take home - Metacam?/ Reglan?/
Mark pups with corresponding color to map of uterine location
Nolvasan°/ Nemex/ +/ Antibiotics
Remove IV catheter AFTER entire dose of IV fluids have been
Weigh pups and placentas, record
administered and OK with attending veterinarian
Record APGAR scores @ 1 and 5 minutes
Photographs of pups
 Assist pups in nursing
Discharge the bitch and pups, being sure you have shown the
Reweigh pups after nursing
owner how to cube feed and care for che pups, and allinstruc
tions and supplies are sent home with the breeder
Blot or dab pups wich reserved amniotic fluid co increase
bitch's accepcance of pups
Administer plasma to ineffective nursers or all pups if colos
trum is not available
Place in oxygen/incubator or warmed basket
Discharge pups and bitch to owner
100 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
When a C-section is the best choice
The decision to proceed with a C-section or allow a bitch to attempt to whelp is usually difficult.
This section will attempt to make the process less emotionally and mentally challenging. It is not
could have done it; and for every one of those decisions, you will have an equal opportunity to look
back on a whelping gone wrong and wish you had reacted more aggressively.
Many factors are involved in the decision to perform, or not to perform a C-section. It is not
uncommon to have a client break down in tears at the mention of a caesarian, usually because they
or a friend have a bitch and/or puppies that had an unfortunate cutcome. This is most commonly
lo reduce your angst when the inevitable phone calls come, here are some guidelines
delivery. It is, however, obvious that not every litter should or could be delivered surgically. The
current trend in human medicine is toward ever increasing caesarians, with predictions that it may
soon approach 50% of U.S. births. Many reasons are listed, but the primary goal we consider
In a study published by Paula Moon, et. al. while an anesthesiology resident at Cornell, she compiled
data from 807 Caesarian derived litters in 109 practices across Canada and the United States
totaling 3,908 pups. The purpose of her study was to evaluate peri-operative risk factors affecting
neonatal survival after canine C-section in a clinical population once the decision was made to
and adapted below (lable 6-3).
Of the757damsfor which informationwas available,maternalmortality atsevendayswas
1.2%. Emergency surgery accounted for 58% (n=453 of 776) of the cases for which information
was available. For both elective and emergency surgeries, the bulldog was the most frequently
represented breed (17%; n=138). The following factors increased the likelihood of all puppies
puppies or less in the litter; there were no naturally delivered or deformed puppies; all puppies
breathed spontaneously at birth; at least one puppy vocalized spontaneously at birth; and neither
methoxyflurane nor xylazine was used in the anesthetic protocol. lsoflurane and propofol were
associated unconditionally with a positive effect on neonatal survival at seven days.
and veterinarians in making well-informed decisions, with the knowledge that well-executed
that we cannot select away from the brachycephalic patient. However, it does allow us to minimize
some of the risk factors known to increase maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality.
Table 6-3 Puppy survival rates
Time after delivery
Puppy survival by C-section birth
Puppy survival by vaginal birth
O hours
92%
86%
2hours
87%
83%
7 days
80%
75%
Moon et. al.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 101
A scheduled C-section is a better choice for:
1. High Risk breeds such as Bulldogs
2. Bitches with diagnosed pelvic fractures or vaginal strictures
 3. Bitches with illness diagnosed during pregnancy predicted to cause dystocia such as diabetes
mellitus or intervertebral disc disease
4. Bitches with previous primary uterine inertia (75% of C-sections are due to maternal causes)
5. Large litters (more than 9 pups).
6. Small litters (1 to 2 pups).
8. Bitches predicted to develop dystocia based on radiographs taken pre-partum - films which
show malpresentations, log-jams, or oversized pups.
9. When the client is unable to manage a whelping.
Adnd sis oi peal lm aiel oot no a ooi sno mt e se 'ens Addnd nof lo si u
mortality. The ideal planned C- section is scheduled based on ovulation timing. Normal pregnancy
in the bitch is 63 days from ovulation, plus or minus 24 hours. The dates in the literature that state
pregnancy can last 58 to 67 days are based on dates from breeding, not ovulation. Progesterone
timing has revolutionized several aspects of canine reproduction and is very valuable in this setting.
(See chapter 3.)
We can calculate that the bitch is anticipated to go into labor 63 days from ovulation plus or minus
that your referral lab indicates signal ovulation. Typically, we schedule cur bitches for C-section 62
days from ovulation providing colostrum or milk is present in the mammary glands and
for it to be safe. Bitches with larger litters tend to have a slightly shorter pregnancy (0.25 day per
Convenience should not override good sense and patience. Lactation represents more than nutrition
for the pups; it represents a physiological and psychological preparedness for the bitch to feed and
and manage themselves in the whelping box
Why and when to be aggressive in early dystocia intervention
a  an o so  e ai aui i a  a a  gns an
prolonged labor cr placental aging.
We cannot overemphasize the need for a rapid decision making strategy and response. At the frst
inkling of a possible dystocia, the staff must initiate decisions regarding the care of the pregnant bitch.
They must advise the owner of how and when to proceed, alert the doctor of the potential crisis, and
be prepared for care of the bitch and neonates by the time the client arrives at the hospital.
would tell a client with a dog showing evidence of any other life-threatening condition to stay home
and wait it out. But many veterinarians make this recommendation to clients with bitches in whelp
In this situation, you are not only putting the bitch at risk but you may be making life and death
decisions for up to 15 patients.
102 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
If you have a client on the telephone that is concerned about how the bitch's labor is progressing,
and they either have no experience in whelping and need trained assistance, or they know they have
someone to drive, the worst thing that can happen is that they will call and tell you the bitch started
whelping in the car en route. The opposite scenario occurs when you advise the client that it is
better to wait while the fetal survival rate plummets on the basis of your conservative advice.
How to determine if a bitch has a dystocia
Guidelines for clients and staff are imperative for rapid assessment of a potential dystocia and loss
of puppy vigor. Providing clients and staff with a list of questions for evaluation of the bitch and your
instruction that they are to immediately notify the staff doctor on duty of findings and concerns can
rapidly and effectively improve communication and is critical in preventing possible bitch and fetal
mortality.
Questions for the veterinary staff to evaluate the bitch at home or at the hospital
indicating the probable need for an EMERGENCY C-section: (Appendix B-4)
1. Has the bitch been in hard labor (abdominal pushing) over 2 hours on the first or 1 hour on
subsequent pups?
 2. Did the bitch initially show good abdominal contractions and stop without producing a puppy?
 3. Is there is green vaginal discharge PRlOR to the delivery of the first puppy?
4. Does the bitch seem distressed? Frantic? Sick? Weak or unable to stand? Tremoring?
Repeated vomiting?
5. Is this labor pattern different than her previous ones?
6. Has the bitch been unwilling or unable to eat and/or drink for over 12 hours?
7. Has WhelpWiseTM indicated there is a problem with fetal heart rates (<160 BPM) or uterine
contraction patterns?
 8. Have any pups been born dead?
uo saeu jeay mo walgod e ag pino aau isaans punosen io ydeisopeu snoaid e pia b
ultrascund or pups without visible heartbeats?) (Malpresented or very large pups)
10. Is a pup palpated on vaginal examination and in an unusual position or not progressing
through the birth canal?
11. Did her temperature drop to 98 degrees and rise to normal (over 101.0) and stay there more
than 4 hours?
12. Has her pregnancy exceeded 63 days?
13. Does she appear to have a very large or very smalliter?
14. Does she have a previous history of dystocia?
15. Is she a breed at risk for maternal or fetal causes of dystocia?
16. Does she have unexplained or unusual discharge from her eyes?
17. Is she having weak or non-productive contractions with multiple puppies left?
18. If oxytocin has been used, has there been a minimal or no response?
19. Are any puppies weak, crying excessively, or do they have any obvious physical
abnormalities?
  si s n  e   s     s 
Trust their intuition.
If the answer to any of these questions is yes, you may need to assess the bitch as soon as
immediately correct any cause for dystocia
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 103
How to minimize the risks of C-sections
Benefits and risks
must weigh the lives of many. Most breeders may have already indicated that the bitch is their top
priority; that if they must decide between puppies and the bitch, they will always opt to do what is
best for the bitch. Fortunately, it is unusual to have to make a decision between the two.
Benefits for the bitch: Ihe most obvious benefit is for the bitch who simply cannot deliver a litter.
cases, the obvious benefit is that the bitch will likely survive if veterinary intervention is provided.
She will not exhaust herself in the process of parturition only to need surgical intervention when she
is a higher risk candidate, she will not labor so hard as to rupture her uterus or cause other damage
when she is ill.
Risks for the bitch: There are risks associated with anesthesia including respiratory and/or cardiac
esophagitis as well as others. These are reported in 1.2% of the bitches in the study done by Moon
et al in the U.S. and Canada.
Benefits for the puppies: Statistically, puppies have a 4 to 6% higher survival rate when born by
C-section. Risk of premature placental separation and prolonged delivery causing weak or deceased
generally the strongest motivation for a client to proceed with a scheduled caesarian.
Risks for the puppies: Although more pups are born alive by C-section, it can be more difficult to
initiate nursing and maternal instincts. Btches who have C-sections are more likely than bitches who
 a 'ss s u s  snd o  an      s  
may need close supervision, pharmaceutical assistance in lactation and developing maternal skills,
sid ou upaat uaaiddns anba ke sdnd at pue
Benefits for the owners: The cwner can plan for a specific time of day and arrange their personal
and work schedule around the delivery. The owner can arrive at the veterinary hospital and return
puppies. Few would consider this a primary reason for surgical intervention.
often come cut ahead financially with the increased puppy survival offsetting the cost to deliver the
pups.
  s   s  n        
scheduling can reduce stress.
104 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Planning protocols
(Appendix A-7)
1. Keep a calendar showing predicted whelping dates of all known breedings. This can be done
calendar. A staff member can check the calendar daily and contact the bitch owner that is
due that day. By doing so, you can reduce the "hour of guilt" phone calls that come as you
are closing or going to bed. This allows you to intervene at home or have the bitch visit your
hospital for evaluation before too much time has elapsed to ensure a good cutcome.
complete history, do an initial assessment on the bitch and puppies, and minimize lag time in
doctor intervention.
 3. Practice procedures so that your staff and doctors are experienced in handling neonatal and
bitch emergency care. Learning how to place an endotracheal tube in a neonate is a task most
certifed veterinary technicians can learn to perform, but the time to learn is not under fire.
 4. Have adequate numbers of trained assistants to properly monitor the bitch and
This is in addition to the veterinarian doing the procedure and a technician monitoring the
of puppies should be established in advance if the hospital staff is insufficient after-hours.
5. Develop a protocol or apply the one supplied in this book. By doing so, everyone on the
veterinary team knows what the anesthetic protocols, neonatal resuscitation techniques, and
sequence of events should be. Assigning specific tasks to individuals will minimize confusion
during induction and neonatal resuscitation.
7. Establish a protocol for after hours care in advance. With the increase in available 24
hour emergency care in many municipalities, your hospital may opt to send clients to a referral
facility. If that is your policy, let your clients know in advance that you will not be available and
that they may be asked to make difficult decisions withoutyour familiar guidance.Counsel
them in advance about decision making on how to decide if a caesarian is indicated, if they
are told theirbitch needs anemergency hysterectomy,and what levelofsupportivecarethey
may chose for possible critically ill neonates
 8. Always use IV fluids prior to and continuously during the procedure for the bitch undergoing
C-section.
 9. Do not wait too long to intervene surgically. If medical management is not successful in
producing effective uterine contractions and delivery of live pups, discuss the advantages of
avoiding a caesarian. Your client will measure your success by the number of live pups they
have at the time of weaning, not by the caesarians you avoided.
10. Determine in advance if your clients are allowed into the treatment and surgery
areas of the hospital. Many breeders prefer to be involved and your staff should know how
you want them to handle these requests.
11. A well-coached client will know if they have a dystocia, have supplies ready in advance,
and will have superior husbandry skills. Many breeder clients will come to you with excellent
post surgical and neonatal care have been covered.
12. Great written discharge instructions are essential to client education and to legally
document your post partum instructions. (See Appendix)
13. Establish a fee schedule that includes fees to support an appropriate number of staff
members, supplies, equipment, drugs and time to provide excellent medical care to the bitch
and pups and to educate and support the owner.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 105
Now that we have this ammunition for ourselves and to bolster cur clients knowledge base and
decision for a time if a problem develops during whelping.
Your staff - The key element to success
Staff plays two key roles in managing a well run reproduction service. The first is in communication
prior fo, during, and affer the appointment. The second involves techniques and procedures related
to the pre-breeding evaluation, at the time of the breeding and at the time of the C-section. While
you may designate 1 or 2 key staff members to handle most communication and procedures
of pre-breeding and breeding., you many need all "hands on deck" when the frst call regarding a
possible dystocia comes in and when the bitch arrives for a C-section.
Communication starts prior to the breeding, at the time of the client's first contact with the hospital.
Well trained staff will be able to explain the services your hospital provides. They will also be able
and the value of progesterone testing. They can provide client education relating to neonatal and
post-partum care fo improve the success of your C-section.
C-sections need a team approach to patient care. While the veterinarian and cne veterinary
technician concentrate on the bitch's surgery and anesthesia, an entire team of highly trained
staff (and in the right circumstances client participation) is imperative to achieve maximal neonatal
resuscitation and survival. Be certain you have spent the time in advance of an emergency
rehearsing how the staff should handle neonatal care.
Techniques for success
This section will cover the process from arrival at the hospital through discharge of the bitch and
liter to the care of the owner. A step-by-step checklist follows for staff and doctors which will help
Telephone assessment of the bitch in labor or with suspected dystocia
Doctor, staff and client have agreed that the bitch's labor is not proceeding normally. On this basis,
she is being transported to the hospital
Preparation for the arrival of the pregnant bitch
Prior to arrival of the bitch and any pups she may have already delivered, you have an examination
room ready as follows.
Clients like to have a large blanket on the floor as many bitches prefer to nest or lie down on
the blanket while in labor. We tind it preferable to sitting on cur exam room furniture. For larger
bitches, the examination can be done on this area of the floor. For smaller bitches, a towel or mat
examination.
the hospital.
pue sanp sauo Aue pue 'swendog 'saenbs aznea 'sde snonw aanaa 'sauuss qing 'siamol
supplies you anticipate will be needed quickly should be in the room or readily available from the
workstation you plan to use to resuscitate the pups.
106 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The patient record, history from telephone calls if not in the file, and consent forms should be
available
Radiology should be prepared in advance if necessary.
For the examination, a rectal thermometer, stethoscope, examination gloves, lubricant, and blood
pressure monitor should be readily accessible.
Arrival of the pregnant bitch and client
Upon arrival, a technician or assistant should be ready to assist the owner into the hospital. The
o auyed ano u addnd e nsodap ou saop aus ans aq oi yg aun uuag yiem pinous ueiuuoa
A technician or assistant should be either in the examination room with the client and bitch at all times
A complete and comprehensive physical examination should be done on the bitch on
restraint assistance from a staff member as many bitches are not cooperative at this point. Once
pulse rate and respiratory rate should be assessed. Blood pressure evaluation is also valuable if
avallable
If a pup is lodged in the birth canal and it appears that an episiotomy willbe needed, it be should be
peformed immediately.
Radiographic and ultrasonographic assessment
Radiographic and ultrasonographic assessment of the litter should be your next step in most cases
NEVER take a bitch to surgery without verifying that she has one or more retained fetuses. A uterus
 s   n   e   o o d g  p si 
a retained fetus. If you cannot be absolutely certain that what you are palpating is 1 or more fetuses.
take the time to ultrasound or radiograph the bitch.
Ultrasound can be helpful in quickly assessing fetal viability. lIt is also a great tool for assessing fetal
resuscitated. However, it is a valuable tool for assessing the general condition. Because deceased
pups are frequently the cause of dystocia, if one or more pups without heartbeats are seen on
ultrasound, the client should be advised of this prior to caesarian. It is probable that a caesarian wil
be needed If there are pups with low heart rates. V fluids and atropine should be administered, and
the patient should be taken to surgery as quickly as possible. (lhe detinition bradycardia in a fetus
a sign of fetal distress, and 140 to 160 is open for interpretation.
Fetal Doppler monitoring, can be a valuable tool in assessing fetal distress. These units are available
for sale and some clients may already own one.
Radiographs can be valuable in determining whether the bitch is a surgical candidate or can be
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 107
pockets) surrounding the fetus, peritonitis, significant loss of detail, 1 or 2 fetuses as the total in the
litter, oversized or malpresenting fetuses, brachycephalic pups, fetuses cutside the uterus, over 10
fetuses, pelvic fractures or a disproportionately small pelvis, C-section should be recommended.
Preparation for surgery
IV catheter placement and IV fluids
C-section. Because of the puppy volume compressing the abdominal veins, there will be a sudden
drop in pressure as those veins fill when you lift the uterus.
Surgical consent forms
doctor should explain the benefits and risks of surgery and anesthesia to the client (some states
she ate last, medications , if she has vomited or had any recent symptoms of illness not explained
procedures including gastropexies, and other history the client or doctor may deem pertinent.
Pre-surgical lab work
If available on a stat basis, lab work should be drawn and run. lf possible, a CBC with platelet count,
chemistry panel and protime be completed. If this is a scheduled C-section, the lab work can be
done the day prior to the surgery.
Pre-surgical EKG
This is advised if available on a stat or in-house basis.
Atropine
This drug is routinely administered at many hospitals for most C-sections. It should be avoided in
at 1 cc per 20 pounds of pregnant body weight using the small animal product (0.54 mg per ml). We
rates. (lhere is some controversy surrounding the use of atropine.)
Buprenorphine or Butorphanol
kg IM (mcg/kg - dose carefully) just prior to induction. Administering buprenorphine at induction
provides post-op analegesia but because it takes 45 minutes to take effect, the effects on the
pain can be reduced. Butorphanol will aid in analgesia as well as sedation if this cutcome is desired.
Metoclopramide
pregnant body weight) pre-op unless it was given orally prior to admission or if she has sufficient
milk. Metoclopramide has been shown to improve lactation in approximately /5% of bitches by its
prolactin secretion stimulation effects. It may protect the bitch from gastroesophageal reflux during
the C-section. Metoclopramide should be avoided in bitches with known hypersensitivity to the drug
"Metoclopramide is excreted into milk and may concentrate at about twice the plasma level, but
there does not appear to be signitcant risk to nursing offspring" (Plumb). Bitches who have had
1 08 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
 C-sections tend to exhibit agalactia more frequently than bitches who have experienced vaginal
births. In cases where the C-section was scheduled, she may not have entered the phase where
performed digital stimulation of the cervix prior to closing the uterus.
Famotidine can also be useful for reducing gastric reflux and post-op esophageal strictures but
Calcium
 Calcium is anecdotally reported to improve maternal skills. It also aids in uterine contractility, reducing
   sa s       s   
Steroids
When C-sections are scheduled, rather than when the bitch goes into labor, short-acting cortico-steroids
the production of surfactant in the neonatal lung; all benefcial to the pups and bitch.
Ideally, steroids are given 8 to 24 hours in advance of a planned C-section. However, there is
anecdotal evidence that even when administered 1 hour prior to C-section, the pups seem to be
more vigorous and more able to breathe with less technical intervention. Both Solu-Medrol and Solu-
Delta-Cortef have published doses for this use. The prednisolone sodium succinate (Solu-Medrol?)
dose is 1 mg/pound of body weight administered slowly IV. Vials are reconstituted at 125 mg/2 ml
and once reconstituted, are discarded if not used within 48 hours. (Lopate, Cheryl. SFT list, 15 April
Caution should be used in administration of steroids if there is any sign that the bitch or pups have
an underlying infection.
Surgical preparatoryshaving
the aorta; instead move her side to side gently to complete the prep. Be certain to have the hair
sg Au 'salddu aun isd Aieael ue ssad pioudx au on leiu oi ena au wo a
will experience post-partum effluvium ("blow their coat" to dog owners) so authorize your staff to prep
a large enough area to assure that the field will be adequate to extend the incision if necessary.
Stabilize the bitch
Prior to C-section she should be stabilized if it appears that she is not a surgical candidate on
admission. This decision must be balanced by the owner's instructions regarding the value of the
pups.
Antibiotics
These are seldom indicated forroutine C-sections.When the cervixis closed,uterine contents are
regarding bacterial contamination, cefazolin or amoxicilin with sulbactam (Unasyn?) may be given
intravenously (assuming that there is no known hypersensitivity to this drug or other beta lactams).
Administration after the pups have been delivered is preferred as it will cross the placenta. Ceftiofur
meconium in their fetal membranes or that appear to be compromised (See Chapter 8).
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 109
Dog appeasing pheromone collar
This is an analog that mimics the pheromone naturally found in the amniotic fluid of dogs and the
mammary glands of lactating bitches. lts function is to reassure and calm puppies, and aid in bonding
between the bitch to her pups. lts effects last into adulthood and it can also be used to reduce
d   pa u s s  pr sy   a  s   
in the amniotic fluids, maternal skills take longer to develop (up to 72 hours). Maternal skills can be
hastened by the use of the AdaptilM collar. Although AdaptilIM comes in collar, room diffuser and
spray forms, the collar works more quickly. The collar can be used on the bitch for several days prior
to her planned whelping or C-section or can be applied at the C-section. The collar will last for up to
substitute for careful observation to assure that she is not threatening to harm her pups.
Anesthesia
(Appendix D-8)
Prior to anesthesia, it should be determined where induction will be done. We prefer the surgical
suite (remember, the surgical shaving is already done) to reduce the time from induction to delivery
of the pups and to reduce the manipulation of the bitch. Walk her to the side of the surgery table,
a pregnancy makes moving her under anesthesia both hard on her and the staff.
Pre-oxgenation of the bitch
This is frequently recommended and in theory is a great idea. Often, the bitch has respiratory
compromise due to the pressure of the expanded uterus on the diaphragm and many are also
brachycephalic. However, there are some patients who will fight the face mask and make the
effort counter-productive, i.e. she uses up more oxygen fghting you than she takes in. Techniques
employing blow-by oxygen can be useful but only if they do not create excessive delays or stress
Rapid induction with injectable propofol and intubation to control the airway may be appropriate.
Propofol induction
Administer propofol through an IV catheter followed with isoflurane or sevoflurane maintenance
via endotracheal tube. This has proven to be a highly successful technique for both the bitch and
should be reduced to 1 to 4 mg/kg IV if the patient is depressed or sedated. (At 10 mg/ml, this is
approximately 1 cc per 5 pounds body weight.) (source: http://www.vasg.org/induction_protocols
ccs, in a syringe, and give to effect. Approximately 1/3 to 2/3 can be given slowly to induce, the
cross the placenta but rapidly crosses back and what remains on the puppy side is metabolized
quickly by the pups.
Recently, the price of Propofol has decreased. Additionally, clinical experience has made this
with the nuances of this protocol prior to anesthetizing a pregnant bitch.
Gas anesthetic induction: With the advent of Propofol, induction by face mask using any gas
fetuses. Many patients who require caesareans are brachycephalic breeds and ventilate much better
110Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
when rapid anesthetic induction allows for immediate intubation and oxygen support. In addition,
Anesthetic maintenance
Most practices use either isoflurane or sevoflurane to maintain the bitch in a plane of surgical
anesthesia for the remainder of the procedure. The MAC decreases by as much as 40% during
pregnancy. This must be accounted for when maintaining with gas anesthesia.
It is possible to maintain the bitch quite successfully on propofol? if isoflurane or sevoflurane
anesthesia is unavailable. In this situation, a syringe may be used intermittently to infuse propofol@
as necessary to maintain a good plane of anesthesia.
Even if inhalant gas anesthesia is not used, it is essential that an endotracheal tube be placed to
be used alone, or for the frst time when performing a C-section. without some form of sedation,
which will affects the pups, control with local anesthesia is rarely attainable. Most veterinarians will
tind it safer and faster to proceed with general anesthesia than to rely on local anesthetics for a
C-section. Epidural anesthetic administration is beyond the scope of this book. If used, ensure the
A local lidocaine block can be useful to reduce the induction agent dose needed and to assist in
(o' I oi g'o) auuydauda jnounm auieop auoe pasn aq laau pinous inq ued do-isod auu
diluted with sterile water should be injected along the incision line. The dose must not exceed 10
mg/kg body weight.
Remember, (how could you forget - the client is there reminding you) you are not just anesthetizing
one patient, you are anesthetizing the entire litter too. You must attempt to minimize stress to the
m aa o  e a   a  o p a  o n s
on the pups. Careful titration of anesthesia and utilizing a technician skilled at anticipating the ups and
downs of anesthetic monitoring will allow you to achieve a successful anesthetic procedure.
Contraindicated anesthetic agents
Many anesthetic agents used in routine veterinary surgical procedures are contraindicated
for C-sections. Many of these agents reduce uterine blood flow. These drugs include xylazine
Isoflurane and propofol are unconditionally associated with a positive effect on neonatal survival
at seven days. If no propofol is available, thiopental IV or isoflurane induction are preferable to the
contraindicated injectable anesthetics listed above.
Monitoring parameters during anesthesia
Anesthetic monitoring during caesarean is critical and demands the full attention of a dedicated
and trained staff member to oversee the respiratory and hemodynamic changes that occur during
pressure. Also helpful are 1. EKG 2. CO, monitoring and 3. temperature. The guidelines established
 '  a  e    s    ps s a 
patient may require ventilatory support in the form of "bagging" with O, (not too much inhalant gas -
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 111
keep her anesthetized but not too deep) or a mechanical ventilatory system may be employed if you
are s0 equipped and experienced in its use. Her Sp0, should be over 95%, heart rate over 100, and
respiratory rate over 12. when the uterus is removed from the abdomen, weight is removed from
the vena cava and may cause blood pressure to drop precipitously. This should be monitored and
anticipated - be sure IV fluids are running at an appropriate rate and collcids are available.
Surgery - The C-section and delivery of the pups
Making the final decision
induction, incision and removal of pups from the uterus. The C-section should not be performed if it
is contraindicated for a sound medicalreason.
If the patient is a poor surgical risk, the owner should be advised of their options and a decision
made that is in the best interest of the bitch. If it is apparent that both the mother and pups cannot
be saved, it willbe necessary to determine which to try to save. The literature reports a 1% mortality
Reducing the surgical risks
Many bitches undergoing anesthesia for C-section may be oxygen deprived secondary to exertion,
stress and pressure on the diaphragm from the gravid uterus. They are often dehydrated, although
neither parameter is evident clinically. Most bitches have not eaten for several to 24 hours, are
not interested in drinking, some have vomited, they have been straining and stressed in labor, and
hypocalcemic.
We manhandle her during examination, radiography, and ultrasonography and proceed to place a
catheter, and prep her for surgery.
We must attempt to do all we can to minimize the stress to the bitch and the pups by keeping
everyone calm (dog and owner), starting IV fluids, managing the bitch's pain and anxiety, doing an
efficient anesthesia and surgical procedure, and providing oxygen if accepted by the bitch.
It is now time to move quickly. Minimizing the time from induction to delivery of the pups strongly
correlates with maximizing neonatal survival rates. And minimizing surgical time minimizes bitch
morbidity. Speed is of the essence!
Before the bitch is induced and the surgery begins, it is beneficial to stop briefly and review the
surgical and treatment areas fo be certain all necessary equipment, supples and drugs are readly
lives. It also reduces stress on the staff and inspires greater confidence in a distressed owner when
they see the staff working as a team, making every move effective.
completed, the IV catheter has been placed, the indicated medications and fluids have been
and has been pre-oxygenated if appropriate
Each staff member has been assigned specific duties for monitoring, setting up the anesthetic
monitor, the surgical scrub, and handling surgical packs, gowns and gloves. Puppy resuscitation
duties should also be pre-assigned.
112  Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Induction of anesthesia and monitoring
In many hospitals, induction is done in the surgical suite. This minimizes the time from induction to
delivery of the puppies.
The bitch is induced with propofol to effect, the endotracheal tube is immediately placed and
secured, the cuff inflated. She is maintained on either Isoflurane or Sevoflurane.
Methoxyflurane, ketamine, diazepam, xylazine, and thiamylal are contraindicated because they
adversely affect puppy survival rates. Face mask induction with anesthetic gas increases the bitch's
oxygen needs due to anxiety and the struggle at induction, causing reduced blood flow to the uterus
and oxygen depletion to the fetuses. It is also putting your staff at risk by increasing the anesthetic
gas in the environment and injury while handling an unruly bitch. Therefore, induction with Propofol
followed by immediately securing the bitch's airway and anesthetic maintenance with isoflurane or
while she is transitioning to the inhalant anesthetic.
V fluids are started, and monitoring sPO,, CO,, blood pressure, EKG, heart rate and respiratory
rates is initiated.
Depth of anesthesia must be managed carefully, even more so than in other abdominal procedures
If the plane of anesthesia is too deep, the bitch will become hypovolemic and blood flow to the
puppies will be compromised. If too light, pain will result in sympathetic stimulation, reducing blood
flow to the uterus.
The surgical prep
Place the patient on her back rolled slightly to the left (left side down) and secured in preparatior
for the surgeon. Positioning with the left side tilted downward minimizes the weight of the gravid
(arguably not much with small puppies and small litters). The table should NoT be tilted with her head
If there is adequate staff, the surgeon should begin the surgical scrubbing at the start of induction.
If staff is short, the surgeon should be certain the patient is in a stable plane of anesthesia prior to
scrubbing in (Appendix A-5).
Cap and mask for all in the surgical suite, routine scrubbing, gowning and gloving of the surgeon
should be initiated.
When the surgeon is ready to drape the bitch, she should be rolled into the final position and the final
lap towels. ldeally, there should be a pre-counted pack of instruments and gauze, and the lap towels
identified with a radio-opaque system (i.e. safety pin).
The surgical approach
be delivered less than 10 minutes after induction, with an average of 1 pup per minute thereafter
(Figure 6-8).
umbilicus caudally as far as necessary to easily exteriorize the uterus. The incision can be extended
cranially and caudally as indicated. Here, the linea can be much thinner than the surgeon may be
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 11 3
Figure 6-8.
A Puppy Resuscitation Center - Plastic tray lined with
heating pads and a blanket. Oxygen mask. DeLee Mucus
traps ready for each assistant to use to suction pups. B.
Puppy CareSetup-2workstationsfor puppyresuscitation,
puppy weighing,icdentification,and umbilical cord care.C.
Surgical Suite Setup - ready for the bitch, with padded,
heated v-tray, towels on the floor for staff safety, surgical
packs and sterile towels.
are dangerously close to the incision and care is required. An incision is made with a scalpel through
the skin to the subcutaneous tissue. Using a pair of Metzenbaum scissors sharply dissect through the
subcutaneous tissue approximately 1 cm on each side of the incision to facilitate closure of the linea.
With a pair of thumb forceps, lift the linea and make a nick through it with the scalpel, blade directed
up. A full-length incision is made in the elevated linea with a pair of Metzenbaum scissors.
Once the incision appears to be long enough, the surgeon can identify the uterus and assess its
position. The uterus should NOT be incised without exteriorization and packing off at least a portion
with lap sponges. The uterus can be carefully exteriorized by locating a puppy in mid-horn position
(they are the most accessible and mobile) and lifting by holding the puppy and uterus in the same
hand. lt can also be helpful to have an assistant, not scrubbed in, apply gentle pressure to the lateral
abdomen on the side the puppy is on, below the drape to avcid contaminating the sterile surgical
field, to facilitate exteriorizing the first puppy. Care should be taken in manipulation of the uterus, as
it is easy to tear or puncture the uterus during this process. If the incision is too small, it should be
seems to need to be unduly large, but remember it must be large enough in cases of multiple pups
in a horn to allow 2 pups folded in a V to be exteriorized simultaneously. Place lap sponges along the
abdominal incision. The towels can be moistened if there is time, but the uterine contents will do this
nicely within a few minutes (Figure 6-9).
114 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure6-9.
A.C-section incision in the uterine horn, near the uterine body, on the corsal aspect of the horn.B. C-section with pup
delivered, head below pup's hips to allow fluicd to drain while placenta is removed from the uterine wall. Note there is no fluid
near the pup's face so no fluid will be aspirated. C. Pup in a transverse presentation. The head of the pup is in one horn with
the rump of the pup in the opposite horn. D. The green area shows where a previous C-section incision was made and healed.
E. Segmental aplasia. One uterine horn is normal, the other uterine horn did not have a lumen that connected to the uterine
the dog in the preceding photograph. The opposite uterine horn was left in situ, and this bitch went on to have a litter of 4
pups on her nextbreeding.Her daughter hadanormal uterus andnormalfertility.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 115
G
H
Figure 6-9.(continued)
G. Routine uterine closure after a C-section using a Utrecht Suture pattern, absorbable suture, not penetrating into the lumen
H.Uterine horn with a narrowing, causing dystocia.Note the serosal cysts are an incidental fnding and not a cause of infer-
tilty or other disease.
Depending on the size of the bitch and the litter, several or all of the pups inside the uterine horns
time or it is likely to tear from shear weight alone.
sponges strategically to minimize abdominal contamination by uterine contents.
There is currently discussion over whether it is appropriate to ovariohysterectomize the bitch at
is NoT to remove the uterus at the time of C-section. This is a relatively recent change of philosophy
Although the ovaries are not necessary for lactation, removal of the uterus can cause tremendous
blood loss, induce DIC, and cause other physiological changes that can greatly increase surgical risk
for the patient.
Even use of the laser will not make ovariohysterectomy safe at C-section. The blood loss is
primarily from blood contained in the uterus, not from the incision sites. We do not recommend
ovariohysterectomy unless the uterus is surgically irreparable or the bitch is at risk of serious
complications by leaving a toxic uterus in situ. This situation is very rare.
Ihe pups should be removed from the uterus. If there is any hope of survival, the uterus should
NEVER be removed with the pups in situ. They need to be removed swiftly and individually while the
Delivery of the puppies
i auiddeu, no, monle on eoan pe Apiden saiddnd suagel lof waishs e dolaap ot inasn s! 1
location in the uterus and to facilitate tracking resuscitation, if any, of individual puppies. Several
     u  a      
Most surgeons prefer to lift the uterus and retract it caudally, exposing the dorsal surface. Make 1
longitudinal incision into the uterus on the dorsal side of the uterus near the uterine body between
116Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
placentas and remove as many pups as possible. The surgeon should make a light-handed full
thickness lengthwise incision with a scalpel over one end of a puppy or between puppies in a
healthy area of the uterine body or horn approximately 1/2 to 2/3 the length of the puppy. If this
is impractical for any reason, another area of the uterine horn may be incised in a healthy area
concurrently with the linea.
The first visible puppy is exposed, the face quickly cleared by the surgeon by tearing full thickness
through the membranes with a gauze square, while holding the puppy head down. (it is not
u oi pauoee ls si euaoeid aun allum auop aq uen sui (sui op oi shossios asn oi Aessaau
uterus so the pup is stillreceiving oxygen through the placenta as it takes its first breath of air.
After the membranes are removed from the pup's nose, the pup can be laid down briefly on the lap
towel so the placenta can be detached from the uterine wall using both hands. Watch to be sure
the pup's nose is not submerged in blood and fetal fluids that pool on the drapes and lap towels.
 In litters born at term, the placenta is usually easily freed from the uterine wall by finding the edge
 of the attachment and hooking an index finger from one hand between the placenta and uterine
wall, and lifting the placenta away while the thumb of the other hand helps separate the placenta
n a      p  ou      s 
With or without the placenta attached, the pup is handed to a waiting assistant holding a sterile
hands of assistants, the surgeon can maintain a sterile feld without chancing that a pup will be
dropped in the handoff to the assistant. Our technicians prefer to have the pup handed to them with
the pup's head downward for fluid drainage and easier access for suctioning fluids with the Delee
mucus trap as they are walking from surgery to the treatment area to continue resuscitation of the
pup. This process is then repeated until all pups are delivered.
If the pups are high risk or trouble is suspected prior to C-section, interventional resuscitation at
removal from the uterus may be useful. An assistant can scrub in, aid in exteriorizing the uterus,
from the uterus. The assistant can use a sterile DeLee mucus trap (straight cut of the original sterile
pue dnd au shaap uoaains aun se suoaoas aun uoons pue sdnd aui qnu oi uaag pue (auaeyoed
separates the placenta from the uterus. Although each placenta does not need to be delivered with
each pup (it can be left in situ and the umbilical cord can be clamped off at delivery), the placenta
will be in the surgeon's way as the next pups are delivered. This pre-emptive resuscitation may
improve puppy survival rates.
Frequently, the next pup in line will slide into the uterine incision. The pups should be removed from
the uterus in the order that makes delivery of each most efficient. The remainder of the pups should
be removed from the uterus as previously described. When the uterine incision can be well planned
the surgeon can usually remove all of the pups through one uterine incision. This is preferred
because the uterine closure will be faster, minimizing surgery time and the uterus will heal with less
scarring, improving the bitch's chances to have another successful breeding.
A second, or rarely third uterine incision may be required. Ifit is obvious that the delivery will be
prolonged by fighting to move the pups down to the incision, an additional incision is indicated. In
all pups through one incision. Oxygen deprivation by prolonging the delivery Is counter-productive
In some cases, there is a bifurcation of the uterine body (the intercornual septum) that will interfere
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 117
e e 's  u ai ao  uo i e nn u I  snd p 
incision must be made.
In some cases, the uterus is friable and heavy and the uterine horn may tear. If this occurs in a location
Once all the pups have been delivered, the uterus should be carefully examined. BE ABSOLUTELY
CERTAIN THAT ALL PUPPIES HAVE BEEN DELIVERED - the uterus should be examined from ovary
to vagina on both sides. Be sure there is not a fetus left in the pelvic canal where it cannot be
visualized. lf there was a uterine rupture, the abdominal cavity should be explored for fetuses and
         s   t   
resorption sites, this should be removed or lavaged from the uterus. The uterine lavage can be done
with either a large syringe attached to a red rubber feeding or comparable tube or a bag of warmed
IV fluids via a venoset. All equipment and supplies must be sterile.
Closure of the incisions
Additionally, brief digital manipulation of the cervix may be performed; this is reported to simulate
vaginal delivery ot pups and improve maternal acceptance of her newborns.
The uterus should be thoroughly examined on the serosal surfaces to assess for small tears
through the serosa or broad ligament. If any are located, they should be repaired with a 2-0 or 3-0
lears in the broad ligament should be sutured to prevent other abdominal organs from slipping into
the rent but close carefully to avoid compromising uterine circulation.
The uterine incision(s) should be closed, carefully creating a seal of serosa to serosa contact. There
are several techniques. The author prefers a Utrecht pattern with 2-0 or 3-0 absorbable suture
(usually polyglycolic acid) with a taper needle. The suture should be meticulously placed so as not to
penetrate the mucosal surface. Avoid suturing the remaining placentas into the incision as this will
increase the risk of developing metritis (Figure 6-10).
When the uterus is closed, the incision line should have a good seal with only the knots peeking
through on the exposed end. This will permit excellent healing with minimal adhesions or damage,
inside or outside the uterus. In most cases, the uterine incislon will heal well enough to allow a return
fo normal fertility, allowing the bitch to conceive, carry and whelp another litter(s).
Prior to closing the abdomen, perform an instrument and gauze count - this is the type of surgery
that can lead to an overlooked gauze sponge or instrument.
      aa      s 
thoroughly. Soiled lap sponges should be replaced with fresh sterile towels, and the assistant can aid
in the lavage directly or via the use of a sterile system. Either sterile warmed (99-101° F) Lactated
Ringers or Normal Saline should be used. Routine generous lavage with 1 to 2 liters of fluids will
reduce abdominal contamination of the abdomen with blood clots and fetal fluids. The surgeon should
be sponged or suctioned from the abdomen although it is not harmful to leave some fluid
118 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
2 cm
2cm
/2CT
C
D
E
Figure6-10.
A Uterine tear at C-section. This can be repaired by careful suturing. B. Uterine tear at C-section repaired with a Utrecht
suture pattern and absorbable sutures. This willnot impair fertility at the next breeding. C. Utrecht suture pattern to close
the uterus at C-section showing placement and proportions. D. Utrecht suture to close uterus at C-section. E. Utrecht suture
pattern to close the uterus at C-section showing the final tie. With permission from the Drost project.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 119
C
Figure 6-11.
A. Puppy Towels - matching set of non-sterile and autoclaved towels, allws color coding pups for tracking neonatal resusci
tation and uterine focation. B. 16 pups wrapped in their colored towels for identifcation. C. DeLee Mucus trap used to aid in
Clearing fluids from the airways of the pups. D. Technician tying off the umbilical cord with suture after the C-section.
The surgeon should remove soiled lap towels and reglove.
There are individual preferences for abdominal closure. One option is to use 2-0 polyglycolic
acid absorbable suture material in a simple interrupted pattern in the linea. Size O absorbable or
non-absorbable suture may be considered an alternative in giant bitches or where wound healing
may be compromised. Continuous suture patterns can be risky in the abdominal wall where there is
a large incision with a great deal of activity and edema. Many of these patients will have a following
procedure, whether a routine ovarichysterectomy, a surgical breeding, or a subsequent C-section,
and non-absorbable sutures may cause complications during future surgical procedures. For the
pattern can be done at the surgeon's preference. For speed, a Ford Interlocking suture pattern with
a non-absorbable material may be used in the skin. This is well tolerated by the bitch and puppies.
Some surgeons close with the subcuticular layer as their final pattern. Surgical staples may not
be suitable for skin closure because they do not lay as flat to the skin and can interfere with the
puppies when they are nursing. An occasional bitch may feel the need to remove her own sutures.
Now you can give her drugs
After all the pups have been delivered and the uterus closed, the use of Oxytocin can be very helpful.
Administered slowly IV or directly into the uterine muscle (myometrium), Oxytocin rapidly causes
120 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
placental attachment sites. The dosage varies widely (1 to 20 U/dog) and should be based on the
needs of the patient. There is often a transient reduction in the bitch's heart rate, but this will resolve
spontaneously.
All of the concerns we have about the use of Oxytocin prior to delivery of the puppies, such as
restricting uterine blood flow or causing uterine rupture are clearly no longer an issue
A non-steroidal anti-inflammatory may also be appropriate. The decision to use or not use a
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory must be based on the overall health of the bitch - her blood pressure
during the procedure, renal and liver function, and her tolerance of NSAIDs. There is no product
currently labeled for this use and it is unlikely the pharmaceutical industry will apply to the FDA for a
with no known ill effects. Others have used Rimadyl with success. The human literature, which is the
well as nursing offspring.
The first dose is administered by injection and followed by oral medication for 3 to 5 days post-op.
Buprenorphine can be used to manage pain until the Metacam@ takes effect. Others prefer
tramadol for pain management. Ihere are other medications commonly prescribed for post-op pain
management, but care must be taken to select one which will not pass in large quantities through
pno ays peu saedeo geuaw no apne ui aaueyo e yons yo au asno iou m pue ywi a
inadvertently or deliberately cause harm to the puppies.
There is no comprehensive study to support the use of more than one dose of pain medications in
the post-op C-section bitch. It is easy to extrapolate from the human that there is post-op incisional
in the dog, it stands to reason that pain management should be considered essential. Add to that
line, and failure to prescribe some form of post-op pain medication represents a serious lapse in
judgment. It is finally recognized in veterinary medicine that pain management is essential to the
managed seem to make better mothers. They feel better, eat and drink better, consequently lactate
better, can move around more comfortably, and are better able to care for their newborns. Not only
provide pain relief to a post-surgical patient.
Resuscitation of the neonate at vaginal birth or Birth by C-section
Airway and breathing, including ventilatory and pharmaceutical support if needed
This is the recommended sequence of events for resuscitation whether the pups are born by
C-section or vaginal birth (See Table 6-2).
inadequate surfactant, excessive fluids in the airways, or aspiration of meconium (Figure 6-12)
All equipment should be laid out and organized in advance so it is readily available as needed. The
pups which are usually born vigorous and vocalizing and need litfle assistance. lf the bitch or pups
their efforts (Figure 6-14).
lt is ideal to have 1 assistant for every 1 to 2 pups. Initial resuscitation should consist of assuring
that the mouth and nose are free of fetal membranes and the free fluid in the oral cavity is suctioned
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 121
out with a soft-tipped bulb syringe. At the same
time, the assistant should vigorously rub the
pup with the towel, tip the pup head down to
allow fluids to drain from the airway, check the
umbilicus for excessive hemorrhage and to
be certain the abdominal wall is complete (no
exposed intestines). The pup should be placed
on a heated surface or a heating pad should be
folded taco-style with the pup and towel in the
fold. Swinging the pups is not recommended as
 this can cause excessive intracranial pressure,
sub-dural hemorrhage and forces stomach
contents into the airway.
Figure6-12
With rubbing, the pup should be vocalizing and
Meconium on pup indicating fetal distress prior to birth.
breathing spontaneously. If this is not the case,
Antibiotics are indicated for this pup.
suctioning with a bulb syringe and De Lee mucus
trap should be started. A bulb syringe is most
effective in removing thick mucus, and can be alternated with a De Lee which is better for thin
it is distended and interfering with respiration. Gently shaking the pup by the scruff of the neck can
also aid in stimulating respirations. If there is excess fluid in the lungs, the assist can lay a pup on a
supplying oxygen and supplemental heat (Figure 6-13).
If the pup is still non-responsive, it should be evaluated for cbvious physical defects, such as a cleft
palate or other deformity, that would make ongoing attempts to resuscitate futile.
If the pup appears normal but is not breathing, the thorax should be auscultated for a heartbeat. If
the pup has a curled tongue and/or a heartbeat, efforts to revive the pup should be continued.
If the pup is breathing, but not well, face mask oxygen should be supplied. If there are a number of
pups who need oxygen, they can be lined up in a glass aquarium on its side or other chamber with
they receive oxygen.
If the pup is not breathing, this may be stimulated
by use of GV26, the acupuncture point. To do
this, a 25 gauge needle is inserted into the upper
lip until bone is hit, then it is turned. This is the
respiratory stimulation point.
The airways should again be cleared, and the
pup rubbed.
If no spontaneous respirations have started
by 10 minutes after delivery, an injection of
doxapram (Dopram?) may be administered. This
product can be administered as 1 or possibly 2
 doses, of 1 to 2.5 mg per puppy each, injected
into the umbilical vein, followed by a saline
Figure 6-13.
Head down position of pup after delivery to aid in fluid fluid
flush to deliver the Dopram? to the circulation
drainage draining from the respiratory tract.
As an alternative, 0.01 ml Dopram? can be
122 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
 dnd au pue 'anu a napun paddop l I'o no alsn yan ppn au oui paaspe
be monitored for a response, seen as a red flush to the mucus membranes. It can be repeated if
necessary. Injection into the tongue may lead to pain and reluctance to nurse. It is essential that
the airway be clear prior to this injection as damage will be done to the pup if it attempts to inhale
against a closed airway or aspirates fluid deeper into the airways. Dopram is controversial in humans
as it can cause brain damage by increasing the brain's demand for oxygen. However, we believe
from clinical experience that there are pups who have survived with normal skills that may have died
without this intervention.
Atropine is contraindicated in the neonate.
If any drugs requiring reversal were used, the reversal agents should be administered. Naloxone
can be administered via the endotracheal tube at two times the injectable dose, but is only effective
if opioids were used. Dexamethasone Sodium Phosphate or Solu-Medrol (0.1 to 1 mg) may aid
Endotracheal intubation should be performed if the neonate is not breathing. (It is a very good idea
with the end cut off and flamed smooth, tom cat or large bore IV catheters. The Cole tube provides the
uosiad auo Kq auop aq Aensn ueo uonegnui aul euais pauoisod ag pinous dnd aul jeas isag
hand, with the thumb of the left (same) hand on top of the tongue, and the fngers of the left hand
curled under the jaw. The left hand will also support the head with the lower jaw horizontal to the table
'anuoi aun supiou puey awes aun 'puey hal aun jo wjed aui ul 'algel aun ot jean mel laddn aui pue
airway and simultaneously hold the tongue downward so the arytenoids can be visualized. The handle
trunk. The right hand of the technician will be used to clear fluid from the airway with cotton swabs, a
bulb syringe, or a Delee mucus trap. As soon as the tracheal opening is visible, an appropriately sized
endotracheal tube can be passed.
An alternative way to illuminate the larynx for intubation is for an assistant to the technician to place
blade of the laryngoscope interfering with the placement of the endotracheal tube.
Once the tube is verifed to be in place, the tube should be secured with a strip of tape around the
tube and around the back of the pup's skull. Initiate ventilation. The first breath is the most difficult
and requires the most force - it is the one that will open the alveoli and spread the surfactant over the
alveolarsurface.
The frst ventilation can be administered by use of 1 ml of air in a syringe. Care should be taken to
avoid overexpansion of the lungs as this may cause pneumothorax. Ventilations should not exceed 15
s  n     g  no  n     
machine can be used to deliver oxygen to the lungs. Use of a manometer will assure that the lungs
prevent the alveoli from collapsing. The maximum PEEP value should not exceed 5.
If intubation is not an option, a face mask with a tightly fitted diaphragm attached to an Ambu bag or
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 123
Efforts to resuscitate a puppy should be continued for up to 20 minutes, with owner consent, if the
ou ay oi dnd au ot algissod si ll seag heay e sey pe aueeadde un jeou Aissoa si dnd
vision and cognitive skills even with prolonged apnea.
If no heartbeat is ausculted, cardiac compressions should be started immediately. This should be done
by placing the thumb on 1 side of the thorax and the forefingers on the opposite side. Compressions
should be given at 100 to 120 per minute, alternating with ventilations through an endotracheal tube
vein or at two times the injectable dose into the endotracheal tube) followed by O.1 mg/kg for
subsequent doses.
Once the pup is breathing spontaneously, oxygen should be administered by face mask or in an oxygen
chamber. This should be continued until the tongue stays pink without supplemental oxygen. Eventually
be used to monitor spO,. Arterial blood gases are not practical to monitor the newborn.
uangsuen o wnenbe ue no loegnou ue aiei si loddns uaxo supaau sdnd go laqunu aun a
tube near or in one nostril of the pup and continuous oxygen flow hooked up. Many owners are willing
to assist technical staff by monitoring the stable pups thereby freeing veterinary staff to care for the
pups needing additional resuscitation.
It is common for newborns to breath irregularly at frst. If they are pink, breathing, have a heartbeat,
and are crying, they are probably OK.
lo use the accordion squeeze, the head and shoulder of the pup are held firmly in one hand while the
the lungs while stimulating cardiac activity. Uther methods can be interspersed at the same time -
CPR, dopram, oxygenation, and suctioning.
Don't give up if there is a curl to the tongue and a heartbeat you can hear with a stethoscope.
It is important for the veterinary staff to practice neonatal resuscitation protocols in advance of the
C-section. In most cases, the veterinarian and one staff member will be concentrating their efforts
on the anesthetic and surgical care of the bitch and will need additional skilled staff to handle the
newborns.
The veterinary staff should also be trained to assess each pup for vitality. There is no standardized
method in veterinary medicine, but use of an APGAR-type method will help to produce consistent
monitoring and care ( lable 6-5) (Appendix A-1).
Umbilical care
e ueun ao podns lao no uaxo jo paau ui laui ou pue 'as ae sdnd aun au
support), the umbilical cords can be tied off from the placentas. A sterile hemostat should be
positioned approximately 1 inch (2 cm) from the pup's abdominal wall, and used to clamp the
umbilical cord. The hemostat is removed and sterile suture used to ligate the umbilical cord in the
crushed site of the umbilical cord. After the umbilical cord is ligated and transected, the umbilicus
should then be dipped in tincture of iodine solution (in the container to be dispensed with the client)
to minimize bacterial contamination of the cord. This infection, omphalitis, can lead to secondary
124  Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Table 6-5 Proposed APGAR for puppies
Parameter
0 pts
1 pt
2 pts
Activicy, muscle cone
 Flaccid
 Some cone in extremities
Active movements
Pulse, heart rate
 Absent - < than 110 bpm
110 - 220 bpm
> 220 bpm
Reflexes when stressed
Absent
Some movement
Crying out
Mucous membrane color
Pale or cyanotic
Slighcly cyanotic
Pink
 Respiratory rate
Absent
Weak, irregular
> 15/min, rhythmic
Interpretation:
Total points
Vitality
0-3
Weak
4-6
Moderate
7-10
Normal
bacterial infection, peritonitis, sepsis, pneumonia and rapid death. The placentas can be discarded
unless needed for histology and culture.
Fluids and nutritional support
Some pups that are distressed due to prolonged labor and delivery will be dehydrated and
hypoglycemic and will benefit from supportive care. Oral or parenteral dextrose and fluid
 Aaun pue sm aq on eadde sdnd aun se uos s issans Aan aq ue uosupe
aspirate, they may be fed warmed formula diluted 50% with normal saline. This should be dosed at
0.5 to 1 ml per cunce of body weight, administered by feeding tube every 2 to 3 hours. This should
be continued, gradually increasing to full strength formula, until the pups can nurse independently.
If the pups and bitch are wiling and able, the pups can be allowed to nurse prior to discharge from
padim aa pinous uuo Ae au 'on a on sdnd au unonui oi oud jdsy An a
with sterile saline to remove the residue of surgical scrub, minimizing the pup's oral exposure of the
product used as this tastes bad and deters the pups from nursing. Once this is completed, the puppies
can be allowed to begin nursing with close supervision by the veterinary staff. In large litters, the
discharge to the owner's care. (Figure 6-14).
The pups should be weighed before and after their first nursing to assess if they were effective
nursers. Thawed fresh frozen plasma can be
administered SC or orally to the pups if the bitch
has scant colostrum or the pups do not appear
to be nursing. (See chapter 8). Antibiotics should
be administered and dispensed to the pups if
they had meconium in their fetal membranes or
appear to be otherwise compromised.
Discharge of the bitch and her litter
(See Appendix C-12)
A typical C-section takes 45 to 60 minutes
from induction to closure. The owner/breeder
client will often want to remain at the hospital
during delivery, either to observe or participate
in neonatal care. Hospital policy should be
established in advance which areas of the
Figure 6-14
Post C-section bitch nursing before she goes home.
Chapter 6: Managing the Whelping and C-section 125
hospital clients are to have access to and whether photographs or videotaping will be permitted.
Medications and supplies dispensed should be prepared. During the recovery which is usually
under 1 hour, the bitch owner should be instructed on post-op care including incision care, pain
medications, dewormers, care of the newborns including daily examinations, nursing instructions,
umbilicus care, weigh-ins, and tube feeding techniques.
 Unless there are complications, the bitch and puppies can be discharged as soon as the pups have
given in the home setting than in the veterinary hospital, particularly in hospitals without 24 hour
care. Most veterinary hospitals are not set up with enclosures that are large enough for the bitch
to be with her pups, and often these enclosures have small gaps newborns can slip through and
become separated from the bitch and litter. They would require constant monitoring. Most breeders
have a whelping box that is secure enough to contain the puppies and allows them to be monitored
Carefully in their own home setting.
assure they remain wellrested enough to provide good post partum care and decision making for
the pups and bitch (Appendix C-9).
1 26Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
CHAPTERT
Managing the Immediate
Postpartum Period in the Bitch
Health care
Prior to whelping, the bitch should be eating a quality commercially manufactured performance,
assess the number of pups due. Most bitches whelp at home without veterinary intervention
If the bitch has not been radiographed pricr to whelping, or if she does not deliver the expected
number of pups, she should be scheduled for an appointment as soon as possible. Ideally, she
The longer the delay from whelping to the appointment, the greater the risk to the bitch and the
retained pup(s).
The minimum examination of the bitch should be a physical examination including hydration, mucus
membrane color and refill, rectal temperature, abdominal palpation for retained fetuses, character of
milk. If there is any question regarding uterine palpation, for instance if the bitch is thick-bodied or
the contracting uterus cannot be distinguished from retained pup(s), a lateral abdominal radiograph
should be taken to confirm that the bitch has completed her delivery.
Many veterinarians and breeders are familiar with an injection of oxytocin following the delivery
of the last pup. In the lingo of breeding, this is called a "clean-out shot." It is surrounded by some
controversy. Purists may state that oxytocin is not necessary if all pups and placentas are accounted
for. Others feel it can aid in expelling any retained placenta or fetuses, to hasten uterine involution,
to 20 units or 2 units/kg, up to 20 units, has not been harmful.
In general, this oxytocin injection is unlikely to cause harm, although the bitch may experience
transient cramping. On the other hand, it is an opportunity to schedule a post-partum evaluation for
whelped at home with a cleft palate or other defect. Early intervention is good medicine for the bitch
or pup and it allows for more effcient scheduling at the veterinary hospital. Most veterinarians would
s e  g a  n a a a ao  au p d e as s
problem after hours.
All pups should be examined within 24 to /2 hours of birth. This examination should include body
weight, temperature, examination of the mucus membranes, examination of the oral cavity for cleft
palates and other defects, palpation of the skull for open fontanelles, auscultation of the thorax for
murmurs, examination of the ventral abdomen for hernias and umbilical infections, evaluation of the
limbs, examination of the rectum for patency (feces present) and evaluation of the presence and
color of urine on a cotton ball swabbed across the urethral opening.
At this visit or within 5 days of birth when the pups are deemed strong enough, dewclaws and tails
can be removed as appropriate for the breed
Unless the bitch was on the 4 week fenbendazole protocol, at 2 weeks of age, the bitch and pups
started for the pups at 6 weeks.
128 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Nutrition and exercise
The feeding location and type of food and water dishes chosen for the post-partum bitch must be
based on where she will be willing to eat/drink and where the pups will be safe. Care must be taken
so that pups cannot fall into the water and food dishes. Some bitches become protective of their
food, even to the point of becoming aggressive toward their own newborns.
Many bitches will not eat very well for the frst few days. It may be necessary to tempt her with
many will require 2 to 4 times their maintenance caloric needs to lactate adequately without losing
bitch to eclampsia.
After weaning, most bitches will continue to eat more than a maintenance diet for a few weeks. Care
should be taken to avoid obesity.
Excessive hair loss, known as post-partum effluvium, is normal and will resolve on its own. It can
 o  ae sag and a aun e idan yo g  
The bitch should be exercised in moderation. Many bitches will not leave their pups during the first
will be more willing to leave and normal activities can be resumed. Care should be taken to protect
the mammary glands from trauma. Swimming can be resumed once the vaginal discharge Is
minimal, presuming the cervix Is closed.
Post partum bitches should not be taken to areas such as dog parks and dog-related activities to
avoid exposure to infectious diseases that could be transmitted to the pups
Anthelmenthics
Post-natal preventive anthelmintic treatment
These protocols, both prenatal/postnatal for the bitch and early treatment protocols for the puppies
veterinarian share in the responsibility of protecting puppy buyers and their families and friends from
exposure to zoonotic diseases which have the potential to cause serious health threats in humans
If the pregnant bitch did not receive an entire round of prophylactic anthelmintic treatment with
fenbendazole, ivermectin, or selamectin, the puppies must be treated with anthelmintics early and
trequently to prevent patent infections.
Pyrantel pamoate is the drug of choice for very young kittens and puppies, and is appropriate for
       s         
24 weeks of age, with their mothers being dosed at the same time. Ihe bitches and queens should
be treated concurrently with their puppies and kittens because they frequently ingest the neonate's
feces. This protocol will reduce roundworms and hookworms in the pups. Kittens do not have
Chapter 7: Managing the Immediate Postpartum Period in the Bitch 129
visit at 6 to 8 weeks of age. Send the worming medications home with the client at an earlier visit,
such as the breeding appointment, the prenatal appcintment for ultrasound or radiographs, or the
post-partum check-up. The breeder is much more likely to treat the puppies if they already have the
wormer at home for both the pups and bitch.
Puppies from bitches treated prenatally with anthelmintics or pups treated starting at 2 weeks of
age are thriftier, gain weight faster, utilize their food better, and have less diarrhea. These pups
are easier to raise because they tend to be sick less often and are easier to keep clean. Pups with
early intestinal parasite infections can have hookworm anemia, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration
poor weight gain, and in some cases die prior to their 6 week veterinary visit. This can easily be
prevented by early worming.
Common disorders of the immediate post-partum period:
Diagnosis and treatment
Mastitis
(Appendix B-6)
Mastitis is a bacterial infection of 1 or more mammary glands. Mastitis is the most common cause of
bitch is vaguely ill, she may be febrile but the gland and milk may appear normal. In this early stage,
for a diagnosis. Cytology on a drop of milk from each gland may aid in diagnosing subclinical or
early mastitis. The milk and gland may look grossly normal. Normal milk contains a few neutrophils,
macrophages, and lymphocytes. Milk from an infected gland will contain many degenerative
neutrophils and bacteria, either cocci or rods. Oxytocin may be helpful in collecting the milk sample
- pain associated with mastitis may deter the bitch from letting down her milk. Total cell counts have
not been correlated to severity of mastitis or neonatal illness, and are not helpful diagnostically
early that changes in the mammary gland are subtle. The 2 routes of infection are through the teat
ducts (trauma from the pups or contamination from vaginal secretions or fetal stools) or through
a hematogenous spread (from the uterus or other sites of bacterial infection). The bacteria most
commonly found include Staph spp., Strep spp, E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, and Pasteurella.
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause. The patient will have a fever; lose interest in
food and water, and be lethargic. There will be marked swelling, redness and inflammation of one or
necrotic area which can abscess through the skin surface.
Within a few hours of developing malaise, one or more glands will be red, swollen and hot. The milk
may be obviously different in appearance from normal milk. On CBC, the white blood cell count will
If septic, she may have a decreased glucose and albumin, and elevated liver enzymes.
If mastitis is suspected, but is not clinically apparent, ultrasound of the glands can help pinpocint
a diagnosis. A normal mammary gland on ultrasound should have organized layers of medium
echogenicity and an overall coarse granular structure. The mastitic gland will lose its organized
layers; instead the tissue will be randomly organized with reduced echogenicity. Most veterinarians
do not routinely scan the normal mammary gland with ultrasound so it is useful to scan all of the
glands for comparison. Only 1 or 2 glands are typically infected, so there are usually others on the
same bitch that can be used for comparison.
1 30  Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Cytology, culture and sensitivity willbe useful in developing a treatment plan. Note if rods or cocci
the skin with 70% rubbing alcohol and allow it to dry. Wearing gloves,express milk from the teat.
the skin.
An appropriate antibiotic is the treatment of choice and is best based on a drug shown to be safe
of sensitivity results. The best choices for safety and effhcacy are amoxicillin, amoxicillin with
the pups in the milk if they are under 2 weeks of age. Because of the inflammatory changes in the
Warm compresses are also helpful. IV or SQ fluids and non-stercidal antinflammatories may be
indicated. Pups should be allowed to nurse unless there is a necrotic gland or they are old enough
and time to heal will adequately treat open abscesses. In rare cases, the necrotic tissue may need to
be surgically debrided and drains placed.
If the bitch is toxic or is developing gangrenous mastitis and a sloughing gland, it may be necessary
to remove the pups and hospitalize the mother. She may require IV fluids and IV antibiotics. IV
Cabergoline administered for 2 to 3 days (5 mcg/kg once daily) will reduce lactation if indicated.
This can be reversed by withdrawing the drug and instituting metoclopramide or domperidone. The
If early weaning is necessary, but the breeder would like to leave the bitch with the pups, she can be
placed in an appropriately sized t-shirt or one-piece bathing suit so that the social interactions that
'anu oi waui sumoe noum anuuo ueo sdnd au nauag m
The prognosis is very good and recurrence at subsequent breeding is unlikely
Metritis and retained placentae
cause of metritis, retained placentas in the dog rarely cause metritis (Figure /-l).
bitch. Metritis is typically noted in the first 3 to 5 days after whelping: mastitis can occur at this time,
but is more common several weeks after whelping. The cause is bacterial colonization of the uterus,
with or without retained placentae and without the hormonal influences that cause pyometra.
The bitch may run a fever, be lethargic, be anorexic like with mastitis; but will have a foul-smelling
based on ruling out mastitis, post-op wound infection if a C-section was performed, or other causes
of illness and the atypical fetid odor to the discharge. Confirmation is based on cytology and culture
of the uterine discharge; cytology will show toxic neutrophils with intracellular bacteria. Ultrasound
may show retained fetal or placental tissues. This is not the same disorder as pyometra.
24240
Treatment consists of appropriate antibiotic
 therapy (amoxicillin, amoxicillin with clavulanic
acid, or trimethoprim-sulfa for bitches that
cannot tolerate the penicillins). Prostaglandin F2
alpha (Lutalyse) and its analogues (Cloprostenol)
may help evacuate the retained tissues and
fluids from the uterus. Oxytocin is of little
value - by this time post-partum, the uterus
responds poorly to oxytocin. IV or SQ fluids
and anti-inflammatories may be indicated. On
rare occasion, ovariohysterectomy may be
 necessary. If the bitch is too ill to care for the
Figure 7-1.
pups, a surrogate mother or supplemental
Retained placenta seen on ultrasound post partum
feeding may be necessary.
If the infection can be managed medically, the prognosis for return to fertility is very good. Recurrence
at subsequent breeding is unlikely.
Retained pups
This is an unfortunate and preventable cause of illness in the bitch. By simply presenting the bitch
prediction of the number of pups expected.
ALL bitches, regardless of their owner's experience, should have veterinary care at the time of
whelping (either pre-partum with an accurate puppy count or post-partum for a follw-up radiograph,
complete delivery of all pups. The attending veterinarian should NEVER feel the need to apclogize to
the client for taking a post-partum radiograph that shows there are no pups leff: this Is great news
for the client and it is practicing good medicine within the standard of care.
depressed, dehydrated, and in need of immediate medical attention. The mother has a litter of pups
depending on her at a time when she is too sick to care for them. You not only have a sick mother to
treat and income loss from the loss of the retained pups, you also need to manage the care of the
remaining pups.
Conservative treatment is infrequently appropriate. If there is a retained dead pup (based on
ultrasound), and the bitch is not febrile or ill; initially, she may be treated with vaginal lavage of warm
24 hours, surgery will probably be necessary to prevent metritis.
risk is that the uterus will contract around the pup(s), decreasing the likelihood that they will pass, or
it will rupture, creating a life-threatening peritonitis.
patient. She should have pre-op laboratory work, V fluids, an appropriate anesthetic protocol, and
132 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
If febrile and ill, she should be stabilized pre-op. The owner should be advised that she could die
Treatment should include: IV fluids, hetastarch as indicated by lab values, antibiotics, and other
care as indicated. Once stable, her abdomen should be explored. If the uterus is in good condition,
remove the retained pup(s) from the exteriorized uterus, lavage the uterus while packed off from the
AND the owner has given consent, an ovarichysterectomy may be performed. Adhesions are
possible. Prior to closure, if there is evidence of uterine rupture, the abdomen should be explored
for uterine contents, lavaged, and an appropriate abdominal wall closure for potential peritonitis
performed. Post-op antibiotics, IV fluids, and pain management are indicated. In extreme cases,
adhesions and peritonitis may require referral to a board-certihed surgeon or 24 hour facility for
nursing care.
Post partum hemorrhage
is more common after Caesarean section than whelping and can be prevented by adequate fluid therapy
serious decision because it can lead to blood loss, shock and/or the development of DlC
Poor appetite
Many bitches do not eat or drink well in the immediate post-partum period. This may be related to
exhaustion, not feeling well, ingestion of all placentas, illness, or such total devotion to the pups that
she will refuse to leave them to eat, drink, or eliminate.
Clinical judgment and client impression are important tools. If the bitch is seen in the immediate
post-partum period and it is determined by radiograph that all pups have been delivered, a
vomiting, and the client feels she is in good spirits, she is probably OK to treat at home.
If she has not had pre or post-partum radiographs, or if she is vomiting, running a fever over 103° F,
not just treating her; the entire litter is at risk and may become your patients if she is not able to care
for them.
If it is determined that she is not ill , she can be encouraged to eat by adding warm canned dog food
improve her lactation. Sometimes the location of feeding must be changed, or hand-feeding can be
used to jump start her appetite. Her appetite should improve by the time the pups are 2 to 3 days old.
If this is not the case, she runs a fever or develops other symptoms, veterinary intervention is required.
If it is determined that she is ill, mastitis, metritis, retained placentas and retained pups are the frst
differentials to rule cut. The post-partum bitch, however, can have nearly any other canine disorder,
respond toconservative therapy.
Diarrhea
Most bitches, whether they ingest placentas or not, seem to develop diarrhea shortly after delivery.
Adequate hydration and dietary manipulation to minimize diarrhea (rice, bland diet, canned pumpkin,
yogurt or a commercially formulated intestinal dog food) and Kao-Pectate? (real kaolin-pectin, not
assess safety during lactation. Fluid therapy may be indicated to maintain lactation. Many breeders
can use SQ fluids at home.
Chapter 7: Managing the Immediate Postpartum Period in the Bitch 133
Parasite Council. These guidelines are available at www.capcvet.org.
Fenbendazole is used in late pregnancy and early lactation to reduce transplacental and
transmammary transmission of I. canis and A. caninum. Fenbendazole (Panacur) is dosed at 50 mg/
Agalactia
Agalactia is the inadequate availablity of milk while lactation should be occurring. This can be
environmental temperature, too litfle food and water intake, too many previous litfers, a C-sectior
poorly with each litter. A complete history and physical examination may reveal the underlying cause.
The bitch should be assessed for illness including mastitis. If no underlying cause is found that
 merits treatment, the following therapy can be instituted.
fo drink, adding moderate amounts of salf or salty food fo the diet, and/or giving SQ fluids
Many breeders have fluids on hand and are capable of handling this at home.
2.Increase food intake.Increase the total caloric intake.
3. Metoclopramide therapy (Reglan) - can be given by SQ injection or orally in liquid or
tablet form. It is useful when there is no apparent milk in the glands, based on the palpation
of non-distended mammary glands (different from milk being present but not being released.)
This is an important side effect of the drug that many veterinarians are unaware of (but lots of
breeders are - thanks to the internet)
 In the CNS, metoclopramide appears to antagonize dopamine at the receptor sites, which
stimulates prolactin release. Metoclopramide Is excreted into milk and may concentrate at
about twice the plasma level, but there does not appear to be a significant risk to nursing
offspring. It is widely used with few limiting side effects.
Metoclopramide is prescribed at the same dose as for gastrointestinal use: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/
a e     s t e    t     y
lactation occurs. It can be restarted if necessary. Some bitches may develop CNS signs
ranging from drowsiness fo restlessness and tremors. The drug should be discontinued if
these symptoms occur.
4. Domperidone blocks the action of dopamine (dopamine inhibits the release of prolactin),
It's use should be avoided in Collies and Collie-related breeds with the MDR-1 mutation. Both
stimulates let-down, only increased production (Figure 7-2).
 5. Oxytocin - can be given to aid in milk let-down, when milk is apparently present in the
mammary glands but the bitch is unable to lactate effectively. lt must be administered by
injection; there is no oral form. Oxytocin may be given subcutaneously at 0.25 to 1 u total
dose SQ every 2 hours to augment lactation
Oxytocin appears to work best if the pups are removed from the bitch, the oxytocin is given,
the bitch has warm compresses applied to her mammary glands for 15 to 20 minutes, and
then the pups are returned to her for nursing.
WhelpwiseM recommends the following oxytocin protocol to improve lactation:
1/2 unit SQ q 2 hours X 4 doses, then
1 unit/SQq 2 hours X 4 doses,then
1 34 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
2 units SQ q 2 hours X 4 doses, then
3 units SQ q 2 hours, then increase time between injections to 4, then 6 then 8 hours, then
discontinue when lactating well.
6. Acupuncture or acupressure are reported to improve lactation.
Domperidone Dosing in ml at 30 mg/ml:
For agalactia - 2.2 mg/kg of pound weight, po BlD for 4 to 6 days, or longer if needed. May be started prior to whelping.
 Dog by weight in pounds
ml of medication
Dog by weight in pounds
ml of medication
7.5 pounds
0.25 ml
 15 pounds
0.50 ml
25 pounds
0.83 ml
30 pounds
1.0 ml
45 pounds
1.5 ml
50 pounds
1.67 ml
69 pounds
2.0 ml
70 pounds
2.33 ml
75 pounds
2.5 ml
90 pounds
3.00 ml
100 pounds
3.33 ml
110 pounds
3.67 ml
125 pounds
4.17 ml
150 pounds
5.0 ml
Figure 7-2.
Domperidone dosage chart.
Aggression toward the puppies
Some bitches may be aggressive toward their pups after vaginal cr Caesarean delivery. This may
last from 24 to 72 hours and is more common in first-time mothers. Within 72 hours, most bitches
have settled into motherhood and tolerate the pups well but a few are never tolerant of the pups.
Bitches should have human supervision, particularly if they are recovering from anesthesia, until the
that are not likely to cause dysphoria is recommended. Buprenorphine, tramadol, Rimadyl? and
Metacam? are good choices.
Some bitches will not tolerate any contact, even nursing; some will tolerate nursing but no
pups; of course this communication is of no value to the pups as they can neither hear nor see.
  s        
There are several proposed causes for maternal aggression. Some suggest that it is genetic, but
it is not always a trait seen in mother and daughters. Stress, underfeeding, overcrowding, and
deafness have all been proposed as possible causes. A low stress environment means a quiet room
in bull terriers. There is no study currently available to show that low measured ionized calcium
levels have been correlated with this behavior. In addition to maternal aggression, there are strange
behaviors including hiding, staring at the pups, and having a glazed over look. Rarely, the bitch
calcium to stimulate oxytocin uptake and the need for oxytocin to achieve normal mothering skills.
Treatment consists of SQ calcium supplementation, followed by oral calcium supplements for several
Chapter 7: Managing the Immediate Postpartum Period in the Bitch 135
Dog Appeasing Pheromone (DAP) can be used to minimize aggression and anxiety. This is an
analog that mimics the pheromone naturally found in the amniotic fluid of dogs and the mammary
glands of lactating bitches. Its function is to reassure and calm puppies, and aid in bonding between
the bitch and her pups. Since its effects last into adulthood, it can also be used to reduce anxiety in
many settings. The bitch who has had a C-section is not exposed to the pheromone in the amniotic
fluids so maternal skills take longer to develop (up to 72 hours). Development of maternal skills can
be hastened by the use of the AdaptilTM collar. Although DAP comes in collar, room diffuser and spray
form, the collar works more quickly than the other forms. The collar can be used on the bitch for
If there is a stressful environment, such as multiple other pets in a small area, changing the
environment is indicated. If there is no response to calcium supplementation, the DAP collar, or the
the pups unsupervised may be the only option to completely removing the pups from their mother.
In most cases, patience with the bitch, crating her next to the whelping box, and only allowing
aq  snou e oi z Aaa asnu di sdnd an m oo ui ag ot lau (ss aos ui un no
required. It is beneficial to the pups to have several days of colostrum and milk from their own
mother prior to changing to hand-raising or placing them with a surrogate bitch.
Eclampsia, Post-parturient hypocalcemia, or Milk fever
stiff goose-stepping type gait and muscle tremors; panting; dialated pupils; hypoglycemia; and
seen as "down cow” syndrome.
showing low calcium. The typical patient is a smallbreed dog with a large litter of puppies at peak
lactation - between 1 and 4 weeks post partum. They are frequently on an unbalanced diet or were
supplemented with calcium during pregnancy.
Laboratory tests show a total serum calcium of /.0 mg/dl or less. Differentials include
hypoglycemia, epilepsy, toxicity, metoclopramide overdose, and other neurologic diseases.
However, on physical examination, a bitch with seizures and mammary development should be
presumed to have hypocalcemia until proven otherwise.
heart rate with a stethoscope, or preferably with an EKG. Administration must be discontinued if
bradycardia, tachycardia, arrhythmia, or vomiting occurs. Administer calcium gluconate 10%, warmed
to body temperature, at a rate of 50 to 150 mg/kg or 0.5 to 1.5 ml/kg 0ver 20 to 30 minutes. An
alternative IV treatment is I% calcium glycerophosphate plus calcium lactate (Calphosan solution I%)
administered at 2.5 to /.5 ml/kg, 0ver 20 to 30 minutes, stopping if the heart rate changes.
Additional calcium can be administered SQ or IM, but the product must be labeled for this route.
Calcium chloride CANNOT be given IM or SQ as it will result in tissue sloughs. If 10% calcium gluconate
solution is available, it can be diluted 50% with normal saline and administered SQ every 8 hours until
the oral calcium takes effect. Oral calcium treatment in tablet form (gluconate or carbonate) is avallable
for dogs and humans over-the-counter. It should be dosed at 500 mg TID per 20 Ibs and continued
throughout lactation. An oral calcium gel is also available and but is very bitter and administration can
1 36Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure 7-3.
A A small dog with a large litter causing eclampsia. Note the
rigdity of limbs and seizure - like activity. B. Monitoring the
EKG of the eclampsia patient during treatment with IV calcium
Calcium must be given slowly with careful monitoring. C. Note
the change in body posture once calcium levels are restored.
Pups must be supplemented while the bitch recovers.
C
be difficult. Tums? contain 500 mg calcium carbonate which supplies 200 mg calcium.
Some bitches need additional treatment if the symptoms are severe. This may include glucose
 ais i          r   
persists.
To prevent recurrence, puppies should be removed for weaning or removed temporarily and hand-fed
until the bitch can care for them. Additionally, oral calcium may be administered during lactation, but
not during pregnancy.
Uterine prolapse
Uterine prolapse is rare in dogs. It can occur following whelping while the cervix is still open. This
emergency requires repositioning the uterus as soon as possible. To do so, the dog should be
anesthetized, the uterus lubricated with sterile lubricant, flushed with sterile saline, and repositioned.
After replacement, oxytocin should be administered (5 to 10 IU IM) to aid in uterine involution. If it
cannot be reduced, hypertonic saline or 50% dextrose can be used to reduce uterine edema. If the
uterus cannot be reduced by external manipulation, a midline abdominal incision should be made and
the uterus reduced by internal manipulation. If the uterus is necrotic or cannot be repositioned, an
ovariohysterectomy may be performed.
Chapter 7: Managing the Immediate Postpartum Period in the Bitch 137
SIPS
This is a common disorder. It is most frequently noted in bitches after their first litter. The only
symptoms are an ongoing vaginal discharge with blood for more than 3 weeks and up to 4 months
post-partum. The bitch and pups do not show signs of illness; the vaginal discharge contains bright
red blood or mucoid blood but does not look cloudy or have an cdor; and the delivery was typically
normal. There is anecdotal evidence that SlPS is less common in bitches treated with oxytocin
post-whelping. (Hutchison, VIN online communication 18 July 2008.)
Diagnosis is usually based on history, lack of other findings in physical examination, and vaginal
cytology. Cytology will show red blood cells, with only a few normal white blood cells and a
few bacteria. A CBC may assure the veterinarian and owner that she is neither anemic, throm-
bocytopenic, nor suffering from metritis. A protime to assure that clotting time is normal is
recommended if the blood loss seems excessive or there is possible exposure to rodenticides or
other causes of coagulopathy.
There is generally no indication for treatment, medical or surgical - this is a selflimiting disease and
it will resolve spontaneously and probably not recur at future whelpings. Bitches may be left intact,
bred again, and usually do not have a recurrence of the condition. Lutalyse? can be used if the
discharge is severe or if the client is concerned. If the disorder becomes problematic, prostaglandin
F2 alpha (Lutalyse?) may be used at 50 mcg/kg subcutaneously twice daily until the red blood cells
time, bands of green tissue identihed as healing placental sites may be noted in the uterine lining.
If the client or the veterinarian elect to have the bitch with suspected SlPS examined, it is best done
by the veterinarian going out to the car to do an examination and vaginal cytology. This will minimize
the bitch's exposure to contagious diseases that may be present in the veterinary clinic.
the underlying cause should be treated (See Chapter 9).
138Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
CHAPTER8
Neonatal and Pediatric Care
Introduction
Breeders and veterinarians share 2 great fears: the first and most devastating is the loss of a bitch
"in whelp". The second is the loss of a litter or an overwhelming number of pups
to substantiate and sources do not always indicate if it includes loss from conception to 12 weeks
remaining pups in that litter as well as pups in subsequent litters can be protected. History, physical
examination, and diagnostics will be described in this chapter.
Neonates are fragile; disorders that are mild in an adult or slight alterations in environment often
have much more severe consequences in the neonate.
The following information is meant to equip you and your staff to provide the highest quality care
possible. The first step is to assist in selecting top quality stock. The second step is to assist in
achieving a successful pregnancy. Third is to minimize fetal distress at delivery. The final step is to
work cooperatively with your clients to raise every pup.
Teamwork with the breeder-client is essential. Most pups are born at home and are not frequently
be raised at home after they are discharged. The breeder who either intuitively recognizes a
sick pup or through objective evaluation (numerical assessments based on body weight/gain,
rectal temperature, and urine color) is usually the person who recognizes the need for veterinary
intervention. Veterinarians and their staff may also detect health problems when the pups are
delivered, at ofhice visits to remove dewclaws and tails, or at routine scheduled visits.
To develop the client-staff team, you can:
1. Teach your client how to monitor the whelping and pups in the early post-partum period.
Objective measurements including rectal temperature, urine color, and weight gain are easily
quantihed and trends can alert you early on if there is a problem.
 2. Train your staff to ask the "right" questions on the phone.
Combined, the client and staff will learn to recognize early signs of disease. (Appendix B-2)
The normal neonate
(Table 8-1)
The first week of life
The normal newborn sleeps and nurses approximately 90% of their time. They should cry very little
and be able to find a nipple without assistance most of the time. They should form a tight seal on
the nipple and nurse for several minutes before dropping off or falling asleep. Pups often twitch and
move intermittently when sleeping. They should be near their littermates, but should not stack on top
is competition during nursing, snuggling when resting, and occasional nursing on one another. They
are born with their eyes and ears sealed closed. They need to be stimulated to urinate and defecate
by their mother licking theirperineum.
When held, a healthy puppy has a good "feel" to its body - it feels well flled out, with good firm body
limbs for up to the first 4 days. They should be able to right themselves, suckle and root for a nipple
spontaneously. Although they can feel, there is no strong withdrawal reflex until day 7.
140 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
What is normal?
Week 1
Week 2
Weeks 3-4
Weeks 5-6
 Temperarure, rectal
%6 -98° F
96-99° F
100° F
100 - 101° F
Ambient temperarure
75 to 80°F
70 to 80° F
70 to 75° F
65 to 75F
Heart rate & blood
200 to 240 bears per
200 to 240 bears per
160 to 200 beats per
Varies with breed
Pressure
min; Blood pressure 61
min, sirus rhythm
min, sirus rhythm;
blood pressure 139
Respirarory rate
15 to 35 per min
15 to 35 per min
15 to 25 per min
15 to 25 per min
Mucus membranes
 Pink tohyperemic if
Pink/l second
 Pink/l second
 Pink/l second
Color/ CRT
recently nursed
 Urine color
very pale yellow, <1.020
Very pale yellow, <1.020
 Pale yellow
Pale to moderare yellow
Weight
May lose up to 10% in
Gaining S to 10%
Calculare weight gain of
Calculare weight gain
the first 3 days.
daily, many double birth 
2 4 gm/day/kg antici-
of 1 4 gm/day/kg
weight by day 10. Calcu-
pated adult weight.
anticipared adult weight.
Birth weighr: Toys 100-
bre weight gain of 2-4
Giant and large breeds
200 gms; Large 400-500
Uu1 al Jais e u1
gms; Giant 700 gms
adult weighr.
small breeds.
Activity
Sleeps & ears 90%
Sleeps & eats 90%
Beginning to crawl, then
Walking,climbing, play-
of time, rwitch while
of time, rwirch while
ep 人q  u pue1s
ing, may bark,begin to
sleeping
sleeping
21. Start to play when
explore environment,
eyes open. Can sit.
mouthing. Normal
postural reflexes.
Arritude
Quiet, cry infrequently.
Quiet
Quiet, more active
Start to develop“person-
alities",
 Body tone and reflexes
Flexor dominarice for 1st
Extensor dominance,
Approaching normal for
 Normal adult
4 days, then extensor.
righting, rooting,
adult. Suckling refex &
Rghting, rooting, weak
crossed exrensor With-
crossed extensor disap-
drawal developing.
pears.
Vision and hearing
No vision but blink with
None to limited vision
Vision blurry, Pupillary
Approaching full vision
bright lighr. Limited
 and hearing, menace
light reflex present
and hearing
hearing.
 present but slow initially.
within 24 hours of eye-
Limited hearing, waxy
lids opening, respond 
discharge.
tO sound. Startle reflex
develops.
Teeth
None
None
Deciduous incisors &
 Deciduous premolars
canine erupt
erupt
 Breeder's interaction
Assure pups are rursing.
Assure pups are rurs-
Continue to assure pups
Continue to assure pups
supplement if necessary.
ing, supplement if
are thriving, begin to
are thriving, continue
Daily temp, weight,
 necessary. Daily temp.
enrich environment
to enrich environment.
urine & stool character.
weight, urine & stool
by variarion of toys,
Lots of human interac-
Start Early Neurologic
character. Continue Early
surfaces.
tion for socialization
Stimulation day 3-16
Neurologic Stimularion
day 3-16
Vererinary care
Assess & treat if rnot 
Assess & treat if not
Assess & trear if not
Vererinary wellness visit
thriving, taildocks and
 thriving. Dispense pyran-
thriving. Dispense pyran-
-assess pups for any ab-
dewclaws prior to Sth
tel pamoate to use on 
tel pamoare to use on
normalities for breeder 
人即
day 14 after birth.
day 28 after birth.
to sell pup with full
disclosure. First vaccina-
tions (DAPPv). Dispense
pyrantel pamoate to use
on day 42 after birth.
Food and water
Nursing only.
Nursing only.
Offer warer, then
Teething. Many pups
If supplementing, 60 ml/
If supplementing, 70 ml/
gruel to start weaning. If 
weaned, on full food and
Ib/24 hours divided by
Ib/24 hours divided by 8,
supplementing, 90 ml/
water, some still nurse
12, fed every 2 hours.
fed every 3 hours.
Ib/24 hours divided by 6,
for social interaction.
fed every 4 hours.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 141
 i h        o   s  
manipulations will improve an individual dog's ability to tolerate stress (Figure 8-1).
while the ambient temperature at the pup's contact surface should start at 90 to 95° F and be
70 and 75° F. Incorrect environmental temperatures, both too hot and too cold, are common
causes of a pup's failure to thrive
and expiration. They have bright pink gums, a PCV equal to their mother's, total protein of 5 to 6.
BUN of 7 to 10 and glucose of 40 to 60. The urine color should be very pale yellow on a cotton ball
and <1.020 specific gravity.
Normal birth weight should be 100 to 200 gms (4 to 7 oz) for toy breeds, 200 to 400 gms (7 to
16 oz) for medium breeds, 400 to 500 gms (16 oz) for large breeds and 700 gms (24 oz) for giant
breeds.
Many pups lose weight in the first 24 hours - but this should not exceed 10% of their total body
weight. After the initial loss, weight gain should be 5 to 10% of their birth weight daily. Another way
to calculate weight gain is to use this formula: Pups should gain 2 to 4 g/day/kg of anticipated
adult weight. Many breeders want the birth weight to double in the first 7 to 10 days. Most pups
should be receiving all of their fluid and nutritional needs by nursing. Careful monitoring of rectal
temperature, weight gain, urine color, and overall wellbeing will indicate if some or all the pups
require supplemental feeding.
The second week of life
The pups still sleep and nurse aggressively most of the time, twitch while sleeping, and should cry
little. They may move more frequently but should still cluster together when not nursing. They do
not interact with any thing in the environment because their eyes and ears are still closed - they
move around the whelping box like bumper cars. They only interact with the bitch to nurse and with
littermates when competing for a nipple (many show a preference for a favorite spot on the bitch),
when suckling on each other, or to snuggle when asleep. They still depend on the bitch to stimulate
them to urinate and defecate. At sometime in the first 2 weeks, extensor dominance replaces
flexor dominance - they should extend their limbs when their neck is extended. They should be able
themselves on the front legs.
 o a  e     g ag p   ae   a
room should be 70 to 75° F. Normal vital signs are a body temperature of 96 to 98° F, heart rate
 o h jo  e pe sudsa  o pue nn ou ' snuis e ym  oi mo p
gravity.
Weight gain should be at 2 to 4 g/day/kg of anticipated adult weight. They should receive all of their
the end of the second week.
Abnormal findings in the first 2 weeks
Despite the varied disorders in newborns, their clinical signs may be so similar that they don't help
distinguish the cause. The most cbvious complaint is incessant crying or mewing. This grabs the
142 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C
F
Figure8-1.
There are 5 steps of early neurologic stimulation, each performed for 5 seconds from day 3 to day 16 of age. A Step 1.
Hold the pup head up for 5 seconds. B. Step 2. Hold the pup head down for 5 seconds. C. Step 3. Hold the pup on a cool
towel for 5 seconds. D. Step 4. Rub the bottom of one foot of the pup for 5 seconds. E. Step 5. Hold the pup on its back for
5 seconds. These can be done in any order.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 143
attention of even the most inattentive owner and bitch, but may not identify the sickest pups. Sick
Sick pups are often separated in the whelping box from littermates, not cuddled in the group. They
who should not be fed milk until warmed to 96° F) or above 98° F (this is a fever in a neonate). If
   y  snd a l n   se ' si sn  o an a 
environmental temperature is too high. Urine color on a dry cotton ball is an obvious color of yellow.
Milk may flow from the nostrils of pups with cleft palates or other swallowing defects.
Sick pups have a look and “feel" that can be difficult to describe. The general appearance is unthrifty
1l aguosap iueo raun sng 'suom suaos sl aaun shes lapaag e fl logel pauoond jo Aoisy e s!
fully, believe them. These are pups that require medical attention.
Diarrhea, nasal discharge, inflammation of the umbilicus, and/or sloughing of the toes and/or tail
tips are early symptoms of illness in newborns
inside the breeder's shirt or carefully with an external heat source. A heating pad covered with a
towel, hot water bottle, or sock filled with heated white rice can be used, but care must be taken to
avoid burning, overheating or warming too quickly.
Once warmed, assist the pup in nursing or tube feed. There are many reasons a pup may be under
nourished and dehydrated. The underlying problem needs to be addressed (sick mother, sick puppy.
 ym dnd e paay 'dnd aue juaaiddns pue m si op oi  isy aue ing 'al e aae oo
 si  a i   o o e sa un sa m   g a 
handout material). Done correctly, it is a safe, fast, and effective method.
Low birth weight and failure to ingest colostrum has a strong correlation with failure to thrive. Pups
that are 25% below the weight of the average pup in the liter are at increased risk of hypothermia,
hypoglycemia, hypoxia, and septicemia. Pups that lose more than 10% of their birth weight in
the first 24 hours are sick enough to seek veterinary attention. Treatment including supplemental
should be initiated. Diagnostics may also be indicated.
Some pups requiring supplemental feeding have serious medical or genetic disorders. More,
however, are just off to a rough start. The least we can do is support them with the warmth and
nutritional care they require. Most pups who start off poorly begin to thrive with a few feedings a day
and a little extra TLC. Clients who are willing to invest the extra effort should be encouraged and
educated to promote this. More pups are lost to starvation than to any other problem in the
immediate post-partum period. Make it your goal to do all you can to prevent your patients from
starving to death. Fear of tube feeding should not be an excuse.
If warming and feeding do not return the pup to normal, veterinary diagnostics and care should be
initiated.
The third and fourth weeks of life
By now, the pups are not so fragile and everyone feels a sense of relief. It is easier to detect
problems and the pups are more resilient when faced with an illness or disorder.
The pups are up on all 4 legs and moving, but at first cannot see where they are going. By the end
144  Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
of the second week and beginning of the third, the ears and then eyes open. Pupilary light reflexes
pinous uoonpoud ieal 'shep maf isny au ot Aungg Agegoud si uoisia sdnd aun pue Aena pue Apno
begin. There willbe some waxy debris in the ear canals as they open, but it should clear on its own.
pue uoisi jo puom e ol isnlpe sdnd aul se pauanos sasiou pue shual aui aaey oi eap! poog e s! 11
hearing. Early neurologic stimulation should be discontinued by day 16
They try to play with each other and with toys, but are awkward and fall down often.
au ui aq pinous auneiadwai woou juaiqwe aun pue d oot ot 6e aq pinous aaneadwat Apog aul
70 to 75° F range.
Most pups are still very dependent on the bitch
for fluid and nutritional needs but weaning can
start. By the third week, a dish or water bottle
(Figure 8-2) can be offered (take care to avoid
drowning), and by the third to fourth week, gruel
can be offered. Introducing gruel and water
should be done gradually so all pups are skilled
at eating and drinking before the bitch is no
longer accessible. Gruel can be made of puppy
food soaked and ground up with warm water or
a combination of chicken baby food, yogurt and
baby rice cereal. Royal canin makes a product
to aid in weaning called starter mousse, which
eases the transition from nursing to eating solid
food. The gruel can be placed in a shallow dish
Figure 8-2.
or on the edge of the palm of your hand for
Pups can easily be taught to lick water from a water bottle by
introduction to the pups. When they are ready
applying a tasty paste such as peanut butter. Use of a water
to wean, they will quickly learn to eat from a
bottle assures a clean safe water source that pups can't fall
dish. The breeder should monitor this closely
to or So
 u n on suinan ao aq  as pue Aaissae ea  lal aun u sdnd aos se
ae anaun - pasn ag pinous sausp seay moius aieedas no sdnoa eus ui pat uaq wo nauan
commercially available pans. The gruel should be very thin, and thickened gradually.
In all but the toy breeds, the deciduous incisor
teeth are beginning to erupt. They can now
defecate and urinate without stimulation; a litter
tray for elimination can be introduced into the
whelping box (Figure 8-3).
Administer a second dose of wormer, pyrantel
pamoate, at the end of the fourth week.
The fifth and sixth weeks of life
The pups are a lot more fun and a lot more work.
Personalities, which have been developing all
along, are easier to describe. They seem more
independent, but socially still need to be with their
mother and littermates - they are not ready to be
Figure 8-3.
moved into new owner's homes. The pups can
Use of a custom buit box with a litter tray for pups to
remain in the whelping box, if it is large enough,
eliminate in and food and water dishes.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 145
This is a good time to move the pups to a less isolated part of the breeder's home - they should
house sounds (IV, telephones, and kitchen noises) and to explore new environments. Environmental
The body temperature should be approaching that of a normal adult - 99 to 100° F. The pups can
be maintained at 65 to 75° F.
Teething is progressing - toy breeds will have deciduous incisors erupting and most other breeds will 
Water should be available at all times, in a shallow dish or drinking bottle - if using a drinking bottle,
be certain all the pups can reach it and know how to use it. The pups should be fed 3 to 5 times
a day, using a gruel of quality commercially available puppy food. Softened food should be used
because pups of this age can easily choke on dry food. They should be monitored to assure that
they are not being over or underfed. No nutritional supplements, no meat, no cottage cheese,
and no raw meat diets should be fed - the pet food manufacturers have formulated excellent
Aq uodn paaodun aq pouueo siap asaui 'saiddnd paang aael pue wnpa liws lot spoo Addnd
supplemental feeding.
Ihe pup's vision and hearing should be normal. Neurologically, the pups should be normal.
set of canine vaccinations can be administered at the end of the /th week. Vaccines and vaccination
protocols change rapidly. It is advisable to review the current literature, products available, the
vaccination protocol (Appendix C-1 1).
Advanced in-home care -- The breeder as the health care provider
Breeder skills and supplies
Most breeder clients are exceptionally successful at raising puppies. They are highly skilled and
intuitive, experienced, hard working, and they put their hearts and souls into the process. Many have
og lot h! op Auew pue 'aol jo jogel e se 1 op awos 'tgey-op yaui poddns oi no awooui not
from their breeder-clients make a formidable team. Veterinarians and veterinary staff can learn as
much from their breeder-clients as they can learn from us.
There are a few things that set a great breeder apart from a good breeder. They are time, great
Time
with veterinary assistance. They see subtle changes in the pups early. They provide basic needs and
146 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
They take the time to carefully consider who should be bred and why. They monitor the pups and
reflect on their successes and failures.
Great husbandry skills
These clients keep their dogs and their environment meticulously clean. Parasite and disease control
the first time the dog urinates inappropriately, the first abnormal stool, the first picked-at meal, the
frst hair out of place, the tiniest lump.
difhiculty diagnosing because they are so early and so subtle. The important thing is to never doubt
predict with accuracy if the changes they have identifhed are serious, may become serious, or are
minor or self-resolving conditions. We are there to put their concerns in perspective, diagnose and
treat what we can, and come to terms with what we cannot control. Our role is to always take them
conditions early, enabling us to provide them with the best possible cutcome.
Exemplary record keeping
(Appendix C-6)
The most essential step in good record keeping is to be able to definitively identify each individual in
a litter. This is useful for several reasons, including tracking health, weight gain, monitoring medical
For pups born at the veterinary hospital: There are several techniques that can be used for
tracking individuals in the litter. With one system, sterile colored hand-towels are used to receive the
neonates during C-section. This allows birth order and each pup's immediate neonatal care to be
hospital record and one copy provided to the owner. (Appendix D-9).
For pups born at home: lf the pup has distinctive markings or colors, they can be sketched or
photographed with a digital camera and included in the record. lf the pups are similar, markings ot
different colored permanent marker, non-toxic fabric paint or tingernail polish, or notch marks can
be clipped into the coat in different locations. Although many breeders use a variety of different
around the neck.
Ideally, a tracking system should be planned prior to the birth of the pups. This prevents trying
veterinarian to track birth order, location in the uterus (when delivered by C-section), time of birth
and length of time between births, identity pups adjacent to abnormal pups, and medical care given
colors need to be reapplied, and clipped areas need to be re-shaved.
This information may become vital in monitoring an at-risk pup more carefully or establishing a
diagnosis of illness in a newborn (Figure 8-5).
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 147
A
R
C
D
Figure 8-4.
A. Outines of pups with markings added by hand for individual puppy identifcation. B. Lateral outines of pups with markings
mended. D. Outine of puppy used for identification
Once the pups are identified, a tracking record must be started for each pup. Tracking each pup's
progress is essential to assure that no pup is overlooked in a litter. There are many different types
a e   e g  nd no   d    a 
(See Appendix C-6 and C-8).
The most commonly and objectively tracked parameters are:
1. Weight at birth and at least twice daily: (Appendix C6 and C8)
2. Temperature at least twice daily:
3. Heart rate and respiratory rate at least conce daily
4. Mucus membrane color at least once daily
5. Urine color at least daily - should be almost clear color on a dry cotton ball used to
stimulate the pup by rubbing the perineum;
6. Stool character at least daily;
7. Medications administered, if any;
 8. Intervention at birth to resuscitate - drugs, techniques, and oxygen - if any:
9. Early Neurologic Stimulation maneuvers completed - 1 time a day from day 3 to 16;
10. Volume of formula fed, if any:
11. Owner concerns or observations;
12. Any other findings noted, if anything out of the ordinary.
148 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
MIN
A
Figure 8-5.
A. Use a rectal thermometer to check on newborn pups. Pups
can accommodate the size of the thermometer tip if petrofeum
jelly is applied frst. B. Check urine color on a newborn pup
with a dry cotton ball rubbed gently on the perineum of the
pup. The urine color should be pale yellow if the pup is welf fed
and welf hydrated. C. Use a digital food scale to weigh pups.
They can be weighed in grams or ounces.
C
If the breeder objectively (based on body weight, urine color and body temperature) or subjectively
indicates that there is a concern with one or more of the pups, this data is invaluable at the
veterinary phone call or office visit. Not only can the breeder clearly identify their concerns, but the
veterinarian can also make clinical judgments and adjustments in the care provided by the breeder.
Secure whelping and nursery area
The importance of a clean, secure, warm, easily-accessible, safe, easy-to-clean area to whelp and
quiet, small, warm room that can be equipped with a child's wading pool, and the following supplies
is all that is needed.
Basic equipment to have at home
(Figure 8-6) (See Appendix C-6)
●Record keeping system.
 Method to re-mark puppy's identification.
+
Room thermometer to track temperature at the puppy's surface.
+F
Rectal thermometer, digital is ideal, to monitor the bitch's and pup's temperatures.
+
 Scale to weigh pups, easiest with a bowl type platform. A kitchen scale is ideal. This should
weigh in ounces or grams.
● Cotton balls to check urine color of pups.
●Feeding tube and appropriate syringes if supplementation is necessary.
●Formula to feed, if supplementation is necessary.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 149
Figure8-6.
A. A custorm buit box with a heated T. E. Scott whelping nest installed. B. An unheated whelping nest with rails to keep the
mother from lying on the pups. This is more inportant for heavier bitches. C. A Durawhelp pre-made whelping box with rails
to protect the puppies. D. A whelping box with iter. E. A clear sided whelping box, with heated T. E. Scott whelping nest. The
clear sides are plastic for easy cleaning, high enough to contain a large bitch, and clear so that the pups can be observed from
across the room. F. The finished whelping box.
150CanineReproduction and Neonatology
Figure 8-6. continued
G. Dangerous use of a heat lamp.It is too close to the pups
and flammable surfaces. Not recommended. H. A home-buit
whelping box with rails, fleece beds and a lamp overhead. I.
A home-built whelping box with PVC rails, bedding, and varied
toys for environmental stirmulation.
· Tincture of iodine - to dip the umbilicus in at birth, 2 and 8 hours post partum
●Chlorhexidine disinfectant solution - to disinfect surfaces in the whelping and nursery areas -
available through your veterinary suppliers or local farm stores.
 Bulb syringe or Delee Mucus Trap.
· Laundry basket or ice chest (do not seal with the lid and monitor temperature to prevent
overheating or chilling) to keep pups in during daily evaluation - makes sorting who is done
and who isn't easier and faster. This can also be used to hold the bigger pups outside of the
whelping box temporarily to allow the smaller cnes less competition nursing.
● Heating pads, rice bags, or Snuggle Safe? - to keep pups warm during sorting - heating pads
 often have safety shut-offs so are difficult to keep warm. Rice bags are stockinette or socks
flled with long-grain white cooking rice microwaved to warm pups. After microwaving, roll the
apeu nsip algeaamooiw e - sles alaanus ung pinoo jeui eae poy e pioae oi punoe ao
to warm puppies, available on line.
● Towels, blankets, tarps and flannel-backed vinyl table cloths to keep the pups and room sanitary.
Each item on the list should cost less than $20.00. Great husbandry isn't expensive, but it is
time-consuming and a lot of hard work.
Many puppies will be evaluated and be treated at the veterinary hospital but most will not remain
being at home with their dam and litermates. In addition to tube feeding, many breeders already
can, or can be taught to give injections, administer SQ fluids, manage catheters, and monitor vital
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 151
hospital for care during the day, particularly if they will be at work. This combination of care allows
for constant monitoring, frequent feedings, and medicating on schedule.
Causes of neonatal mortality
(AppendixB-2)
Early recognition and effective medical care can significantly reduce neonatal ilness and death.
This can be divided by age range into three time periods. First are problems that occurred in utero
the post partum period (from 2 to 5 weeks of age); and third are those in the post-weaning period
(trom 5 to 12 weeks of age). Common causes of neonatal illnesses include: dystocia, physiologic or
trauma, teratogens and toxins, and infectious diseases.
 si i s laamh pus addnd su, se uu aosip oads ou si aa
to thrive. while a diagnosis is pending, or if no diagnosis can be made, survival of these pups is
dependent on promptly providing the basic supportive care needed to prevent sepsis, maintain body
temperature, blood glucose, blood volume, and adequate oxygenation.
Remember, puppies can have most of the same diagnostics used on adults - blood chemistries,
CBC's, ultrasound and radiographic imaging. Different normal values must be applied, and
Dystocia and prolonged labor - Occurs in the immediate post partum period
distress can prevent neonatal illness and loss.
Fetal stress/distress with oxygen deprivation during birth is a common cause of neonatal illness and
 si dnd au un padde ag pou  syl g ae sp o snoy isy a ui Ann 'yap Aa
to 3 days of age and begins to "fade". Pups that were distressed at birth or that were noted to have
a prolonged delivery should be watched carefully. Injectable ceftiofur or unasyn, or oral clavamox
to be weak, supportive care should be initiated.
One study showed a higher percentage of neonatal death in pups born to an older dam. This
reinforces the importance of careful monitoring of the bitch in whelp and the need for early
intervention during delivery if pups are in distress.
Physiological causes - Occurs in the immediate post partum period
The pups are totally dependent on the bitch and breeder for care. Frequently, first time mothers will
so that the pups are all together and secure. Some bitches do not have enough milk initially so
supplementation is necessary. Some need help in learning to lick the pups so that they urinate and
defecate. With patience, an Adaptil collar, and on occasion calcium supplementation of the bitch,
this will be resolved within the first 72 hours. Ongoing problems will require assessment by the
denied access until the bitch is comfortable.
152 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Nutritional causes in the neonate - Occurs any time prior to completing weaning
It is common for a bitch to require several days to lactate sufficiently to support a litter without
assistance. This is most common in those with very smalliters (1 to 2 pups), very large litters (10
or more), bitches who have been ill during pregnancy, who have not been fed appropriately or were
unwilling to eat during pregnancy, who deliver pups prior to the whelping date, or have undergone
a C-section. Some bitches are reluctant to allow the pups to nurse and some pups are too weak or
sick to nurse.
The bitch may be allowed to eat food that is not ordinarily part of her normal diet. This can include
meat that is not too fatty or spicy, ice cream, scrambled eggs, or commercial diets meant for
nutritional support such as lams Maximum Calorie? Diet, Hills Prescription A/D? or Royal Canin
Recovery RS? Diet. Other foods including human food may be used if appropriate for her individual
Fluid therapy can be useful in improving lactation. Subcutaneous fluids can be administered, often by
the clients at home, after all other causes of agalactia have been addressed.
can help increase lactation in approximately 75% of bitches. It affects the CNS and appears to
antagonize dopamine at the receptor sites. This action is thought to be related to prolactin secretion
stimulation effects. Metoclopramide is excreted into milk and may concentrate at about twice the
metoclopramide may be used simultaneously.
The metoclopramide dosage is similar to that for Gl use: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg subcutaneously or by
mouth (tablets or syrup) three times a day as indicated. Continue for 3 to 5 days, but the use can be
bitch with Gl hemorrhage, Gl cbstruction or perforation, a hypersensitivity to the drug, or a seizure
disorder.
therapy, oxytocin, metoclopramide therapy, and the bitch's improved appetite to kick in.
age, and the other bitch is not overwhelmed with her own litter, she will often accept the new pups.
Some clients will seek out a "wet nurse", a lactating bitch from another breeder and move the pups
to that location. This can be risky. The surrogate bitch may refuse the pups, or the facility may have
infectious or husbandry problems that could lead to puppy illness or loss. This approach can also
create liability issues.
Tube feeding is the most reliable supplemental puppy feeding technique. lt ensures that the required
volume is delivered efficiently, even to a pup too sick to nurse (See Appendix C-16). Many
breeders and some veterinary staff fear tube feeding. When done correctly the technique is highly
successful.
o aumun no yeam oot si dnd aui 1 'aog e uo ayons oi yanoua uons si (s)dnd aui pue 'punoj ag
take a botle, or if the opening in the nipple is too large, the pup may aspirate formula and develop
aspiration pneumonia and/or death.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 153
Supplemental feeding with an eyedropper is dangerous and not recommended. The administration
rate is often too fast and the pup cannot control the flow rate.
Parenteral supplementation will not deliver adequate nutrition and should not be considered a
substitute for using the Gl tract.
Standard of care dictates that your client should be informed of their options. Nutritional support via
Environmental causes - Housing and husbandry
Disorders related to housing and husbandry can occur at any time. Access to good food, clean water
and safe shelter are the backbone of basic needs in any species (Figure 8-7).
Prior to whelping, a member of the veterinary staff should discuss basic husbandry with the breeder.
Enough time needs to be invested to assure that the breeder has the facility and equipment necessary
for a successful whelping and to raise the pups to adoption age. Even breeders with a great deal of
experience will benefit from a review and assurance that they have all supplies and equipment in order.
C
Figure 8-7.
A.Infant incubatorsmodinedforuse forneonatalpups.Theyare used forwarmingpups asweas oxygenadministrationif
indicated. B. Note the pups with extremely straight hocks and stifles, and feet rotated into an atypical position. Most will return
D.A custombuiltUtroughto support pups with diffculty learning to walk.
154 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
less stressed if isolated from other dogs in the household. A small room, if available, is ideal. If this
is not a viable option, a partition can be placed in a larger room. Even the most even-tempered bitch
The ideal flooring should be impervious to fluids, easy to clean, and not too slippery. If the room
selected does not have this kind of flooring, plastic sheets/tarps can be used as a base with
washable rugs or bedding placed on top with a heat source. A wading pool or whelping box can be
housed in a plastic dog crate that is opened, so that only the bottom half is used. An exercise pen
surrounding the wading pool can be used to insure that the bitch and her pups stay in the area that
The whelping area should be scrupulously clean. Several times daily, waste should be removed
and the whelping box should be cleaned with an appropriate disinfectant such as diluted bleach
disinfectants. Dry the surface prior to placing the pups back in the box to avoid skin irritation.
Washable absorbent bedding should be used to keep the pups clean and dry and to provide good
footing. For the first 2 to 3 weeks, little urine or stool will be in the bedding because the bitch will
usually clean up after the pups. Bedding must be washed frequently with an appropriate laundry
detergent (detergents for baby laundry work very well) and diluted bleach. Nursing home pads for
As the pups approach 3 to 4 weeks of age, a shallow tray of pine shavings or shredded newspaper
Over time, the pups will begin to housebreak because they are naturally drawn to that area to
Water should be offered in a shallow dish or drinking bottle at about 3 weeks. Take care to make the
o ana un 'poog o paa ol algun ag pue ui ym o et pou m dnd e peui os yanoua moys ys
be used, but any heavy shallow dish that allows enough room around the circumference for all the
pups to eat at once will do nicely. Food and water dishes should be washed and bleached regularly
because some pups will walk through, defecate in or lay down in the dishes. Royal Canin Starter
mousse is an easy diet to use when transitioning from nursing to solid food (Figure 8-2 and 8-3).
Genetic and congenital disorders
These may be noted at any time. Congenital defect are disorders present at birth. Many are
and teratogens as well. Genetic defects may include physical malformations, inborn errors of
metabolism, and increased susceptibility to disease. In many cases, these disorders overlap
Physical defects grossly visible
or microanatomy and are more difficult to identify and treat. Up to 20% of neonatal pups may have
one or more congenital defects.
Inborn errors of metabolism
Metabolic diseases, also called inborn errors of metabolism, are genetic disorders which represent
a defect in the biochemistry of the protein molecule. The protein defect is either in the structure or
function of a protein molecule.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 155
While many congenital defects are lethal, some can be diagnosed and managed successfully
Congenital defects often account for pups that are stillborn, weak, or fail to thrive. If there is an
obvious anatomic defect, the diagnosis is straightforward. However, many are internal (inborn errors
of metabolism, immune system deficiencies, or microanatomic), and can be very difficult to diagnose
in time to manage. Some congenital defects appear at birth or early in life, others may not become
apparent until later in life.
 Differentiating the pup with a serious or terminal congenital defect from a normal pup that merely
care instead of a diagnostic work-up or while diagnostics are pending. Puppies do not have the
physiologic resources that adult dogs have and may not be able to tolerate a complete diagnostic
evaluation prior to initiating treatment. The pup can be assessed for improvement or progressive
deterioration after supportive care is initiated, and the treatment plan adjusted as indicated (Table 8-2)
Table 8-2 Congenital defects of dogs
Age of Diagnosis
At Birth
Neonatal and
Early Adulthood
Midlle Age
Advanced Age
 Pediatric
Anatomic
 Cleft palate, spina
Patent Ductus
Hydro-cephalus,
Elbow dysplasia,
Hip dysplasia
 bifda, umbilical
Arteriosis, Portal
OCD, Aclanto-
spinal stenosis.
hernia and other
systemic shunts,
occipical instabilicy,
midline defeccs,
Hydrocephalus,
megaesophagus,
limb anomalies,
Persistent right
pyloric stenosis,
agenesis of
aortic arch, heart
prognathism,
portions of GI
valve disorders.
brachygnathism,
tract, peccus
 patellar luxation,
excavatum
cataracts.
Congenical portal 
hypoplasia.
 Micro-anatomic
Renal dysplasia
Immune system
Thymic disorders,
Cyclic
Immune mediated
 Degenerative
severe combined
haematopoiesis
lymphocytic
Myelopachy
immunodeficiency.
thyroiditis, hypoa-
drenocorticism.
 Metabolic
Congenital
Amyloidosis,
Uric acid deposi-
Dialated
Diabetes Mellius,
Copper toxicosis,
tion, Cystinuria
cardiomyopachy
growth hormone
MPS disorders, hy-
deficiency.
pothyroidism, von
(Picuritary dwarf.
Willebrand disease.
ism) Centronuclear
Exercise induced
myopathy (CNM).
collapse (EIC).
Failure of passive immunity
Puppies may have inadequate passive immunity, immunity acquired from their mother, for 3
reasons. 1. The bitch was not immunized. 2. The bitch, although immunized, was a low-responder
or no-responder to the vaccine and this failure to mount an antibody response was not detected
opportunity to nurse in the first 24 hours
These puppies are vulnerable to diseases normally protected against by routine immunization
protocols. Ninety-five percent of passive immunity is acquired through colostrum within 24 hours of
birth, only 5% is transferred transplacentally.
If the bitch was not immunized prior to breeding,or if she is a no or low responder, she should not
156Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
be vaccinated during pregnancy (Canine herpesvirus is the only unique exception to this rule). In
these cases, Fresh frozen plasma should be administered to the pups, who should be isolated from
potential sources of infection until after their second vaccination. Vaccines should be administered
All pups should be closely observed to determine if they have been adequately nursed in the
frst 24 hours. This is essential not only for nutrition and fluid intake, but also to transfer passive
immunity. If the bitch does not have enough milk, is unavailable, or if the pup(s) are not able to nurse,
nursing includes observation for effective nursing, increase in body weight, and dilute urine color,
using hydration status as an indicator of nursing ability.
Teratogenic effects and toxins during pregnancy
The first trimester of pregnancy (3 weeks in dogs and cats) is when the developing fetus is most
susceptible to teratogens and toxins.
griseofulvin, environmental pollutants and some, plants, vitamins, hormones, and radiation therapy
This list is not all inclusive and new drugs as well as newly reported drug adverse effects are introduced
package inserts, veterinary drug formularles, and human drug formularles are excellent resources.
In general, pregnancy should be as drug-free as possible. Most commonly prescribed products for
heartworm, intestinal parasites, flea, and tick control are safe during all stages of pregnancy. Ihe first
trimester (the first 3 weeks in the dog) is the time during which the fetus is most vulnerable to the
teratogenic effects of drugs. For planned breedings, these medications can be administered just prior
Alternative drugs are sometimes available. The veterinarian should discuss balancing the risks versus
the benefits of the drug with the breeder so that a mutual decision can be made.
Infectious diseases
Infectious diseases are a significant cause of death in the post-weaning period.
Neonates and adults are susceptible to most of the same organisms. Neonates are especially
vulnerable to bacteria, viruses, and parasites to which the adults are immune or more resistant
The neonate is more vulnerable to these diseases for several reasons. They are fragile - have litle
body fat, scant glycogen reserves, dehydrate easily, cannot thermoregulate, have no protective
intestinal flora, do not have a fully developed immune system, and have not developed immunity
inadequately nourished, chilled, and be affected by multiple infectious diseases simultaneously.
Neonates need careful monitoring and protection.
Bacterial diseases and sepsis
Pasteurella, Esherichia, Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Kebsiella, Pseudomonas, Clostridium, and
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 157
may invade through the skin, the umbilicus, the oral cavity and Gl tract, the respiratory tract, the
mature), some are the result of environmental exposure, and some are the result of a pathologic
 e  g  se o a u so o  g a u 
critically ill. They have limited resources with which to ward off infections and must be treated quickly
and aggressively.
Supportive care and antibiotic therapy must be initiated immediately. Samples should be collected
for culture and sensitivity testing, but an initial antibiotic must be chosen while culture and sensitivity
results are pending. Cytology can be useful in empirical antibiotic selection
discoloration (blue coloration) hypoglycemia, and hematuria.
Toxic milk or Toxic metritis
Both mastitis and metritis may be associated with sick and dying neonates
A bitch with toxic metritis may initially present with sick and dying pups, and no symptoms. This
typically occurs when the pups are 1 to 5 days old. Symptoms include fever with a foul smelling
vaginal discharge. This is a true emergency. The bitch and her pups should be present at the
veterinary visit. The mother needs treatment with antibiotics, fluids, and possibly Lutalyse?. She
should be evaluated to confirm that there are no retained pups. The owner should be taught to tube
feed the pups until mom is better (See Chapter 7).
She should be examined for coexisting illness because she may also be sick from any number
of causes unrelated to toxic metritis. Particular attention should be paid to the uterus, mammary
glands, and C-section incision site/abdomen.
Viral diseases
Maternal antibodies, naturally acquired and as a result of vaccination, play an important role in
protecting the neonate from viral diseases. It is important that the bitch be appropriately vaccinated
well before her planned breeding date, as vaccinations are not recommended during estrous and
pregnancy. Even when the bitch is vaccinated, there can be failure of passive immunity. She may not
 auunp wnnsoo aenbape ayi o pait aey Ae sdnd au :suouo au ot papuosan au
no natural immunity to.
Canine Herpesvirus (CHv) is a common cause of neonatal death, from the pre-partum period up to 6
weeks of age. In the older pup and adult dog, CHV looks like an upper respiratory infection or kenne
cough. If Herpes is acquired by the bitch during pregnancy, she may resorb the pups which can
the birth of small pups who fail to survive (Figure 8-8).
The pups can be exposed to CHV during the birth process, if fresh vesicles are present on the
may be recommended to reduce exposure of the neonate to the virus. lIf the pups are a few days to
158 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
D
Figure 8-8.
A. A 1 week old puppy that died acutely of Canine Herpesvirus. Post mortem findings. B. A 1 week old pup that dlied
of herpesvirus. Note the characteristic petechial hemorrhages on the liver and kidneys. C. A litter of pups whose dam
contracted Canine Herpesvirus during pregnancy. Note the diference in size of the pups, demonstrating the various neonatal
ages when the pups succumbed. Some pups were carried to term and survived. D. Littermates to the pups shown above.
These five pups survived but were smal at birth.
 from 9 to 14 days of age. Symptoms range from sudden onset of persistent crying (mewing),
respiratory distress, abdominal pain and bloating, hypothermia, depression, anorexia and weakness.
This often quickly progresses to death within 4 to 24 hours.
Treatment is largely supportive including oxygen, fluids, hyperimmunized plasma, supplemental
feeding, and antibiotics to manage any secondary bacterial infection. There is one report of successful
treatment with Acyclovir dosed at 10 mg/kg as a suspension P0 q 6 hours until 3 weeks of age.
membranes of the extremities where the temperature is slightly below body temperature. It is believed
that this is the main reason the neonate suffers from a more serious syndrome when affected by
Canine Herpesvirus than a mature animal with a body temperature over 100° F. For this reason,
increasing the ambient temperature may aid in preventing and/or treating affected or exposed
neonates. Care should be taken that the increased ambient temperature does not lead to dehydration.
Diagnosis is confirmed at post-mortem, based on cbservation of classic spotted lesions in the liver
and kidneys, pneumonia, and by histology or PCR testing.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 159
It was thought that once a bitch was exposed to CHv, her subsequent litters would be protected.
be vulnerable to CHV due to the short life of protective antibodies. However, a bitch that has had
CHV affected puppies can go on to have a normal litter.
demonstrated that bitches immunized produced increased litter size, higher birth weights, and
United States.
and early neonatal death. Symptoms of Parvovirus I are vomiting, diarrhea, respiratory distress,
care is the only treatment, but is often unsuccessful. Diagnosis Is confrmed at post-mortem.
Canine Parvovirus 2 is a common cause of death in the unvaccinated pup from 6 weeks to 6 months
maternal antibodies wane between protective vaccinations. Death from severe enteritis, dehydration,
shock, septicemia, bone marrow suppression, and cardiac involvement is common. Ireatment consists
weight IV slowly over a period of 2 to 4 hours. There are reports of response to Tamiflu.
Many other viruses, even those that cause mild disease in the adult, can cause fatal disease in the
neonate (Figure 8-9).
Parasitic diseases
Both internal and external parasites can lead to illness and death of the neonatal puppy
Intestinal parasites such as roundworms (loxocara) and hookworms (Ancylostoma) can create
such heavy burdens that pups can be lost. Antihelmintic medications, wormers such as pyrantel
pamoate, should be administered to all the pups and the bitch every 2 weeks starting at 2 weeks of
age. These should be administered even if no parasite ova are seen on fecal flotation, because the
prepatent period lasts for at least the trst 3 weeks of the pup's life.
Roundworms and hookworms can cause signifcant diarrhea and nutrient depletion in neonates.
Intestinal intussusceptions and rectal prolapses are also sequella of worm infections. Hookworms
published by the Companion Animal Parasite Council are avallable on line at www.capcvet.org.
transmission of parasites across the placental membrane and through the milk to the pups. Both
require administration during pregnancy but are safe and effective. Routine worming of the bitch will
not prevent this route of transmission
lactation (the last 14 days of pregnancy through day 14 after delivery) will minimize transmission of
whelping to reduce roundworm and hookworm infections in neonates. Dogs who carry the MDR-1
160 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A
Figure 8-9.
ADeceased neonatal pup with skinlesions.Post mortem
showed death was caused by an adenovirus. B. Adenovirus
post mortem. C. Warts on the mucus membranes of a
young pup, a non-fatal disorder.
gene should not be treated with this protocol. Selamectin applied topically to the bitch at 6 mg/kg
6 and 2 weeks before whelping and 2 and 6 weeks after whelping, reduced roundworm burdens in
puppies by 98%, and reduced egg shedding by 99.7% in the dams.
Both the fenbendazole and ivermectin regimens have been documented to reduce roundworm
infections (I. canis and A. caninum) in puppies up to 98 to 100%. This not only reduces worm
burdens and the commonly associated diarrhea in pups but also reduces exposure to these zoonotic
parasites for anyone handling the pups.
External parasites, in low numbers such as fleas and lice, can be controlled by managing the
environment. Baths using non-insecticidal shampoo and flea combs can be used to remove
the neonate.
Heartworm microfilaria can cross the placenta and enter the circulation of the fetus if there are
micro-hemorrhages during pregnancy. Ihese microflaria cannot cause disease in the affected pup
the administration of the medications can be timed so that they are not given during the first 3
weeks of pregnancy.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 161
Behavioral problems
Several behavioral problems exhibited by the bitch can create health concerns for the neonates
(Figure 8-10).
their owners and spend adequate time with their puppies. Bitches can be aggressive toward other
canine members of the household, and fail to adequately concentrate on caring for their pups. After
vaginal or Caesarean delivery, bitches can be in pain and can be reluctant to allow pups to approach
them for nursing - improved pain management may help alleviate this problem. Use of a Dog
Appeasement Pheromone collar, prior to or at the time aggression is noted, can help calm the bitch
(See Chapter 6).
Hypocalcemia may lead to maternal aggression.
The theory is that calcium is needed for oxytocin
uptake, the key hormone in maternal recognition
of her pups. Although the total calcium is normal,
the ionized calcium may be low. The clinical
picture described is that the bitch becomes
glassy eyed, stares, growls at her pups, and
may become aggressive toward the owner, the
pups, or other dogs in the household. Calcium
(Calphosan? SQ) is reported to lead to resolution
of symptoms within 30 to 45 minutes of
administration.
All bitches, particularly post C-section first time
mothers, should be monitored very carefully for
Figure 8-10.
the first 72 hours after delivery. Some will growl
Preparing the new mother and her thirteen pups for the ride
home after a C-section.
and snarl at their pups as the pups crawl away
from the mammary glands and past the shoulder
hours after delivery, a switch flips and the bitch changes from aggressive to maternal. During the first
3 days, or any time a bitch may be aggressive, she should not be left alone with her pups. Either an
adult person should be present at alltimes in the room, or she should be moved from the whelping
box to a crate when she is unsupervised. Use of a Dog Appeasement Pheromone collar may shorten
the time until she accepts the puppies.
Cannibalism is an extreme form of maternal aggression. An entire litter can be destroyed in a few
 minutes so caution should be taken with any new mother and her pups.
Breeders frequently report that they have lost a pup or puppies as a result of the bitch lying on
the pup. It is possible in many of these cases that the pup was sick or otherwise debilitated, which
predisposed it to death in this manner.
Trauma
With careful housing and supervision, trauma should not occur. The dam should not be left unattended
with her pups until she has been observed to be trustworthy, especially if she is recovering from
anesthesia from a C-section. Other dogs and puppies in the household should not be left alone with
the pups until the pups are substantial in size and able to fend for themselves (Figure 8-11)
Collars, flea collars, or other neck bands should not be used on the pups. The room where the pups
162 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure 8-11.
A. A kitten at post mortem that died of splenic hemorrhage caused by the mother biting the kitten through the abdominal
Wall. B. The kitten in A at post mortem, showing free blood in abdomen.
become burned, chew on electric cords, choke on foreign bodies, fall into water dishes, or knock
heavy objects onto themselves.
If a pup presents with signs of trauma - bite wounds, fractures, electrocution, or burns - they should
be treated in the same way that an adult would be treated.
Anesthesia can be induced with propofol and maintained with isoflurane or sevoflurane if surgery is
warranted.
Maternal nutrition
Excellent maternal nutrition is essential to support pregnancy and lactation. A high quality commercial
dog food - pregnancy, puppy and performance diets are currently recommended. She should be at
an ideal body condition prior to pregnancy. During the first 4 weeks of pregnancy, no diet changes or
increase in quantity is indicated. During the last 5 weeks of pregnancy, she will beneft from an increase
of 20% to 50%, depending on the size of litter she is expected to have. No nutritional supplements are
uuand no auoad 'saiddnd log pap algeie Aeiao e pat si aus yt assa
Unccoked diets put the pups at risk of developing bacterial and parasitic conditions.
Low birth weight
Low birth weight is a strong predictor of neonatal ilness.
Thymic disorders
Thymic disorders are typically undiagnosed except at post mortem. The thymus should be present
until puberty. It may atrophy prematurely due to viral diseases (canine distemper, canine parvovirus)
or may be hypoplastic and the cause of death due to immunosuppression.
The thymus should be identifed and submitted at any complete post-mortem examination.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 163
Diagnostics for the sick neonate
Neonatal examination, supportive care, symptoms, and
diagnostic work-up
The importance of an office visit - Assistance when they need it most
Veterinary intervention can be the difference between life and death for the neonate. This needs to
from the client. Neonatal examination, history, supportive care, diagnostics, and specifc treatment
are similar to that offered adult and pediatric patients.
Handling the newborn at the veterinary hospital should be done with great care. Two disinfected
laundry baskets with a heat source and towel should be ready prior to the arrival of the client. The
which pup has been examined and treated.
Allstaff should wash theirhands thoroughly and wear examination gloves prior to touching the pups.
examination surface. Although the bitch should be present for an examination (to evaluate for a
retained pup or placenta, metritis, mastitis, or other illness), she may be more comfortable in the car
 or another room during examination and treatment of the pups.
diagnosed and so healthy pups can be compared with sick pups diagnostically. The physical exam
should be similar to that of any patient. Vital signs including rectal temperature, heart rate, respiratory
rate, and mucus membrane color/capillary refill time should be taken. Urine color (including urine
specific gravity) and stool character should be evaluated. Precise weights should be taken and
compared to those in the breeder's records and at the C-section if the information is available. All of
this data can be recorded by a veterinary technician or assistant. (Appendix D-4).
Supportive care or "Treat for the Treatable"
Neonatal and pediatric patients can be treated with the following protocol (unless there is a contra-
specific protocol. These patients are fragile and deteriorate so quickly when ill that treatment should
be initiated while diagnostics are pending. Sick neonates symptoms include respiratory distress,
constant crying, weakness, abdominal distention or pain, anorexia, poor weight gain, poor nursing
restlessness, and isolation. None of these symptoms are pathognomonic for the underlying cause.
therapy; 5. Antibiotics; 6. Passive immunity with plasma or serum infusions; 7. Transfusions; 8.
Vitamin K injections; and 9. Basic hygiene and assistance with eliminations. Assume the sick neonate
has a treatable disease and initiate care until proven otherwise (lable 8-3).
Oxygen
prematurely, that aspirate amniotic fluid or meconium, that are traumatized or oxygen-deprived at
164  Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Table 8-3 Summary of empirical treatment of the sick neonatal puppy
 Identify cthe sick individual(s) The entire litter should be present for examination
Oxygen
Warm the hypochermic pups slowly until retal temperacure reaches 96° F
 Provide nutritional support in the form of tube feeding formula or IV/PO/IO glucose
Fluid therapy PO/IO/SQ
Antibiotic cherapy and topical treatment of che umbilicus
 Plasma or serum administration
Transfuse
Vitamin K
Hygiene and elimination
Initiate diagnoscics - blood work, urine testing, radiographs, ulcrasound
Reintroduce normal diet - nursing, cube feeding, puppy food
Consider hand-raising che pup(s) and using empirical antibiotics and supportive care on che entire liccer if no source of infection
 can be found
The decision to use oxygen is generally based
on clinical judgment since arterial blood gases
are not practical and often unavailable. There are
no reports of oxygen causing vision deficits after
use in neonates and it does not appear to be
contraindicated.
Intubation and ventilation may be necessary
immediately following birth (See Chapter 6).
Supplemental oxygen can be administered by
nasal cannula or placement of an IV catheter
in the trachea, if only 1 pup is affected. It can
also be administered to 1 or more pups by use
of an oxygen chamber, either at the veterinary
hospital or at home. There are many techniques
Figure 8-12.
Oxygen administration to newborn pups using an aquarium
for constructing an oxygen chamber. An empty
on its sidle.
aquarium or clear plastic storage box can be
used with the oxygen tubing inserted through a hole in a plastic lid or plastic wrap. Oxygen tanks or
concentrators can be used to deliver a continuous supply of oxygen.
The greatest limitation to oxygen use is restriction of the treatment group of pups from association
with their dam and littermates. The benefits versus limitations must be considered.
IMPORTANT
Thermal support
overheating.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 165
It is essential to avoid overheating puppies that are in a confined space with no ability to move away
in a short time, therefore careful monitoring is essential.
Heat sources include heating pads, heat lamps, heated microwave pads, heated rice bags, incubators,
and hot water bottles. Enclosed housing and transport devices include crates, x-pens, whelping boxes,
The ideal ambient temperature for a litter and the bitch is 70° F with a relative humidity of 55 to
65%. Ambient temperatures of 85 to 90° F are only necessary for orphaned cr sick pups or those
removed from the care of the bitch. The temperature of the contact surface should be 70 to 95° F
Achieving the correct ambient temperature for a litter can be diffcult. Pups can easily be too warm
or too cold. A room thermometer should be placed at the surface the pups are housed on to monitor
the ambient temperature. A rectal thermometer must be avallable for monitoring the pups. Digital
thermometers register fast and are easy to read.
12° F above the ambient temperature. A sick newborn is even more vulnerable to hypothermia. The
external heat source for maintenance of a safe core temperature. This situation is exacerbated by
licking of the pups is a common cause of chilling, which leads to ilness.
Low body temperature (less than 96° F) is a very common and often life-threatening problem in the
si eipeorpeg ls lo painb Aensnun si peyi dnd io dnd yois Aue ui paioadsns ag pinoys ill 'aieuoau
If pups are too warm, they are usually fussing/crying or overly active. They fail to thrive and gain weight
although the bitch is healthy and lactating well To distinguish between the ambient temperature being
oo si auneaduat suaigue au f Aieian uayei aq pinous saumeaduat sdnd le 'laaa, e pue wem oo
ay sdnd au jo uouod e Auo fl d soot laao auneaduat leioa e aaey Ainsn mm sdnd aun jo le 'yay
rectal temperatures over 1oo° F, it is more likely that the hyperthermic pups are febrile and ill.
be carefully and slowly warmed over 30 to 180 minutes. Care must be taken to prevent thermal
 p sn d c s    a p g s d ai (a 
used as a rectal probe when encased in a plastic sleeve. As the pup warms, heart and respiratory
rates increase, nursing attempts return, the gut begins to move and the glucose level rises. Feeding
should not be attempted, by nursing, bottle or tubing, until the rectal temperature can be maintained
at 96°F.
chew through the cord. Many of the newer pads have an automatic shut-off. They do not maintain
consistent heat but can reduce the chance of overheating.
166Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
There are several safer alternatives to the use of a heat lamp. Human or veterinary neonatal
water blankets are also a safe and can be wrapped around the pups. Commercially-produced forced
air patient warming systems are another safe and effective method of warming.
RICA surgical produces a countertop incubator/fluid warmer that can be used with oxygen. It is small
enough and affordable enough for clients to purchase.
Hot water bottles, SnuggleSafe?, or bags filled with rice or oats that can be heated in the microwave
u   dn p   a o  b  g  o snd a  a a
source in each of the 4 corners of a box with the pups in the center. Effective heating will provide a
1 degree rise in body temperature every 10 to 30 minutes.
A pup that becomes chilled rapidly WiLL develop a life-threatening condition. A chilled pup does
temperature; the pup will not move, breathing becomes almost indistinguishable, the heart rate
Nutritional support including tube feeding
technique is highly successful.
or slightly higher and that it is wellhydrated. Gentle and slow warming of the pup should be initiated
in thecourseof treatment iscritical.
If the pups have diarrhea, the milk replacer can be diluted 50/50 with equal parts of Ringer's and 5%
dextrose.Asthe diarrhearesolves,the milkreplacercanslowlybereturned to theexclusivediet
Tube feeding is usualy initiated by the veterinary staff, but can easily be continued at home. With
appropriate training and equipment, nearly every client can be taught to safely tube feed a puppy.
The most effective way to tube feed a neonate is to pass a soft silicone feeding tube through the
also be indicated for long term feeding. This can be done with a brief anesthetic period using gas
induction and/or propofol induction and maintenance. Despite the tendency of some pups to gag on
the tube when fed past the second week of life, as they mature, many pups see the feeding tube and
Tube feeding can be used as the sole means of nutrition for orphaned pups or those with congenital
abnormalities such as cleft palate which precludes nursing. It can also be used as a supplemental
feeding technique when the bitch cannot adequately meet the needs of the neonate. lt can easily
enough or mature enough to eat semi-solid food without assistance.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 167
Some breeders and veterinarians are reluctant to tube feed for fear of harming the puppy. The pups
aspiration, and puncturing the esophagus or stomach. All of these are possible and serious, but less
cannot adequately feed the puppy.
Some clients and veterinarians fear that by supplementing, the pups will have no drive to nurse, the
bitch will not have encugh milk, or that they are keeping a puppy alive that nature would select out.
lube feeding will Nol reduce the pup's drive to suckle and stimulate the bitch to lactate. The pup
Puppies require 22 to 26 kcal per 100 gm of body weight for the first 12 weeks. This translates into
13 ml of formula per 100 grams of body weight per day per pup for the first 7 days. This increases
to 17 ml/100 gm for week 2, 10 ml/100 gm body weight for week 3, and 22 ml/100 gm body
weight for week 4. This should be divided into a minimum of 4 feedings per day.
a caloric intake. A neonate stomach can accommodate 1 ml = (1 cc) of formula per 1 oz of body
calculations under duress. However, the first several feedings should be approximately 30% lower
than the calculated formula to allow for the stomach capacity to accommodate this volume. A
Aaa aq ueo yoewois aui pasunu aaey oi sieadde dnd aun  pat aq osie pinous Auenb lai
palpated prior to feeding to estimate fullness. If the pup is found to be over-fed after being tubed
 pue pauoe aauss Adsa ue ym ueae passed ag uo agne au (auo pue papuaisiaao)
excess volume removed by gentle suction.
0l g sjenba siu1 1alam Apog nnpe paiedioue jo punod iad Aep lad wa z ot I uea pinous sdnd
10 days of age.
Tube feeding equipment should be washed cut with hot soapy water and allowed to dry between
uses. lt is not necessary to boil the equipment between uses. The feeding tube and syringes should
freely. Feeding tubes come in a variety of sizes and materials; neither feeding tubes nor syringes are
e pun sdnd Aoue geno jeou pue xaau aons uons e sy dnd aun yi som aog e ym supa
until they recover or the defect can be corrected. Clients frequently prefer bottle feeding. If the correct
bottle and nipple can be found, and the pup(s) is strong enough to suckle on a bottle, this can be an
effective method. If the pup is too weak or is unwilling to take a bottle, or if the opening in the nipple is
common because the flow rate is often too fast and cannot be controlled by the pup.
lotal parenteral nutritional support, i.e. feeding intravenously only, is impractical in most cases due
fo the small size and unique nutritional needs of the patient.
168Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
IT IS CRITICAL THAT YOU DO NOT ALLOW ANY PATIENT TO STARVE TO DEATH, ADULT OR PUPPY
Standard of care dictates that your client should be informed of their options. Nutritional support via
Puppy milk replacer formulas can be purchased commercially, made at home with a recipe, or
fat/protein ratios most closely match bitch's milk. Pups fed home-made diets or goats milk offen
develop nutritional cataracts
Pups require a relatively dense caloric intake (energy requirement is 2 to 3 times that of an adult) to
enzymes, so hypoglycemia can develop easily, particularly in small breed pups.
Normal blood glucose should exceed 70 mg/dl (goal 80 to 150 mg/dl). Symptoms include episodes
of weakness, tremors, stupor, coma and seizures. This is frequently associated with anorexia,
vomiting, diarrhea, sepsis, or a low birth weight. Congenital glycogen storage diseases are rare,
but should be considered in the differential. Although the immediate episode must be treated with
oral and/or injectable glucose, long term management includes correcting the underlying cause and
feeding a diet high in protein, fat, and complex carbohydrates in multiple (every 2 to 3 hours) small
meals per day. Continued use of oral glucose-containing products will cause wide fluctuations in
blood glucose levels.
If a puppy is presented in a hypoglycemic crisis, an IV catheter should be placed in the jugular vein
if possible (use the largest vein possible or the Intraosseous (IO) route to reduce the likelihood of
catheter cannot be placed, 50% dextrose, honey or corn syrup can be rubbed onto the gums and/
 h    na  si     s  p o
Dextrose and 0.45% NaCl can be given subcutaneously if the IV or lO route is unavailable. For patients
that present in a coma or in shock, 20% dextrose administered IV or IO should be used, but with care.
the patient is remaining euglycemic
A panuuoo ag ueo asoxap %g pea oi yanoua pae si dnd al se uoos se paaho ag pnoys poo
Prior to discharge from the hospital, the pup must be weaned off the dextrose and must be eating an
appropriate diet to prevent relapse of the hypoglycemic episode.
Fluid support and methods of administration -- IM, IO, IP, IV, PO, PR, and SQ
Dehydration may occur because of inadequate nursing or secondary to diarrhea, fever and/or other
body mass and the inability of their kidneys to concentrate urine
Hydration status can be assessed on tacky mucus membranes, history of loss and/or inadequate
There are multiple routes of fluid administration in the neonate and pediatric patient. The route
selected will be based on many factors including the ability of the gut to effectively absorb fluids, the
severity of the illness, preference of the client, associated costs, size of the patient, and skill level of
the veterinary staff.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 169
The fluids given by any of these routes should be warmed to body temperature (95° to 99° F or 35°
to 37° C) before being administered. Neonatal fluid maintenance is 60 to 180 ml/kg of body weight
If indicated, fluid loading can be initiated by using warmed fluids at a rate of 1 cc per 30 gm of body
weight over 5 to 10 minutes, continuing until the patient shows improved mucous membrane color. The
t7/ay/o oo1 ol 0gi pouad anou tz/gi/oo og 0t 0e o paseauoui aq uaui ueo atel aoueuaueu pin
hour period) based on deficit and ongoing loss. Potassium chloride can be supplemented via the fluids
ad baw g'z moag si wnissiod aue h! (xa hy lusni Aeo o
The IV and IO (intraosseous) routes are most effective for debilitated patients but are more costly,
veterinary skills.
IV fluids
The jugular vein is the largest, most accessible vein in the neonatal and pediatric patient. An IV
catheter (20 g to 24 g, up to 1 inch in length) can be placed, with or without a cutdown, and sutured
into place with a tape butterfly. If the skin is diffcult to pierce without damaging the catheter, a
20 g needle can be used to nick the overlying skin allowing easier introduction of the catheter.
expected to be indwelling for over 12 hours, a sterile skin prep (Betadine?, or Nolvasan) should
0.5 cc of 50% dextrose can be injected into the catheter at the end of each injection cycle. Heparin
should be avoided.
Fluids that can be administered via the IV route include 2.5% dextrose and 0.45% NaCl, Ringers,
colloidals, blood and blood products as well as drugs labeled for IV administration. Lactate cannot
be metabolized by the neonate. lt is better avoided if there is an alternative fluid source, but can be
used if LRSistheonlyfluidoptionavailable
If IV fluid administration is desired but a vein cannot be catheterized, either intermittent IV injection or
intraosseous fluid administration may be substituted.
10 fluids
The intraosseous route (lO) allows rapid absorption of fluids or blood/blood products by
administration directly into the vascular space. It is easier to place an lO needle than it is to
  e aa - ais e spaau painbi d gu e uo ua ls e an
spinal needle or a hypodermic needle, size 20 to 25 gauge, materials for a sterile prep, bandaging
materlals, and a routine IV administration setup with an extension set. The sites most commonly
used are the trochanteric fossa of the femur, the tibial tuberosity, and the trochanteric fossa of the
proximal humerus, taking care to avoid injuring the growth plates (lable 8-4).
Thisrouteoffluid administration should be limitedtopatientsthataredepressedor unconscious
because of the associated discomfort and for a maximum of 24 hours at any one site.
10 Needle placement technique
Palpation of the various sites is done to determine the location best suited for this patient. The site
should be 1 cm distal to the trochanteric fossa of the femur or humerus, or 1 cm distal to the tibial
sing po asnaao pioae oi aneo suyei 'padde si dand auais e pue paddo si ats aui isoagn
170 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Table 8-4 Intraosseous catheter placement-set up
Scylet - from IV catheter or smaller needle co clear lumen of needle if plugged.
Gauze squares
1 inch whice tape
 Saline flush
 Sterile gloves - depends on doctors size
Nolvasan? surgical scrub
Antibiotic or Betadine? ointment
 Injection port
which may cause chilling of the patient. A small bleb of lidocaine or bupivicaine can be administered
if indicated by the patient's condition, taking care to use a minimal dose as neonates have a reduced
tolerance for these drugs. A small nick is made in the skin with a scalpel blade. The limb should be
stabilized with the free hand cupping the stifle or other joint distal to the insertion site, and the middle
hinger parallel to the long bone to aid in directing the needle into the lumen. A 22 g spinal needle or
a hypodermic needle is selected to suit the size of the patient's intramedullary space. The needle is
should be removed and a second smaller needle or IV stylet should be placed through the needle to
lape the needle into place with a figure 8 strip of 1 inch white tape around the hub of the needle,
the opening in the skin. Position folded gauze squares around the hub of the needle to support the
dislodging the needle or discomfort to the patient. Complications from lO administration are rare. This
technique does require removal of the pup from the other healthy littermates and dam.
Fluids that can be administered via the lO route include Ringers, normal saline, 5% dextrose,
hypertonic fluids such as 50% dextrose and 7% saline, hetastarch, other colloidals, blood and blood
products and drugs labeled for IV administration.
SQ fluids
Subcutaneous fluid administration is a very simple method of rehydrating a neonatal patient. The
patient must be warm and have adequate peripheral circulation to pick up the fluids. This can often
be done by the client at home. This route has the advantage of keeping the affected neonates with
their littermates and dam. It is also more affordable for the client.
Not all fluids can be administered via the SQ route. Lactated Ringers, normal saline, 2.5% Dextrose
with 0.45% NaCl, serum and plasma and drugs labeled for subcutaneous administration can be given
via this route. 5% dextrose is not recommended for administration subcutaneously.
Warm the fluids to body temperature and inject them into 1 or 2 sites in the interscapular space.
fluids with a venoset. The typical dose is approximately 1 cc per 1 oz of body weight per time of
administration.
Overhydration can be a serious complication. Rapid or labored respirations are a symptom of
overhydration and indicate that fluid therapy rates must be adjusted.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 171
PO fluids
Fluids can be administered by mouth or by feeding tube, if the gut is working. This means that the
 there is no ongoing vomiting.
If the pup is strong and has an adequate suckling response, a small"preemie" nipple and bottle or a
small bottle (15 ml) designed to administer oral medication to infants can be used. Many pet nursers
the boftle is so large it is diffhcult fo assess how much fluid the pup has taken.
Initially, a sick pup can be fed electrolytes (warmed Lactated Ringers) or a 50:50 mix of milk
replacer and LRS, mother's milk extracted from the bitch, or goat's milk combined with warmed
or by feeding tube, but never by eyedropper as this is too likely to lead to aspiration. Alternatively.
a 5% to 10% dextrose solution can be given by feeding tube at 0.25 ml per oz of body weight.
There is a small but serious risk of aspiration or perforation of the gut when a tube is used for oral
supplementation, but when done correctly, the risk is very small and the benefits are great
Antibodies can be absorbed through the gut only during the first 24 hours of life. These antibodies can
the bitch does not appear to be producing adequate amounts of colostrum, plasma or serum can be
the veterinary hospital's lab and administered by feeding tube. Testing for failure of transfer of passive
having inadequate colostrum intake, plasma or serum should be administered immediately.
Commercially available canned milk replacers may state they contain colostrum on the label.
However, they contain heat processed bovine colostrum that has no protective immunity to the
newborn puppy
Antibiotics
Treating the puppy
Antibiotics should be considered a first line of defense and started immediately for any sick or
debilitated pup. This includes pups born distressed, with diarrhea, with meconium in the fetal fluids,
decision to treat the affected pup only or the entire litter is a clinical decision and will vary from case
to case.
Antibiotics can be administered to neonates through the same routes that are labeled for an adult
labeled for IV administration. IV injection into the umbilical vein can be useful if the use is indicated
administration should be used with caution due to the small size and limited circulation of the target
neonate. Maternal antibodies are not protective against many bacterial infections.
Many of these bacteria in pups are are relatively antibiotic sensitive. This, and the immature
172Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
metabolism of a neonate, make penicillin, amoxicilin, amoxicillin with clavulanic acid and cephalexin
 antibiotics of first choice. These can be given through the feeding tube if the gut is working and
at home. Injectable penicillin can be administered subcutaneously by a client if the patients have
Amoxicillin can be dosed at 25 mg/kg IV or IO (preferred), IM, SQ or PO. After 2 to 3 days, the dose
may be reduced to 10 mg/kg if there has been a good clinical response.
Ceftiofur can be used as an injectable for newborns that have had meconium in their fetal
pups born vaginally or by C-section - so they can be identihed and treated as indicated. Naxcel or
ceftiofur is dosed at 2.5mg/kg SQ q 12hrs 5 days maximum.
Potentiated sulfonamides must be used with caution and only in the well-hydrated newborn patient.
This is an appropriate drug choice in a lactating bitch with metritis, mastitis, or other bacterial
infections. Aminoglycosides are rarely indicated and should only be used based on culture and
sensitivity results.
The fluoroquinolones are reported to cause defects in the formation of articular cartilage and they
are contraindicated from 8 weeks to beyond 8 months ot age, depending on the length of the growth
weeks of age if absolutely necessary, but only if based on culture and sensitivity results and if there
Articular cartilage damage has been reported due to use of fluoroquinolones. Small breed puppies
eliminatedamage.
ane oi anp uoap npe le jo uodna di oud sdnd ui pasn ag pou pinous sauai au
of the enamel color.
The umbilicus should be closely evaluated and treated by continued dipping with tincture of iodine.
The umbilicus is a common source of infection in the neonate, causing fatal peritonitis
Treating the bitch
The carbapenems (amoxicillin, penicillin, amoxicillin with clavulanic acid and cephalexin), macrolides
(erythromycin and azithromycin) potentiated sulfonamides and lincosamines (incomycin, clindamycin)
are generally safe choices for use in the lactating bitch, if she is not sensitive to the products. Most
of these antibiotics will be distributed in the milk, in varying percentages. Although clindamycin
may cause nursing puppies to develop diarrhea, the American Academy of Pediatrics considers
clindamycin compatible with breastfeeding.
Although many drugs cross into the milk, in no case should this be considered an adequate route of
administration for antibiotics (or any drug) to the neonate
Passive immunity - Plasma or Serum
Newborn pups are dependent on ingestion of colostrum in their first 24 hours of life to develop
adequate passive immunity to carry them through their first few months of life. The passive immunity
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 173
npd ag on eadde pou saop wep aun t o 'ug ne yeam no 'yis 'aaid ae sdnd auh f
adequate amounts of colostrum, or for any reason the pups will not be able to nurse adequately
plasma or serum can be administered by oral, subcutaneous or intraosseous injection.
Fresh frozen plasma is available commercially (HemoPet Appendix A-4). It is practical to have
this product on hand, frozen, in practices with a large breeder client base or if a current client is
used for other applications in the pediatric and adult patient. Overnight shipping is also available for
unexpected needs.
Alternatively, blood can be collected (then harvest plasma or serum) from the dam or another
dog from the same kennel. The commercially available product is harvested from health-screened
harvested from facilities other than the breeder's kennel, this risks introducing non-endemic
protection to the newborns to diseases they will be exposed to in their own environment
The dam can be used if she is physically able to withstand the associated blood loss. This is not
recommended if she has just undergone a C-section or is otherwise debilitated. The candidate should
be a resident of the breeder's kennel, have not previously had a blood transfusion or a pregnancy.
be young and in peak health. A larger dog should be selected because she will be able to tolerate
blood (that translates into (16 cc of plasma or serum) after centrifugation).
Collection of the plasma or serum
Prep the donor dog aseptically over the vessel selected. Collection and harvesting of the blood must
also be handled aseptically. In most cases, jugular venipuncture with physical restraint will provide
adequate volume.
ae spiny A ! poolg jo (1jun 1) 30 00g 01 dn aieuop ueo 3op (3y 0e) punod 0/ 01 0g Ayjeay 
administered concurrently. This can be repeated every 4 to 6 weeks.
Either plasma or serum can be harvested and administered. Serum is the non-cellular fluid from clotted
blood; plasma is the non-cellular fluid from unclotted blood. Studies indicating the effcacy of passive
assumed, however, that the two blood products are interchangeable. The advantage of plasma over
serum is that it contains cloting factors. The advantage of serum over plasma is that it is easier to
harvest in a clinical setting
To harvest plasma, the blood can be drawn into a syringe with ACD anticoagulant and transferred
into the tubes, or directly into an ACD blood collection botle or bag. If using tubes to collect and
harvest serum, the blood should be collected into sterile non-barrier red top tubes that have had the
tops wiped with alcohol (and allowed to dry) or chlorhexidine to prevent introduction of bacteria. The
blood should be allowed to clot at room temperature for 20 minutes, then centrifuged. If collecting
as plasma, the blood can be spun in a centrifuge. The plasma or serum must be removed from the
cells aseptically with a sterile needle and syringe, taking care to avoid including red blood cells in the
harvest. The serum or plasma can be frozen for later use; it should be kept refrigerated only if it is
to be used immediately. It is most practical to store the plasma or serum frozen in 5 ml aliquots. The
water (lower than 100° F or 36° C), never warmer, and never microwaved as the protective antibody
proteins will be inactivated.
174 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Administration of the plasma or serum
IgG antibodies are well absorbed when administered subcutaneously. They can also be given IO
but this route is more complicated and cannot be done by the breeder for the second and third
administration. PO administration is inferior to SQ when comparing absorption rates of antibodies.
 PO administration has been suggested to provide local immunity in the gut.
Plasma is often used in place of serum, but there is no documentation of the absorption in the
neonate by any route. If used, it should be citrated (ACD) plasma, not heparinized plasma. ACD
valuable in the premature neonate with coagulopathy ( Table 8-5).
The published dose for a puppy is 16 cc of plasma administered SQ aseptically in divided doses
over 24 hours.
Kittens require smaller doses, 5 cc SQ 3 times in 12 hours, and show high levels of circulating
antibodies within 12 hours of administration.
Most breeders can be taught to administer SQ fluids including plasma at home (See Appendix C-13).
Table 8-5 Fresh frozen plasma for neonatal puppies
Keep all plasma frozen until use.
To thaw, carefully warm the plasma to body cemperature. Only warm the tubes you will be using at each administration - keep
the remaining cubes in the freezer. Thawing is best done by placing tube against your body or in a pocket for warming. Do NOT
heat in warm water or microwave as this will denature/damage the proteins and render the product inetfective. Gently rock the
ube during thawing; do not shake
The dose is 5.4 cc per puppy 3 times over a 24 hour period, cotaling 16.2 cc per puppy. If this can be administered in che frst 24
hours after birch, it can be given orally wich a feeding cube. After the pups are over 24 hours old, ic must be given by SQ or IO
injection to be effective systemincally.
Draw 5.4 cc of warmed plasma into a 6 cc syringe. Using a feeding cube (only ifthe pups are less chan 24 hours old) ora 20 or
Mono uaaand on pauouid uys au pioy os uaai ji esed paem aun nalun (io siny t iaao sdnd jo) aipaau ae za
are administered
Transfusion
some breeds of kittens, is not a condition seen in the puppy.
Puppies are born with a normal hematocrit, which declines from approximately 42% to 24% by the
   g  o  on pn    'o d se     
months of age.
a whole blood transfusion. Blood is administered at a rate of 10 ml/b of body weight over 2 hours
IV or lO. The whole blood should be collected with a citrated anticoagulant and administered with a
standard Millipore blood filter. Administration of blood IP should be done as a last resort only.
Vitamin K injection
should have an injection of Vitamin K1 administered at the rate of 0.25 to 2.5 mg SQ or IM once.
trauma, or other illness.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 175
Basic hygiene and assistance with eliminations
Pups up to 4 weeks of age lack the ability to urinate or defecate without assistance. Every 4 hours,
motion with warm wet cotton balls to stimulate elimination.
If the pups appear soiled with feces or look greasy, they should be carefully washed to reduce
contamination without chilling the pups.
In some cases, the pups will have a gas accumulation in the stomach and/or intestinal tract. Gas in
the stomach can be relieved by passing a feeding tube and allowing the gas to escape. This type
of tube can also be passed rectally if there is gas in the colon or if an enema would benefit the
pup. If there is a frothy gas in the stomach or the gas is lower in the intestines, simethicone can be
administered orally. A pediatric formulation is easily found over the counter in most stores
The literature suggests the use of a trocar to relieve gas. Because of the risk of peritonitis, other
better options should be considered.
Adjusting drug doses for the neonate
oui pausand ou si anaui euoau aun not paisne ag oi spaau snp iso po aesop aui
for most drugs and there are many physiologic differences between the neonate and the adult patient.
blood-brain-barrier is more highly permeable to drugs; the neonate has reduced albumin so has a
administered by SQ injection and PO routes have an increased rate of absorption compared to adults.
Routes of administration such as intraosseous (lo) not used in adults are options in the neonate.
Critically ill or septic pups should have antibiotics administered by injection, not by PO route.
Selected drugs, particularly antibiotics used for sepsis, should be administered by injection (IO, SC
neonates (cephalosporins and penicillins), they only offer protection against gram positive bacteria.
Neonates, commonly stricken by septicemia caused by gram negatives, may need the more broad
spectrum antibiotics in other drug classes such as ceftiofur and potentiated sulfonamides or fluoro-
quinolones. Because the bacterial flora of the gut is altered by antibiotic administration, probiotics
should be included with an antibiotic regimen.
In general, drugs that are water-soluble should have the dose increased to compensate for the
decreased (up to 30% to 50%) to compensate for decreased clearance.
Each drug dosage should be researched and calculated based on the case. Many antibiotics have
a wide margin of safety, and this needs to be considered when drugs are selected. The benetit-risk
ratio of each drug should be carefully assessed and the breeder/owner should be included in this
House Officers book is very useful and available used for a very affordable price. This focuses on
drugs used in human pregnancy; the data can be extrapolated to veterinary use if necessary.
176 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Prior to administering any drug to any patient, particularly a neonate, the following
thought process is useful:
1. Is there a better alternative treatment? Do we need a drug at all? Do we need this drug?
2. Are the risks of treatments balanced by the benefits?
 3. What do we know about this drug in this type of patient considering the physiology of the
neonate?
o adk sn ui p sun nnoge apa jo yol not asuadoo m asn uo am eep aau sl 't
patient?
5. Do we have informed consent of the owner?
6.What parameters will we use to assess treatment success?Toxicity?
7. Should littermates also be treated?
Although many drugs cross into the milk, in no case should this be substituted as an adequate route
of administration to the neonate. Many drugs, however, will be found in the milk and may affect the
pups, and this needs to be considered in drug selection. In most cases, with precautions, pups can
continue to nurse. In the rare circumstances where the bitch's milk may cause harm to the pups
they should be hand-fed but left with the bitch so she can mother them. Use of a garment (human
htm) will interfere with the pup's ability to nurse but will allow her to spend time with them without
causing harm (Tables 8-6 and 8-7).
S.O.A.P. (Subjective/Objective/Analysis/Plan)
(Appendix D-5)
 A complete and systematic history and physical examination, like that for adults should be done on
neonates.
Symptoms
The breeder usually notes symptoms such as puppies that are sick, crying inconsolably, vomiting,
coughing, losing weight, dehydrated, have diarrhea or dying. Sometimes, they know something Is
wrong with 1 or more pups, but can't quite describe it. In either instance, this is an emergency and
deteriorate quickly.
For the appointment, the client should be instructed to bring:
1. The entire litter.
 2. The mother of the litter.
 3. A way to keep the pups warm and safe in transit. To keep the live pups or kittens warm in
 lamoi e ym paaaoo pue pau ssauo aii ue 'ped sueay e asn ueo lapaang aur jsuen
prop the lid open. A thermometer to monitor temperature to prevent chilling or overheating is
essential.
 4. The recorded notes and charts the breeder has kept of data on puppies or kittens weights,
temperatures, vaccinations, worming, medications, urine color, stool character and diet fed
POSSIBLE TESTING.
6.A fresh fecal sample from the pups.
instituted.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 177
 Table 8-6 Key drugs, dosages and indications for Pediatric Patients
 Canine Repro
Key Drug
Indication
Dose Range
Frequency
Route
 Precautions
Reference
 Margin of Safety
(dose adjusted for
 neonates and
roduction
pediatric patients)
Acyclovir
Herpes virus infection 10 mg per kg as
Every 6 hours until 3
PO
 Anecdocal only.
 Kampschmidc and 
Narrow
I and
 suspension
weeks of age.
ochers. Unpublished 
Neona
observation
Amikacin
 Gram Negative
Up to 20 to 25 mg per
Every 36 to 48 hours
IV
 May cause renal and
Plumb
Narrow
Septicemia
kg (with caution)
ifunder 6 weeks.
ootoxicicy. Reserve
for suspected severe
life-chreatening gram
negative infections.
 Monitor blood levels.
Amoxicillin
 Infection 
10 to 22 mg per kg
Every 12 hours
PO
Various
Amoxicillin/
 Infection
12.5 to 25 mg per kg
Every 12 hours
PO
Lee
Clavulanic Acid
Ampicillin
Infection
22 mg per kg
 Every 8 hours
IV
Lee
Cefazolin
Infection
10 to 30 mg per kg
 Every 8 hours
SC or IO
Decrease dose if
 Root Kustritz
diminished renal 
function.
Cefotaxime
 Infection
 25 to 50 mg per kg
Every 8 hours
SC or IO
 Root Kustritz
 Ce phalexin
 Infection 
10 to 30 mg per kg
Every 8 to 12 hours
PO
Various
wide
 Chloramphenicol
Mycoplasma Infection
22 mg per kg
 Every 8 hours
PO
Reserve for CNS
Poffenberger
Narrow
(Puppies only)
(up to 7 days total)
disease or cases where
bacteria are resistant
to other antibiotics.
Use minimized due
to human health risk
when handled.
Fenbendazole
Anthelminthic
 50 mg per kg
 Every 24 hours for
PO
 5 days if treating for 
Various
3 days
Giardia.
Fluoroquinolones
Infection
5 to 20 mg per kg per
5 to 20 mg per kg per
To protect against
Various
Narrow
day PO
day PO.
cartilage damage,
avoid use from 8
5 to 20 mg per kg
5 to 20 mg per kg
weeks to 8 months
 every 12 hours IV for
 every 12 hours IV for
ofage.
sepsis
sepsis.
Metronidazole
Giardia or anaerobic
10 to 25 mg per kg in
Every 24 hours for 5 t0
PO
 Neurocoxicity or
Plumb
Narrow
infection 
pups at least 2 weeks
10 days
"intoxication"
ofage
 Pyrantel Pamoate
Parasites
 5 to 10 mg per kg
Every 14 days starting
PO
Various
Wide
at 14 days ofage
Sulfadimethoxine
Coccidiosis (not
 50 mg per kg first 
Every 24 hours for 5
PO
Avoid ifunder 4
Plumb
Narrow
labeled for chis use)
dose, chen 25 mg/kg
to 10 days
to 5 weeks of age.
Can cause renal
 precipicate if patient
is not well hydraced.
May cause KCS or
thrombocytopenia.
Trimethoprim-
 Infection
 30 mg per kg
Every 24 hours
PO
Same as for
Various
Narrow
sulfadiazine or
sulfadimechoxine
Trimethoprim-
Sulfamethoxazole
Vitamin K 1
 Neonatal hemorrhage
0.25 to 2.5 mg cocal
Once
SQ, IM
Use small gauge
Various
Narrow
dose SQ or IM once.
needle. May cause
anaphylaxis by
Chapter
injection. PO is better
absorbed.
Neon
I pue
I Pediatric
Care
6
Table 8-7 Drugs to avoid in neonates and pediatric patients
Drug name:
Reason to avoid
 Doxycycline and tetracyclines
Discoloration of teeth and alteration in bone development
Fuoroquinolones
Damage to cartilage in pups over 8 weeks and under 8 months
Griseofulvin
Liver damage - diminished liver clearance
Ivermectin
 When neonates, blood-brain barrier coo permeable
Metronidazole
When neonates, blood-brain barrier too permeable
NSAIDS
 In the neonate, renal function may be damaged
 Long acting corticosteroids
Gelens, Hans. "Drug Therapy in Pediatric Practice." Western Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas, 2003.)
Diagnostic workup
History
A thorough history is essential, and should be taken by a technician or assistant. The SOAP form is
useful to ensure that the unique information required for a complete history of the neonates is not
overlooked.
Physical exam step by step
(See Appendix D-4 & D-5)
diau si lti'l si dnd I Auo fi dnd oa uo paad aa pinous uouxa ishd aado 
if the breeder brings other "normal" puppies for comparison. If there is any question, all the pups
as well as the bitch should be brought. The bitch's examination often provides clues regarding the
source of the illness. You may also tind early signs of illness in seemingly normal littermates that
reduce morbidity and mortality.
A towel placed over a heating pad makes a suitable location for the examination. It is ideal to have
2 laundry baskets with a heat source lined with towels ready when the pups arrive. Ihe use of 2
laundry baskets, each with a heat source and lined with towels helps to sort pups, to keep track of
your differential.
pups does not upset her.
A SOAP form is useful when examining the neonate. A pediatric, neonatal, or electronic stethoscope
should be used because the smaller size of the neonate makes finding murmurs more difhcult with a
larger stethoscope head.
unique findings worth noting.
Vital signs are moderately different in the newborn as compared with the adult and gradually shift to
aady ag e ing 'yuid ag pinous saueaa snnu aul 'sani dnd au se seou hnpe
pressures are lower as neonates, then gradually normalize
180 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Assessment should include body tone, body condition, and hydration. Reflexes start as flexor
dominant, but become extensor dominant by 5 days of age.
to opening is clinically related to neonatal opthalmia and should be addressed immediately. (See
ulcer (Figure 8-13). Sloughing of the ear tips is clinically related to septicemia.
Any cleft in the upper lip, nostrils, or palate (look
carefully at the soft palate with good lighting) is
important and needs to be discussed with the
breeder at once (Figure 8-14A-C).
It is normal for the lower jaw to look dispro-
portionately long at birth as this aids in nursing.
This normalizes as the pup approaches weaning
age. Malocclusion and retained deciduous teeth
are common and may require correction to
 prevent pain and improve dental alignment with
maturity but are seldom a cause of acute illness.
a rare cause of clinical disease (Figure 8-14D).
Many puppies, particularly toy breeds, have
Figure 8-13.
an open fontanelle at birth. This should close 
 A 9 week old pup with lower eyelid entropion
as the pup matures. If it is excessive in size or
inadvertent damage to the unprotected brain.
The nares should be wide enough to allow for ease in inspiration. Stenotic nares are common in
the brachycephalic dogs and may require surgical intervention to prevent a lifetime of respiratory
distress. Elongated soft palates, everted laryngeal saccules, and disproportionately narrow tracheas
or overly stretched tracheal membranes are also often seen in the toy and brachycephalic breeds
and should be noted.
              
Innocent murmurs are common and typically can no longer be ausculted by 12 weeks of age. These
innocent or functional murmurs are usually soft, no louder than a grade ll on a scale of Vl, are loudest
larger and more active in the litter. The functional murmur is often associated with fever, anemia, or
should not be sold as normal; a referral for a complete workup with a cardiologist should be offered.
Neonates have a higher heart rate, lower blood pressure, and a sinus rhythm.
Lung sounds should be similar to that of an adult.
The abdominal wall should be complete. The umbilicus should be small and the umbilical cord
should have dried up and fallen off in 3 to 4 days. Inflammation of the umbilical region is signitcant
Examine for umblical and/or inguinal hernias. These are common and in rare instances can allow
for strangulation of abdominal contents. Abdominal wall defects can allow intestines and other
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 181
Figure 8-14.
A.A newborn pup with severe cleft palate and ip.B.A newborn pup with cleft palate. C.A newborn pup with cleft lip. D.A
narrow lower jaw with lower canine teeth causing trauma to palate.
abdominal contents to be exposed at birth. In some cases, these can be surgically corrected at
birth. Umbilical hernias or hernias of the midline cranial to the umbilicus can suggest the presence of
a diaphragmatic or peritoneo-pericardial diaphragmatic. Patent urachus is rare in dogs.
It should be possible to see urine and stool on all normal pups. The absence of urine suggests
dehydration, anuria, or urinary cbstruction. Gently palpate the abdomen for the presence of an
overly full bladder or free fluid. If feces are absent, diarrhea, constipation, or ani atresia should be
considered. Normal bowel sounds should be present. The stool character should be noted.
Evaluate the vulva for evidence of abnormal structures suggesting intersex. Sticky or purulent
vaginal discharge is common in the young female pup and rarely associated with clinical disease
(Figure 8-15).
If a male pup is not urinating, evaluate the tip of the penis for calculi. If the bladder is distended and
the pup is distressed, evaluate for urethral calculi. Both testes should be palpable in the scrotum by
 pup without both testes palpable in the scrotum should be evaluated for testicular torsion.
Blood work
Blood work can be very useful in making a diagnosis in the neonate. The newer lab equipment available
182 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
in many veterinary hospitals can provide results
with microsamples and rapid turn-around times.
The smallest possible sample should be taken and
should not exceed 1.5 ml. Normals for neonatal-
pediatric patients are shown in Tables 8-8 and 8-9
Titers
Titers show 1 of 2 aspects of a patient's ability
to mount an immune response against a disease.
One mechanism is cellular and the other is
antibody production. This antibody test is called
a titer. If a titer is high enough, it is said to be
protective. The level determined to be protective
varies from one infectious agent to the next.
Passive immunity is from antibodies transferred
Figure 8-15.
from mother to neonate via the colostrum; active
Puppy vaginitis,common finding.
immunity are antibodies developed in the pup.
practice to either diagnose a disease or to evaluate the efficacy of a vaccination program. Most
veterinarians and breeders use titers to determine if the dog needs to be revaccinated according
to a pre-set schedule. However, titers can be even more valuable to determine if a patient has
responded well enough to a vaccination to develop protection. Surprisingly, up to 15% of all dogs
fail to respond adequately to routine vaccinations. Up to 5% of all dogs fail to mount any immune
response to immunization (called no-responders) and 10% fail to mount a high enough response to
be fully protective to either parvovirus or distemper virus (called low-responders).
Upon completion of the puppy vaccination series is the best time to determine if a patient is a
low-responder or a no-responder. Ideally, a titer should be done at approximately 18 to 20 weeks.
If the dog is a low or no-responder, an additional vaccination is recommended, followed by another
titer. If the second titer still shows a poor response, a booster with a vaccine produced by a different
manufacturer is recommended. If the dog still fails to respond, the recommendation is to limit the
dogs exposure to situations that may allow disease transmission. If this patient is the mother of a litter
of pups, the pups should be treated as pups with a failure of passive immunity. The use of immune
plasma in the neonate and early vaccinations of the pups can help protect them from disease. The
heritability of this failure to respond is unknown, the pups of this bitch should be titered at 18 weeks of
age, with the same protocol followed for them if they show limited response to vaccine.
Table 8-8 CBC (Table of normals for the neonate)
Parameter
Range
Age
PCV/Hct
42 to 48%
Birch
PCV/Hct
30%
 21 days
PCV/Hct
26%
28 days
PCV/Hct
24%
8 weeks
PCV/Hct
Increasing
9 weeks
FCV/Hct
Adult range
20 weeks
WBC
Adult range including differential but
 poor bone marrow reserve
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 183
Table 8-9 Chemistry panel (Table of normals for the neonate)
Parameter
Normal range
Reason
ALP
T/nI 000s on dn paseauoul
 Bone growch
ALT
Normal
BUN
Increased 1st 7 days, then declines t0
Immaturicy
low end of adult normal
Glucose
80 to 150
Total Procein and Albumin
TP 4.1
Albumin
Low
 Specific Gravicy
1.006 to 1.017
immacuricy
Urine procein
 Mild proceinuria normal up co 6 weeks
of age
Urine glucose
Mild glucosuria normal up to 6 weeks
ofage
 Electrolyces
 Normal
Urinalysis
Urine specifc gravity can be used to estimate the hydration status of a puppy. Remember, skin
Urine can be collected by rubbing the perineum with a dry cotton ball and collecting the urine
specific gravity should be between 1.006 and 1.017. Urine in this range is typically very pale
supplementation - increased time nursing, more tube feeding, or more IV/SQ/o fluids. This is a
Dipstick
Very little urine is required for testing on a urine dipstick. In the very young, when urine quantity is
limited, the sticks can be cut in half the long way. It is considered normal for puppies under 6 weeks
to have mild amounts of glucose and protein in the urine.
Organic acids
These pathway errors lead to illness and death. Because they are not readily apparent on physical
examination, but cause significant clinical signs, early detection is vital.
Inborn metabolic pathway errors are diagnosed by testing for amino acids, organic acids, and
carbohydrates. These are more readily detected in the urine compared to the blood.
Symptoms include early neonatal death, unthriftiness, slow development, cloudy corneas, anorexia.
chronic vomiting and/or diarrhea, skeletal defects, and enlarged livers and/or spleens. Urine testing
no physical exam tindings or other diagnostic testing can reveal a cause.
information can be found on their website by searching for penngen.
184Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Cultures - Samples and techniques
Vral cultures
Viral cultures are usually taken for electron microscopic analysis. These are samples of feces
corneal scrapings and other tissues that may be found to contain the virus.
Newer tests, PCRs, are replacing electron microscopy in many cases. Prior to sampling, check the
submission information at your reference lab for a list of the most recent and accurate tests, how to
sample, and how to submit a sample.
Bacterial cultures
Bacterlal samples need to be collected carefully to avoid outside contamination and maximize
should wear gloves to avoid contamination of the sample by contact with their skin. Sterile
intruments and collection devices should be used.
should be collected prior to opening the intestinal tract. Specialized swabs with media to support
bacterial growth should be used. For blood cultures, vacuum tubes are avalable and should be stocked
Solid tissues can be placed inside sterile bags or tubes for transport. If bacterial cultures are not to be
performed at the clinic, refrigerate them and send to a reference laboratory as soon as possible
EKG lead l1
non-invasive and easy screening test available in many veterinary facilities. lt can be used to detect
both primary cardiac arrhythmias as well as electrolyte disorders with secondary cardiac changes.
pup. Although cardiac chamber enlargement can be detected on EKG's, interpretation can be more
diagnostic of the underlying cardiac pathology.
Many pups, under 12 weeks of age, may present with soft systolic murmurs. Some may be innocent
the pups will outgrow them. For pups with loud or persistent murmurs, or who are small and tire
easily, cardiology referral is recommended. Prior to sale, referral to a cardiologist or internist with
specific cardiac disease and developing a prognosis and treatment protocol.
Radiographs
S  n on ad ms ng  a o n an  o
can be diagnosed radiographically, even in the very young. Restraint can be difficult. Sedation and
patient well (Figure 8-16).
The young pup has a lack of detail on abdominal films due to lack of abdominal fat. Non-screen
casseftes or special screens (such as mammogram casseffes) can be used to improve detail.
they are willing to allow a radiograph - don't assume that they will decline just because the patient is
so small.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 185
Thoracic radiographs can be more enlightening
than abdominal radiographs. These can be
used to evaluate for pneumonia, rib fractures,
hemorrhage, an enlarged heart, and a incomplete
diaphragm. Relative to adults, the lungs will be
 more opaque and the heart larger. Gas in the Gl
tract is readily apparent. Some foreign bodies
can be easily seen. Bones will have a mysterious
array of growth plates and very little mineralized
structure if the pup is very young.
Ultrasound
Utrasonography can be very useful in the neonate
and pediatric patient. The lack of abdominal fat,
and thus detail on a radiograph, is not an issue
with ultrasound. However, the neonate does not
have the same relative organ sizes as an adult
and the ultrasonogram should be interpreted
 carefully. Nearly any ultrasonic study that can be
done on an adult can also be done on a neonate.
Ultrasound is a very useful tool for collecting
urine by cystocentesis. It can also be helpful
abdomen and thorax.
Many cardiologists use echocardiograms to
Figure 8-16.
assess for cardiac disease. Puppies under 10
A radiograph of a newborn pup.
weeks of age are generally not candidates for
echocardiography.
Function testing
Gastrointestinal function testing
TLI (Trypsin-Like Immunoreactivity): The TLI test is not considered to be a classic function test. It
assesses normal exocrine pancreatic function to check for the ability to secrete normal digestive
enzymes. This problem is most common in adolescent German Shepherds, but other breeds are
alsoaffected.
Following a comprehensive physical examination, evaluation for intestinal parasites and appropriate
use of a broad spectrum wormer, a TLl test should be a routine part of any work-up for canine
small bowel diarrhea. It is available at Iexas A and M University and can be ordered alone or in
combination with cobalamin and folate. The patient must fast for 12 hours for these tests to be
accurate. (See:http://www.cvm.tamu.edu/gilab/)
Hepatic function tests
Bile acids
This test assesses liver function. In the pediatric patient, it is used to detect a suspected
porto-systemic shunt. These are most commonly run in pairs, fasting or pre-prandial and after a
meal, or post-prandial. However, a single bile acid that is significantly elevated is often considered
shunt, but there are logistic problems with this test - it must be kept anaerobic until run, on ice, and
a control from a normal patient is often required with each sample submitted. For these reasons, the
bile acid test is often preferred.
186 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Renal function
lohexol clearance test
Diagnosing renal disease is a challenge. Ihe tests we rely on - the BUN and Creatinine tests - do
not become elevated until the patient has suffered damage or loss of over /5% of the renal tissue.
In dogs and cats, we sometimes rely on urine specific gravity to detect renal disease, but it does not
drop into the isothenuric range (1.008 to 1.012) until 66% of the renal tissue is damaged.
It is obvious that a more sensitive test is needed for earlier diagnosis of kidney damage. The iohexol
clearance test is valuable for this application, but seldom used in private practice.
related to the functional renal mass.
lohexol is used as a radiographic contrast medium for myelograms and IVPs. It works because it is
not protein bound and its elimination by the kidney tracks the GFR. The test is sensitive, accurate
and linear.
Prior to testing, contact the reference laboratory you intend to use to be certain that the protocol
has not been updated. The test is currently run on serum. A 300 mg iodine/kg bolus is injected as
a one-time injection IV with a catheter. The precise time of the injection must be recorded. At 2, 3
and 4 hours after administration, additional samples should be drawn. The sample size should be
sufhcient to harvest at least 1.2 ml of serum from each of the 3 samples. All samples should be
allowed to clot in serum clot tubes, and centrifuged. Label each sample with the owner's name
         s       
into plastic transport vials with the above identifying information on them and submit by shipping
overnight to the reference lab in an insulated container (Figure 8-1 /).
Orine Protein Creatinine Ratio (UPCR)
A urine protein creatinine ratio (UPCR) is useful in determining if there is evidence of protein loss in
Interpretation complex and is beyond the scope of this book.
A
Figure 8-17.
A. Congenital renal disease. B. Renal dysplasia in a pup.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 187
Post mortem exam
A post mortem examination is recommended whenever a pup dies. It is rare in companion animal
from post mortem examination can be invaluable. With prompt results and institution of appropriate
therapy, other pups in the litter may be saved.
In house
The gross post mortem can be done in the veterinary clinic, taking care to note and record any
DNA, organic acids in the urine, and toxicology. Digital photographs are useful. The particular
differences to note between the neonate and adult are the relative diference in organ size, and the
and record keeping will prove useful for both this client and future clients.
Reference laboratory
The body may also be refrigerated, not frozen, and submitted it in its entirety with gel packs to a
reference lab. Prior to shipment, develop a relationship with a lab and pathologist that will accept
fndings, histology, PCR, toxicology, urine organic acids, and microbiclogical fndings (bacteria,
viruses, and parasites).
If the lab prefers a complete post mortem on fresh tissues, the body should be wrapped in plastic,
 a   b      a  s    
and shipped overnight or by lab courier. If the lab personnel prefer tixed tissues, both body cavities
Be certain all paperwork is complete including a clinical history and the veterinarian's signature if
required (Figure 8-18)
Managing the neonate in the hospital
Itis difficult to manage patients overnight in hospitals without 24 hour staffing. This is especially
true for the neonatal patient due to the need for frequent feedings and the potential for frequent
changes in treatment protocols. This often necessitates separating the sick pup(s) from their dam
B
Figure 8-18.
1 88Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
and litermates, causing additional stress and nutritional deficits.
nighttime care at home. Many injections can be administered by the breeder.
arranged at a 24 hour emergency clinic.
lness syndromes in the neonate
This discussion, covers common disorders by symptom rather than by etiology. It is not intended to
be allinclusive.
"Fading puppy syndrome"
temperature, blood glucose, blood volume, prevent sepsis, and adequate oxygenation. Keep the
patient warm; provide plasma and/or fluids; supplement oxygen, food and antibiotics. This is often
all that is needed.
Poor weight gain
Poor weight gain has a strong correlation with pups that fade and die. This can involve either
the entire litter.
Evaluate the bitch for disorders that reduce lactation. These include mastitis, metritis, inadequate
Correct the underlying disorder, hydrate the bitch and administer metoclopramide and oxytocin to
the bitch by injection or orally.
Administer plasma SQ to the pups and start supplemental feeding. Heat, oxygen, antibiotics, and
weight, then drop 1 feeding per day if they continue to gain weight as anticipated.
Diarrhea
Amost every litter has one or more pups that are affected with diarrhea. The prognosis and
other symptoms such as vomiting. Symptoms include crying, failure to nurse, bloating, dehydration
 l me il s    s     l aa 
All pups over 2 weeks old should be wormed every 2 weeks unless the bitch was on the 4 week
fenbendazole protocol while pregnant and in early lactation. If they have diarrhea and are not
vomiting or too sick to worm, and have not been wormed in the past 2 weeks, worming should be
done at once. Owners should be advised to practice good hyglene and cautioned about the zoonotic
potential of intestinal parasites
The bitch should accompany her pups to the clinic for evaluation. If she is not ill, it may be advisable
to examine her in the car to prevent exposure to diseases in the clinic. Check her for mastitis and
metritis
Diagnostics should include fecal flotation and fecal centrifugation. Evaluate a fecal smear stained with
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 189
if there is an abundance of cocci, or if Clostridium is noted, administer an appropriate antibiotic
Bacterial cultures can be set up at the clinic or submitted to a reference lab. In house tests are now
available for Parvovirus and Giardia, providing results in 20 minutes. Parvovirus is of greatest concern
in unvaccinated pups over 10 weeks of age or in vaccinated pups 10 to 14 weeks old.
Determining and treating the underlying cause of diarrhea should be the goal. Adding baby rice
syringe fed. If the pups are on solid food, they can be fed a commercially available diet to control
diarrhea. Kaolin/Pectin suspension can also be used.
Constipation
Constipation is less common than diarrhea, but some owners will see pups straining to defecate
This can progress to vomiting. It can be related to inadequate water or food consumption.
Sometimes, a wellubricated thermometer can stimulate defecation. If not, and a patent rectum has
been contrmed by finding feces previously, treatment should consist of SQ fluids, oral Karo syrup.
glycerin suppositories, and/or gentle soap suds enemas with warm water administered with a soft
overcorrecting diarrhea and it is easy to swing back and forth between the 2 conditions.
Fussy
 A fussy puppy can be suffering from anything imaginable. Attentive owners can usually assess and
be examined for signs of illness.
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is common secondary to aspiration of food, fluids, or medications. It may also result
from exposure to infectious diseases such as Herpesvirus.
Prevention is the most effective way to deal with pneumonia. Neonates should not be allowed to
 m         s i a o  t    
syringe or eye dropper because it can lead to aspiration of formula.
Treatment consists of:
1. Antibiotic therapy for primary bacterial disease, treatment of aspiration, or to treat secondary
invaders following viral infection.
 2. Fluid therapy to keep secretions loose and for general supportive care.
3. Oxygen, by tank cr oxygen concentrator. +/- nebulizer
 4. Hyperimmunized plasma to aid in infecticus disease management.
5. Nutritional support.
6. Warmth if Canine Herpesvirus is suspected.
Refusal to nurse
maternal skills, inadequate lactation, or a sick bitch or pup.
1 90 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Regurgitation
First, distinguish regurgitation from vomiting. This is usually done by asking the client questions or by
describing the difference and giving the client symptoms to watch for. On occasion, the pup may be
observed in the act at the hospital.
Regurgitation is often noted at the time of weaning, when solid food is introduced. If only one
episode is noted, overeating is the probable cause. lf one or more pups are regurgitating after
each solid meal, losing weight, and/or have aspiration pneumonia, they need to be evaluated.
Radiography, including barium swallows, can be done in most practices. Referral for functional
imaging should be considered if barium swallow and observation are inconclusive. Differentials
bodies, esophageal strictures and fistulas, and other more unusual disorders.
Megaesophagus
Supportive care can be rewarding because many but not all, pups will either "outgrow" or improve
Owners must monitor for early signs of aspiration. Appropriate antibiotic therapy based on culture
textures ranging from solid to liquid diets can be tried to determine which kind each patient tolerates
best. Gastrotomy tubes can be placed surgically if required.
Drinking botfles mounted above the pup's head also allow gravity to improve swallowing. Over
the-counter products that thicken drinking water (developed for use in nursing homes for human
patients) are useful.
Sucralfate suspension is recommended for all patients with megaesophagus. (Gaynor et al., 1997)
Medicate affected animals with oral sucralfate suspensions (1 g tid for large dogs and 0.5 g tid for
with caution. Bethanechol can be dosed at 5 to 15 mg/dog p/o TID or 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg P0 TID.
is rare. The incidence is highest in male German Shepherd pups. The stomach, and occasionally
Emergency surgical or endoscopic intervention is required.
Vascular ring anomalies
Vascular ring anomalies can mimic esophageal foreign bodies, esophageal strictures,
was gaining and growing well while nursing, but fails to thrive and begins to regurgitate when solid
food is introduced. Pups with vascular ring anomalies must be distinguished from those with a cleft
palate. Pups with a cleft palate will show milk in the nostrils after nursing and fail to thrive from birth;
far less common than primary megaesophagus. Several different vascular ring anomalies, involving
different blood vessels, with and without a patent ductus areteriosium, have been described.
Persistent right aortic arch is the most common, with aberrant subclavian arteries second. lt is
thought to be hereditary.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 191
A vascular ring anomaly is a congenital defect caused by an abnormal location of the great vessels
can be clinically distinguished from vomiting by the lack of retching and the tubular shape of the
littermates in size at the introduction of solid food, become thin, and may show signs of fever and
it aspirates and has evidence on radiography of pneumonia. Although a dialated esophagus can
be seen on survey radiographs, a carefully performed barium swallow is useful in distinguishing
megaesophagus from a vascular ring anomaly. Because these conditions differ in treatment and
prognosis, the barium swallow should be offered to the client.
Diagnosis is made by clinical suspicion and a barium swallow (esophagram). Take a non-barium
survey radiograph to assess the lungs and radiographic technique. Carefully feed a small amount
aul paiengeaa aq oi snaeydosa aun jo uood aul ssedkg m ll asnenag 'agnt supaat e asn iou oa
affected pup will have a pouch of barium and food in the esophagus just cranial to the heart. This
is distinguished from a normal esophagus (no collection of barium, just slender stripes) or from a
megaesophagus (where the barium accumulates in the esophagus but does not end abruptly at the
base of the heart).
ads ou ane araul 'sase aen u paeui ag oe Ae sydeogue pue Xdoosopua doosoon
changes noted on blood tests. The pup may have an elevated white blood cell count with a left shift
if aspiration pneumonia is present.
the prognosis for full recovery Is guarded. Bethanachol may improve esophageal motility
Swallowing defects (Dysphagia)
This is a group of disorders where the dog has diffculty prehending and/or swallowing food. These
can include foreign bodies, anatomic defects and neurologic deficits. Observation of the dog
indicated for a detinitive diagnosis.
Sepsis
Sepsis is a common cause of illness or acute death in neonates, and they must be monitored closely.
Symptoms can include crying (mewing in puppies), lethargy and weakness or restlessness, a distended
of the distal extremities (toe tips, ear and tail tips) or sudden death.
Affected pups may have an increased white blood cell count with a left shift, or a profoundly low
white blood cell count due to consumption of the cells. There is often a low blood glucose and low
platelet count.
Septicemia should be treated on an emergency basis. Begin supportive care including correction
for low body temperature, hypoxia, low blood glucose, and dehydration. Begin antibiotics after
collecting appropriate samples for culture. IV or lO antibiotic administration is more reliable when
Sepsis occurs easily in neonates due to chilling, inadequate colostrum ingestion, hypoglycemia
secondary to viral infection or parasitism, or metritis or mastitis in the dam. Bacteria may enter
192 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
through the umbilical cord (remember to treat the cord with tincture of iodine solution 3 times in the
frst 8 hours after birth), gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, or skin. A post mortem with bacterial
cultures should be performed as soon after death as possible. The information yielded regarding the
source of infection might save the remaining littermates.
Herpes
Canine Herpesvirus (CHV) can cause fetal death or early neonatal illness and death. (See previous
section in this chapter).
Husbandry problems
Husbandry problems can involve inadequate maternal skills, inadequate food and water, and
environment is an invaluable tool in resolving these issues
If this is impractical, photographs, video along with a complete history and physical examinations of
the dam and pups can be very useful.
Dermatitis
Infected umbilicus or Omphalitis: A moist, inflamed umbilicus can lead to peritonitis and rapid
death. Prevention consists of dipping the cord up to the abdominal wall in tincture of iodine (not
Betadine) at birth, 2 hours and 8 hours post-partum until the umbilical cord drops off. The cord
typically dries and falls off after 3 days. Diagnosis is made by observation of redness, swelling,
and discharge in a sick puppy. Ireatment, if diagnosed in time, consists of topical cleansing of the
generalized peritonitis or abscesses in the liver and lungs.
include multiple pustules on the unhaired ventral abdomen, near the genitals. Once the pustules
 ai          s     
soon resolves. Ireatment may only require antibacterial shampoos such as chlorhexidine or benzoyl
Puppy strangles or Juvenile cellulitis
deep pyoderma, weeping skin lesions on the lips, around the eyes, and inside the ear flaps and
Rarely, there is joint involvement with joint swelling and lameness. The drama is in the rapid onset,
the number of pups affected, and the poor response to antibiotic therapy (Figure 8-19).
cells. To confrm the diagnosis, skin scrapings and fungal cultures can be collected to rule out other
disorders. Additional studies such as skin biopsies are seldom indicated and may delay treatment.
Although this is considered by most to be a bacterial disease, it's falure to respond to antibiotics
hypersensitivity. Concurrent therapy with corticosteroids and topical Dome-boro? can lead to rapid
and complete resolution. Failure to quickly initiate a combinaticn of antibiotic and corticosteroid
therapy can lead to a long course of disease, permanent scarring of the affected areas on the face,
and possible death. Appropriate therapy involves the use of a cephalosporin or amoxicillin-clavulanic
acid combination at label doses, prednisolone or prednisone at 2.2 mg/kg daily for 14 days with a
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 193
A
Figure 8-19.
A. Skin lesions on the face of a Labrador Retriever pup with
Puppy Strangles or juvenile cellulitis. B. Lymphadenopathy
caused by puppy strangles or juvenile cellulitis. C. Puppy
strangles or juvenile cellulitis with exudative lesions inside
the pinnae.
slow tapering, and careful application of Dome-boro? solution on cotton pledgets with no rubbing or
abrasion. The importance of corticosteroid use cannot be overemphasized.
Pups affected by juvenile cellulitis are often between the ages of 4 weeks and 6 months. The breeds
commonly affected are Golden Retrievers and Golden Retriever mixes. This suggests a genetic
component.
Demodecosis
Demodex mites are a relatively common cause of hair loss. Dogs with demodex can present at any
age, with hair loss in patches cn the face, trunk, feet, ears, or generalized hair loss. if more than
6 lesions are identifed, it is considered generalized. Approximately 10% of dogs with demodex
develop generalized disease.
It can cccur in dogs under 1 year of age, and in older dogs with immunosuppressive disorders. It is
considered to be a genetic disorder, probably autosomal recessive, caused by abnormalities of both
the humoral (antibiodies) and cellular (T cells) immune systems. Demodex in the pediatric patient is
not considered predictive for long-term immune system dysfunction. All dogs are considered to be
exposed to demodex mites shortly after birth, but only dogs with this specific immune deficiency
develop the disease. It is not considered contagious. Dogs with this disorder should be removed
from the gene pool.
Dogs with demodex are usually not itchy. They may present with one patch of hair loss, several
patches of hair loss with no associated inflammation, lesions on the feet, otitis with no other
194Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
a pustular dermatitis. In generalized cases, the dog may present ill, with a fever and generalized
ymphadenopathy.
The pattern of hair loss is suggestive of demodex but should be confirmed by identifying demodex
mites on deep skin scrapings. Areas of suspected demodex should be scraped with a slightly dull
scalpel blade, while squeezing the skin, until blood shows. The material should be placed in cil on a
glass microscope slide with a coverslip, and examined at 40x. Rarely, skin biopsies are needed to
make the diagnosis.
Until recently, generalized demodex was sometimes fatal. The development of new parasiticides has
made it highly treatable.
Treatment of demodex
Goodwinol cintment (rotenone) has been used for decades to treat individual lesions. If demodex
becomes generalized following treatment with Goodwinol, it is not a treatment failure.
Patients with associated pyodermas should be treated with antibacterial shampoos and systemic
antibiotics prior to the use of topical miticides.
Amitraz as a dip is the only FDA approved product for the treatment of generalized canine demodex.
The label directions are complete. In some states, only personnel with pesticide training are
should wear gloves and protective eyewear. The dip should be diluted according to label directions,
with a fresh dilution for each treatment. Apply it to the entire body for 15 minutes, with the feet
2 weeks for at least 3 treatments, and 1 month beyond 2 consecutive negative skin scrapes at 1
observed after treatment and may require supportive care.
Up to 40% of dogs will not resolve completely with amitraz treatment. Some will need intermittent
      s      
Other treatment options include ivermectin, milbemycin, and an amitraz-metaflumizone combination
product. Some dogs are highly sensitive to these products and they should be used carefully. It is
treatment.
Neonatal ophthalmia
This is a true emergency in the neonate that has not yet opened its eyes. It is cbvious clinically. The
diagnosis is made on the observation of a swelling behind the eyelid(s) and/or purulent drainage
from the inner corner of the eye.
All breeder clients should be educated to monitor their pups for this. If it is suspected or observed,
opening the eyelids. Soften the lid margins with baby shampoo and a warm compress. The lids can
be manipulated open by using dry gauze on the fingers for traction. lIf this is unsuccessful, a curved
mosquito forceps can be carefully used to open the seal between the eyelids. Collect a sample of the
purulent discharge for culture and sensitivity testing. Staphylococcus is the most common organism
cultured. All affected pups should be treated with an antibiotic ophthalmic ointment preparation.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 195
All affected eyelids should be opened. In some cases, opening the eyelids on all the puppies in the
litter is indicated. Frequently, purulent material is found behind eyelids not yet showing distention.
Opening the lids prematurely will not cause damage to the pup's vision. Failure to treat this condition
promptly may lead to permanent eye damage.
shows this has not been the case - in fact, this is seen in households where the pups are kept
fastidiously clean. Be cauticus in communicating to clients that they may not be raising pups in
sanitary conditions (Figure 8-20).
A
B
Figure 8-20.
A & B.A1 week old pup with a purulent ocular discharge.This condition, known as neonatal ophthalmia requires opening
the eyelids and treating prompty to prevent permanent damage to the eyes.
Birth defects
Birth defects are defined as abnormalities of structure, function, or body metabolism that are
present at birth. Over 4,0o0 are known in humans. lt is not possible to make a comprehensive list
The most common structural defects in neonates include the cleft palate, heart defects, umbilical
hernia, gastroschisis and omphalocele (open abdominal wall), spina bifida, underweight neonate
swimmer puppy, and abnormal rear legs. The following defects should be recognized early and are
often treatable.
Cleft palete
This defect is visible with a good oral examination and good lighting. All veterinary staff should be
trained to evaluate pups for this at assisted births or when a pup is presented for failure to thrive.
Clients can be instructed to look for this at the time of the pup's birth. Often, the shape of the head
is different in the affected pup; experienced staff will frequently detect this at delivery.
Although this is surgically correctable in some cases, management until surgery is taxing on the
owner. Tube feeding is recommended until the pup is old and large enough for surgical intervention.
these pups to be rewarding. Most clients opt for euthanasia when the defect is discovered or if the
management becomes too difficult
196Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Heart defects
All pups should be ausculted for murmurs within a few hours to days of birth. They should have a
 complete physical examination including careful thoracic auscultation, in a quiet setting prior to
placement in their adoptive homes. Most murmurs are audible by 6 weeks, but some will not be
noted until the dog is an adult.
Many murmurs that are audible in the very young are innccent and will disappear as the pup matures.
All murmurs should be noted and the breeder should consider advanced evaluation of the pup's
cardiac function prior to placement in homes if the murmur persists beyond 8 weeks.
corrected and some can be managed medically. The cause of most murmurs cannot be definitively
identified with auscultation, so any murmur that persists or any pup with clinical signs associated
with the murmur (such as a small pup that tires easily) should be referred to a cardiologist prior to
sale or if kept by the breeder.
Umbiical hernia
Keep the umbilicus clean and disinfected until the cord dries and falls off. Very large or vulnerable
hernias should be corrected prior to the sale of the pup. Smaller stable hernias can be corrected by the
new owner, often at the time of the spay or neuter. Nearly all umbilical hernias are inherited (they are
not usually caused by trauma to the umbilicus at birth), they are not serious and are easily corrected.
Many breeders will use the affected dogs for breeding. Compared to other more serious defects that
are life-threatening, using these dogs for breeding is not the sign of an irresponsible breeder.
Gastroschisis and omphalocele
These are relatively common defects in the newborn human and puppy. Gastroschisis is a defect
in the abdominal wall, not at the umbilicus, but usually just right of it, allowing intestines and other
It is a genuine emergency requiring immediate surgical correction. It is not usually associated with
other defects and the pup often will do wellif the surgery is prompt and goes well, and antibiotics
omphalocele is that an omphalocele is caused by failure of the 3 portions of the embryonic gut to
form correctly. Because of this embryonic error, a portion of the gut may be incomplete and diffcult to
detect in neonates. In humans, both of these defects are detected by ultrasound, allowing Caesarean
heritable inhumanswhere it is most common in mothers under3O that are smokers.
Whether born by vaginal birth or C-section, the umbilicus should be closely examined at birth. If any
defect is noted, the area should be covered with a moist sterile dressing and the pup immediately
saved by rapid intervention if the intestines are not compromised. Many of these dogs enjoy normal
lives with no other associated defects.
Correction of an abdominal wall defect is best achieved by immediate surgery. Anesthetize the pup
by face mask gas anesthesia (intubation is often difhcult due to the small size of the patient). Prep
 as   s as  s a    e  e   
cavity. The defect in the abdominal wall may need to be enlarged to allow the exposed contents
to be repositioned without force. A 2 layer closure is suffcient. The first layer, the linea, should be
closed with a simple interrupted pattern of 3-0 or 4-0 absorbable suture. The subcutaneous layer
is not visible in most newborns.The second layer, the skin, can be closed with the same suture or
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 197
a non-absorbable suture. The umbilical cord should remain exposed, and may need to be ligated
to prevent hemorrhage. The pup can be discharged to the owner with its littermates. The incision
should be kept clean with tamed iodine or chlorhexidine. Administer systemic antibiotics, usually
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid drops or injectable ceftiofur, to prevent peritonitis. Pups with gastroschisis
can usually be saved, while those with omphaloceles do not have as high a rate of survival rate due
to associated multiple gastrointestinal and thoracic wall defects (Figure &-21E and F).
Spina bifida
This is another midline defect, like umbilical hernias and cleft palates, but much more rare. There is
little information regarding treatment. Some pups will survive without intervention if the defect is mild
(Figure 8-21A).
Underweight newborn
Often this pup is normal other than its small stature. Commonly, the pup was crowded or had poor
(Figure 8-22A).
Figure 8-21.
A-C. Newborn pup with 3 midline defects: cleft palate, spina bifda and open abdominal wa. D. Neonatal pup born with open
abdominalwall andopeneyelids
198 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure8-2l.(continued)
E. Neonatal pup born with gastroschisis. F. Neonatal pup born with gastroschisis with a successful repair of the defect
done immediately after birth. G. Neonatal pup born with open thoracic walf. This pup did not survive. H. A newborn pup with
hypospadias, a failure of the midline to close. This pup survived I. A radiograph of a bitch with distocia. The pup was known
to have anencephaly prior to delivery by C-section. J. A neonatal pup born with anencephaly.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 199
1
+
Figure 8-21. (continued)
K. A neonatal pup born with anencephaly. The pup did not survive. L. Severe anasarca or walrus puppy. This puppy could
not breath and did not survive. M. A neonatal English Buldog pup born with the feet rotated. Within a few days, this will
self - correct. N. A neonatal pup born with multiple defects.This pup did not survive. O. A Pembroke Weish Corgi pup with
a thoracic walldefect which developed 3 days after birth. In mild cases, some of these pups survive.P. Neonatal pup bor
with schistosomus reffexus. This pup did not survive.
 200 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
+
Figure 8-21. (continued)
Q. Neonatal pup born with schistosomus refexus. This pup did not survive. R. Neonatal pup born with Schistosomas
Reflexus and a paw with extra toes. This pup did not survive. S. Pup stilborn at C-section, appears to have died several days
prior to birth due to inadequate blood flow to the pup through the twisted umbilical cord. T. Close up of the twisted umbilical
cord inthepreviousillustration.
A
B
Figure 8-22.
AL Littermate neonatal pups with size disparity due to placental dysfunction. B. Pembroke Weish Corgi pup with ribcage
defect seen at post mortem demonstrating extreme deviation of shape of thorax. This developed at the 3rd day of life, was
not present at delivery by C-section.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 201
Swimmer puppies
Swimmer pups have a flattened chest wall and diffculty supporting their weight on their legs. This
"diagnosis" is based on the appearance of the pup. Swimmers need to be distinguished from a more
severe form of thoracic wall defect, pectus excavatum, which has a poor prognosis.
They are usually normal in appearance at birth, but change quickly by several days to weeks of age.
Some are very heavy relative to their littermates. Providing better footing on an egg-crate mattress
to walk, some breeders place them for several short sessions a day in a U-shaped narrow carpeted
trough with high sides to help support their weight. With supportive care, many will improve (Figures
8-22B and 8-7C and D)
Abnormal rear legs
The hocks are often rotated laterally and the paws are rotated upward. Euthanasia at birth is
not advised. The legs often roll into a normal position by 4 to 7 days of age and have "normal"
ambulation as they mature Figures 8-7B-D and 8-21M).
Seizures
Seizures occur in patients of all ages. Determining if the patient had a seizure or other type of
episode can be difficult. Other syndromes that can mimic seizures include: cardiac episodes, pain,
intense itching, or other behaviors.
Seizures may be divided into 2 categories: intracranial and extracranial. Intracranial causes include
epilepsy, trauma, inflammatory lesions, and hydrocephalus. Extracranial causes include metabolic
a rare cause of seizures in the dog, but can be intracranial or extracranial.
Evaluate extracranial causes first. Hypoglycemia (glucose < 40 mg/dl) is easily determined. If
suspected, a blood should be drawn before treatment is initiated.
If the glucose is normal without supplementation, evaluate for a portosystemic shunt with bile acid or
diagnostics are pending.
pue Aeua dn daay iou saop oum dnd ius e si sunus suaissood e jo paadsns sop aun 'uao
physically with its littermates. Some may seize and show other neurologic signs of circling, ataxia and
y lae kuened souaa ensnun aay isng reu aos pue ianb aan ane aos ruoaos
as bile-containing bladder stones. (See section Nutritional Support earlier in this chapter.)
In some cases, the presence of a shunt can be confirmed by abdominal ultrasound. There are 2
generaltypes ofshunts-intra-hepatic and extra-hepatic.Surgical correction of the intra-hepaticshunt
is very difficult and often cannot be accomplished. An extra-hepatic shunt is somewhat easier to
use an embolization coil to correct this vascular flow defect. The patient will require careful pre-op and
202 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Managing theportosystemic shunt patient medically prior to surgery to minimize
symptoms. Management includes the use of:
1. Metronidazole to reduce the ammonia levels produced by anaerobic bacteria.
2. Lactulose to decrease Gl transit time and minimize ammonia absorption from the gut
3. Medications such as propofol, sodium and potassium bromide, and levetiracetam to manage
seizures and reduce the probability of post-op seizure complications.
4. Low protein diet.
 5. Proton pump of H-2 blockers if indicated for Gl bleeding.
6. Manitol, furosemide and mild hypothermia to manage elevated intracranial pressure.
Inflammation in the CNS is a documented cause of seizure in the dog. Although rare in most regions,
immunity. Seizures caused by canine distemper are difficult to manage with medications. Other
causes include bacterial disease in the brain, Cryptococcus, Toxoplasmosis, Ehrlichiosis, and
s
Toxins are a common cause of seizures, particularly in the pediatric patient with a tendency to ingest
involved. Consultation with the ASPCA's National Animal Poison Control Center at 1-800-548-2423
should be recommended to the client if a toxin is suspected.
Intracranial causes of seizures include trauma, hydrocephalus, inborn errors of metabolism, hypoxia
at birth, inflammation, infection, parasitism, and idiopathic epilepsy. Specific diagnostics include:
ultrasound of the brain to assess the size of the ventricles of the brain if the fontanelle is open; CSF
and an open fontanelle. Breeds at increased risk include Boston terriers, Chihuahuas, Pomeranians,
Pugs and Toy Poodles. Pups with hydrocephalus may be disoriented, slower to learn than
littermates, and seize. Confirm the diagnosis by ultrasound of the brain if there is access through the
open fontanelle to assess the size of the ventricles, MRl, CT, and EEG. Presumptive treatment should
凸
B
Figure8-23
A. Terrier pup with hydrocephalus at euthanasia. B. Same pup with skul opened at post mortem showing ventricles of the
brain with thinned walls due to fluid accumulation
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 203
include prednisone (0.25 mg/kg to 0.5 mg/kg once daily to BID) and furosemide (0.5 mg/kg to
2.0 mg/kg once daily to BID) to reduce CSF accumulation. Some patients are candidates for shunt
placement for better long-term management, but these are not without complications. The long-term
prognosis is guarded.
Ao  n 'su uno  un uaas a   ie pe oi od exoy  pasn sani
be able to offer supportive care and patience while the brain is allowed to heal.
If idiopathic epilepsy is suspected, based on age, breed, and elimination of other possible causes,
and the seizures are progressively worsening, treatment may be necessary.
Cocker Spaniels, Collies, Dachshunds, Dalmatians, German Shepherds, Golden Retrievers, lrish
Setters, Irish Wolfhounds, Keeshonden, Labrador Retrievers, Pointers, Poodles (all varieties), Saint
Bernards, Schnauzers (miniature and standard), Siberian Huskies, Vizslas, Welsh Springer Spaniels,
heritable, so affected dogs should not be included in the breeding program.
Treatment for suspected or diagnosed idiopathic epilepsy is initiated when justified by the frequency
or severity of the seizures. Emergency management using injectable diazepam, barbiturates and
sodium bromide may be indicated. Long-term treatment with oral phenobarbital and/or potassium
uaa pue 'syaam zl se sunos se saiddnd ui pasn aq ueo sanup asaul inasn aq reu apiwon
dosages. If the seizures are well controlled, slow withdrawal of medications may be indicated after 6
months of therapy.
Anasarca or "Walrus" or "Water” puppy
Anasarca pups, also known as walrus or water puppies, are pups born with excessive fluid accumulation
in their subcutaneous tissues. It is most commonly seen in English bulldogs, but has been recognized
'al e u Addnd auo sioane Aiensn il pooisiapun pou si asner aul 'spaag patelaun lauo Aueu u!
although entire litters have been affected.
si us aun pue sey Aan ae raul yg pe aueneadde ssoa un jeouge Apunood ane sdnd asaui
distended with subcutaneous fluid. Some appear to respond to treatment.
Assure that the airway is open and the pup is breathing. If the breathing is spontaneous, administer
face mask oxygen. Tracheal intubation may be indicated but is often very difficult as the edema makes
visualizing the tracheal opening nearly impossible. Retrograde intubation may be attempted. If intubation
'asnd ou si aaun fl 'asnd e ym dnd uuaa-uou e oi auo pe t aeui 'aaissod si uoe pu
further resuscitation efforts may not be indicated.
controversy regarding the success and specifics of therapy. Because furosemide is not contraindicated
and the cost is reasonable, the effort is probably worthwhile. The prognosis is highly variable and some
pups survive if mildly affected. The cause Is unknown, but a heritable component is suspected.
There is a protocol widely circulated on the internet that may be requested by clients. Accurate
excess fluid or if pleural effusion is so severe that the lungs cannot inflate. Diuretic use is reasonable,
but Potassium must be supplemented to prevent excessive loss on day 2 of treatment.
204 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Theoretically, the pregnant bitch could be monitored for excessive weight gain and if noted, that she be
treated with a diuretic. However, assessing what her exact weight gain should be is diffcult if only one
affected pup is present.
The following protocol is presented by Dr. Hoskins:
1. Provide an open airway and keep the pup in a warm location with its littermates
 2. Weigh the pup and record the weight in grams or ounces.
3. Administer a dose of 0.2 ml furosemide IM.
4. Weigh a "normal” sized littermate for comparison.
 5. Determine the difference in weight between the normal and affected pup and record this.
 6. Move the affected pup frequently and stimulate urination.
 8. Reweigh and record the affected pup's weight every 3 hours. Keep the pup warm.
9. Repeat the furosemide injection every 3 hours until the affected pup weighs no more than 45
grams or 1.5 ounces more than a normal littermate. Discontinue the furosemide when the pup
has been reduced in size to within 45 grams of a normal littermate.
10. Every 3 hours, administer 1 meq of potassium chloride for every 30 gms or 1 cunce of
weight lost. The potassium chloride can be administered orally. A 1o% potassium chloride
solution contains 1 meq in 1 ml (1 ml = 20 drops). Discontinue the potassium chloride when
the furosemide is discontinued.
Feeding in the critical period (Recipes)
Tube feeding directions (See Appendix C-15)
Materials:
1. Goat's milk, (pasteurized is preferred), or commercial milk replacer
2. Feeding tube, silicon or red rubber feeding tube 5 to 14 French
 3. Permanent magic marker
4. Syringe of appropriate size
 5. Puppy scale
6. Rectal thermometer
Steps:
1. Establish a wellit warm location where you can hold the pup comfortably and all materials are
within reach. Be attentive and do not rush.
2. Take the puppy's temperature rectally - do NOT feed unless the rectal temperature is between
96° F and 99° F. If the temperature is below 96° F, gently warm the pup before feeding.
3. On a safe surface, hold the pup with the neck extended. Hold the tapered end of the feeding
tube even with the last rib of the largest pup to be fed. Lay the tube along the side of the pup,
mark the tube even with the tip of the pup's nose. The tube should be marked (Figure 8-24).
4. Fill the syringe with the calculated amount of formula or milk (20 cc/16 oz body weight or
temperature in a warm water bath - avoid microwaving. Feedings should be administered
every 3 to 6 hours as indicated by weight gain and hydration status (Figure 8-25).
 5. Attach the syringe to the feeding tube.
6. With the pup fully awake, warm (over 96° F rectal temp) lying horizontally on the chest, gently
pass the tube over the center of the pups tongue, applying gentle pressure to slide the tube
up to the mark. Keep the pup's chin below its ears and pass the tube along the left side of the
throat to reduce the chance of mistakenly introducing the tube into the trachea instead of the
esophagus. If resistance is met, remove the tube and start over.
7. If you are right handed, cup your left hand around the back of the pups head and hold the tube
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 205
Figure 8-24.
Figure 8-25.
Hold the pup with the neck extended. Hold tapered end of
Fillthe syringewith the calculated amount of formula or milk
the feedling tube even with the last rib of the largest pup to
(20 cc/16 oz body weight) plus 1 cc of air and attach the
be fed. Lay the tube along the side of the pup and mark the
Syringe to the feedling tube.
tube even with the tip of the pup's nose.
Figure 8-26.
Figure 8-27.
With your left hand if you are right handed, cup your left hand [
Depress the plunger on the syringe, not too quickly, deliv
around the back of the pups' head. Hold the tube between
ering the calculated amount of formula or milk.
your index and middle finger of your left hand to prevent it
from moving out of the correct position while feedling.
8. BEFORE FEEDING, firmly pinch the pup on the foot or tail. If the pup vocalizes, the tube
placement is correct and you can proceed with feeding. If the tube is mistakenly in the
trachea, the pup will struggle but will not be able to make any sound - STOP IMMEDIATELY,
 9. With your right hand, depress the plunger on the syringe, NOT too quickly, delivering the
calculated amount of formula follwed by the 1 cc of air, stopping sooner should milk reflux
out of the mcuth or nose (Figure 8-27).
10. Flex the tube on itself to prevent milk from being aspirated in to the pup's airway. Repeat for
each pup.
11. Wash syringe and tube with hot soapy water and allow to air dry until next feeding.
12. Stimulate the external anal and urinary orifices with a warm moistened cotton ball or
washcloth to effect defecation and urination
Remember the5P'sofsafe tubefeeding:
1. Premeasure the tube
2. Pass with the chin down
3. Pass along the left side
4. Pinch to assure the pup can vocalize before feeding
 5. Prewarm the pup and formula before feeding
Hand-rearing the orphaned, sick, cleft palate, or abandoned pup
Hand-raising may be necessary if the mother dies or is too ill to care for the pups. It may be required
if the bitch refuses to care for one or more pups or if she fails to lactate. It may be indicated if the
the milk. Only a few feedings may be needed until the pups become competitive with littermates.
 206 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Pups raised without their mothers must be kept warm - at 90* F to 95* F. They must also be
stimulated to urinate and defecate at each feeding and wiped with a damp towel at least once a day.
In any of these circumstances, tube or boftle feeding must be used. Some pups, if healthy enough
not to aspirate, may take a bottle. Most pups will require a feeding tube. Multiple tube feedings are
possible each day for most pups and for most breeders.
If long-term nutritional support is needed, a naso-esophageal tube may be placed and sutured
in place. lIf the pup can be anesthetized, or Is so sick that anesthesla is not necessary, an
esophagostomy feeding tube may be placed.
If the pup is totally dependent upon this form of feeding, feed at a rate of 1 cc per 1 oz of body
weight. Initially feedings may be needed every 2 to 3 hours around the clock. Feedings can be
further apart as the pups gain strength. Skipping the middle of the night feeding first is a practical
way to begin adjusting the schedule.
Addnd pue 'syaam t oi e ie lana 'aae jo syaam Z ie sdnd pasieiuey lot peis ue supaat ys
food at 5 to 6 weeks if they are able to eat and swallow normally.
Raising the “Singleton" puppy
Sometimes, only one pup is born or survives. Appropriate calorie intake is a primary concern;
(metoclopramide or domperidone) to lactate. If the pup is being hand-raised, frequent feedings and
nurse may need to be restricted.
with unusual and sometimes dangerous personalities.
Dr. Patricia McConnell (personal consultation) recommends that the pup be handled several times
daily from day 1 on. Several times a day, it should be pushed off the nipple while nursing by a
human holding a stuffed animal to simulate competition at the nipple (frustration) and touch (tactile
stimulation). Once the pup is larger and can begin to interact, it should be exposed to age and size
appropriate puppies to enhance social skill development. If the bitch is not available, supervised
exposure to an appropriate adult dog may also enhance the development of social skills. Frequent
human interaction in a typical household (not isolated kennel) setting is also important to allow the
so appropriate social interaction must be started by & weeks of age or younger to prevent the
development of fearful or aggressive behavior.
In special circumstances, a surrogate mother and/or littermates may be a solution. There is a
potential liability to both the owner of the bitch (that the pups may expose her bitch and pups to
disease) and to the owner of the pups (that the bitch and other pups may expose the pups to
disease and that the bitch and/or pups may cause trauma to the newly-introduced pups).
Taildocking and dewclaw removal
Removal of dewclaws and taildocking are often requested by breeders. Both procedures are under
consideration for change in the United States. The surgery is usually done when the pups are 3 to 5
days old, during their first veterinary visit.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 207
Vital signs and a thorough history are needed on all the pups prior to surgery. Vital signs include
rates. lf the pups are not identihed by the breeder, they can be marked with colored markers. As
If the pups are vigorous, the dewclaws can be removed at their dam's C-section. Taildocks should
taildocking is more stressful so is better done once the pups are gaining weight.
pe on 'ateuoau aun u aueopil jo sasop aieudoidde aun asn pasn aq re eisauisaue eoo
toxicity. General anesthesia is not routinely used for these procedures at this early age.
Dewclaw removal
 laed ruagnnan jeaiel ui dnd au piou pinos suisise Aeuaaa aui aains nog dnd au da
li dunu aun suoddns puey nauo au pue shapinous pue peay aui suoddns puey I ym 'aigei au
the feet should be pointed toward the veterinarian, with the dorsum of the pup toward the assistant.
Ihe hand supporting the head and shoulders can also be used to extend and restrain the most ventral
forelimb.with the index finger of the assistant cranial to the elbow and the 3rd finger of the assistant
caudal and proximal to the elbow, the limb can be held in abduction. This allows the veterinarian to
  o s              m
  s      n        s   s
dewclaw. The scissors should be parallel to the long axis of the leg, at approximately a 45? angle from
caudal to cranial. Carefully remove the pad associated with the dewclaw. Make a second incision with
the tip of the iris scissor to remove the remaining bone fragment of the dewclaw. without removing
pressure from the carpal pad, to maintain hemostasis, place a drop of surgical glue around the rim
 of skin and slide the skin into apposition. If necessary, styptic powder and/or direct pressure can be
used to control hemostasis. A hemostat is often used to crush or pull the dewclaw off, but this does
    's   o  ss    s    e 
variably present in some pups within the same litter (Figure 8-28A-E).
Taildocking
Tail length is the most important concern. The best way to assure the correct length is to request that
the breeder mark the tail at the preferred length.
 a s    a   a a      si a
to take or leave, where the tail meets the tip of the vulva, how many vertebrae to leave, where the
tail changes width, which coin (nickel, quarter, etc.) to use under the tail to measure, and so on. The
au oi dn yaual jo uoisioap aui saaal lapaang aut tl dnd aui jo aae pue azis aui uo juapuadap ag uen
relieved of fault if they follow the breeder's preferences (Figure 8-28F-K).
Holders, 1 pair of thumb Forceps, 1 Mosquito Hemostat, 1 pair of curved Iris Scissors and sterile
gauzesquares.
a suuad e suisn napaang au Ag pa s yual au ae no aoag 'ii au soy jiy aun d
208 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
4
E
Figure8-28.
A. Surgical preparation of the dewclaw for excision. B. Making the frst incision to remove the dewclaw. C. Making the
second incision to remove the remaining portion of bone from the declaw excision. D. Closing the dewclaw excision site with
Surgical glue.E. Dewclaw excision completed and closed.F. Surgical instruments and supplies ready for taildock procedure.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 209
?
Figure 8-28.(continued)
G. Marking the tail length with a permanent marker and ruler prior to docking the tail. The client's input is invaluable in this
decision. H. Shaving the tail in preparation for docking. I. Making the horizontal incision to dock the tail The scissors are
best held horizontaly for a long taildock and vertically when the tail is to be shorter, near the rectum. J. After the tail is
docked, use the iris scissors to remove the remaining portion of the transected vertebrae, allowing the skin to be pulled
over the tip of the tail to minimize tension on the sutures and scarring. K. Closing the taildock site with sutures.
210Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
 sdnd au arenus apiag no guesn yrm dand pue 'yod aas e asn uad anss no lai
defecate prior to the procedure
The assistant holds the head at a 45° angle down, with the legs directed ventrally. The assistant can
use both hands to support the pup and restrain the legs. The assistant must be careful not to restrict
the pup's breathing.
If the tail is to be docked level to the rectum, leaving no vertebrae or only 1 vertebra, the scissor is held
scissors. In 1 firm cut, the entire tail should be transected from ventral to dorsal, using a serrated Mayo
scissor. Use the tip of the iris scissors to remove the remaining bone fragment. Close the wound using
4-0 Vicryl in a continuous suture pattern.
jo ag addn aun y ng 'ii au se iens uisiu 1 u sno aun ay o si au uoisiui aun io
the scissors angled more caudally than the lower blade. This creates a flap of skin longer dorsally than
ventrally, allowing the skin to be sutured on the underside of the tail. This creates less scarring.
The alternative is to make 2 cuts from proximal to distal, meeting in a V pattern in the center of the
tail. This also allows a flap to form, reducing scarring
With either technique, the extra piece of vertebrae is removed with iris scissors and 1 or more
interrupted sutures of 4-0 Vicryl? are placed in the skin. The sutures can be removed 24 to 48 hours
after placement to reduce scarring which is particularly noticeable in some short-coated breeds
Styptic powder can be applied along with direct pressure if necessary to achieve hemostasis
Consistency in the crder of removal reduces the likelihood that the surgeon will overlook removing
some of the dewclaws, particularly when the pup has dewclaws on the rear legs.
Feeding and housing at weaning
The veterinarian should understand basic husbandry to serve as a resource for the client.
Pups can be weaned between 3 and 6 weeks of age. Some bitches will wean the pups on their own,
while others need to be separated from the pups. Many breeders use a plastic child's swimming
should be used. A drinking bottle is an easy way to keep the pups dry and provide a constant source
of clean drinking water. Pups quickly learn to use this drinking bottle if baby food is applied to the
tip to draw their attention. Be certain all of them are using it effectively before it is used as their only
source of drinking water.
Many pups will begin to housebreak if given the opportunity. Some breeders allow the pups to follow
their mother outdoors to eliminate. Alternatively, a shallow plastic tray (like a litter box) flled with pine
shavings because they are too aromatic. At adoption, send some of the lifter material with the puppy
simple step will make the transition to a new home much easler.
will not have the necessary social interactions with littermates and dam. Pups placed when they
are too young tend not fo eat and sleep well and are fussy. Many breeders who ralse dogs for
Chapter &: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 211
competition will keep their pups until 10 weeks and up. This allows them to better assess the litter
wormed several times and transition into new homes more easily (Figure 8-29).
Figure 8-29. Examples of weaning, feeding, and housing young puppies.
Preparing the puppies to leave for a new home
Physical examination
(Appendix D-4 and Chapter 2 The Veterinary Examination)
Prior to placement, each pup should receive a comprehensive physical examination by a veterinarian.
Vaccinations
(Appendix C-11)
Each veterinarian has preferred vaccination protocols. These change as new diseases, vaccine
technology, and information on response to vaccines becomes available.
be modified according to each breeder's needs (Table 8-10).
Deworming
Recommendations by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) and Companion Animal Parasite Council
(CAPC) have updated worming protocols. The CAPC website, www.capcvet.org may be reviewed by
212 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Age/Date Next
Examination
vaccinations
Heartworm Test
Medications
Other
Visit
and Other Lab
Tests
 2 and 4 Weeks
 As needed
PyrantelPamoate
6 to 8 Weeks
Veterinary Puppy
DAPP(No Lepto)
Fecal
Heartworm
Visic #1
No Heartworm
preventive wich
test due
pyrantel q4 weeks,
wich pyrantel 2
weeks later Flea/
Tick Control*
9 to 11 weeks Due
Veterinary Puppy
DAPP (No Lepto)
Fecal
Heartworm
Obedience Class
Visit#2
Bordetella
NoHeartworm
preventive wich
test due
pyrantel q4 weeks,
with pyrantel 2
weeks later Flea/
TickControl*
12 to 16 weeks due
Veterinary Puppy
DAPF/Lepto 4 way*
Fecal
Heartworm pre-
Vaccinations may
Visic #3
Lyme*
No Heartworm
ventive wormer
be divided so fewer
Rabies
test due
 Flea/Tick Control*
are administered at
Canine influenza
Pyrantel pamoate
each visic
vaccination*
fenbendazole
Large Breed: X-ray
hips for laxity
16 to 20 weeks due
Comprehensive
DAPP/Lepto 4 way*
Fecal
Heartworm pre-
Lyme*
 No Heartworm
ventive Flea/Tick
Canine influenza
test due
Control*
vaccination*
2 weeks after last
Distemper/Parvo
 Titer for Distemper
Recommended to
 Repeat boosters if
vaccination
Ticer Blood test
 and Parvovirus
assess response to
low or no response
vaccination
to previous vac-
cinations
6 Months or older
Presurgical
 Complete series if
 Presurgical blood
Heartworm pre-
Spay/Neuter - if
not yet done
test, Heartworm
ventive Flea/Tick
appropriated medi-
 test if not on
Control*
cally or dependent
preventive
 on owner's plans.
Microchip
15 Months due
Comprehensive
DAPF/Lepto*
Heartworm test
Heartworm pre-
Rabies
ventive Flea/Tick
Bordecella
Control*
Lyme*
 Canine Influenza*
Varies with region of the country
the veterinarian and pet owner for most current recommendations.
Pups and their dams should receive their frst worming when the pups are 2 weeks of age. Repeat at
4, 6, and 8 weeks, then place on monthly broad-spectrum heartworm anthelmintics that are effective
against parasites with zoonotic potential.
Fecal examinations should be performed 2 to 4 times during the first year and repeated 1 to 2
roundworms and hookworms through the placenta and the milk. (See section on Antiparasiticides
during pregnancy in chapter 5).
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 213
Nutrition
by softening the food with warm water. No other food or nutritional supplements are necessary. Many
4 hours, gradually reducing the number of meals to 3 per day until the pup is 6 months old.
Puppy shopping list
To have prior to bringing your new puppy home
1. Crate, exercise (x ) pen or playpen
2. Washable bedding
3. Ceramic or stainless steel food and water dishes
4. Puppy food appropriate for the breed
5. Appropriate chew toys
6. Kong toy and food to stuff
7. Leash and collar
8. Long line to allow puppy to run safely
9. Dog shampoo
10. Towel or blanket from puppy's mom
11. Treats for housebreaking
12. An empty bottle to take water home from the breeder's water source for the first few days in
the new home.
To do upon purchase
Schedule an appcintment for a wellness veterinary examination
Vaccination schedule
DAPPv at 6 to 9 weeks of age
DALPPv at 12 and 16 weeks
Rabies, based on local legislation
Bordetella if in classes, boarding, grooming, daycare
Lyme if at risk
NO Lepto before 12 weeks
Worming schedule
Heartworm preventive and flea/tick control based on region of the country
Spay/neuter schedule
Appointment for puppy grooming
Visit a boarding kennel
Sign up for puppy socialization class
Placing the puppies
The responsible breeder will have had the pups examined by a veterinarian, vaccinated at least
once, and wormed several times. If the pup is over 8 weeks old, it should also be on a monthly
broad-spectrum anthelmentic. Some breeders will use topical external parasite control.
The pups are often microchipped. Many breeders will have the buyer sign a contract. If the pup is
purebred and eligible for registration with a purebred registry, paperwork for this may accompany or
follow the pup once it is received by the breeder. Receipt of registration paperwork is often delayed,
214 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Zoonotic diseases
the protection of the buyers. For this reason, multiple wormings and negative fecal examinations
should be completed prior to sale. The pup should also be bathed just prior to or after sale to reduce
the number of parasite eggs in the coat. This is particularly important if the pup is to be placed in a
household with immunocompromised individuals including children or those who are mentally disabled.
Registering litters
Litters produced using fresh chilled or frozen semen, multiple sires, or with co-owners in different
households cannot be registered on-line; the paperwork requires more time to file and receive from
the purebred registries.
The American Kennel Club (AKC) allows breeders to sell pups to buyers on a limited registration. This
anenag auop si sui paasia sdnd ay io s aaey pouuen ng paasian si dnd aun ren suea
pue uoensiaau ing uo plos dnd v  enb supaag, jo aq oi dnd aun apisuoo pou saop lapaang a
without restrictions in the contract of sale may have pups registered with the AKC.
Chapter 8: Neonatal and Pediatric Care 215
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER9
Infertility and Reproductive
Problems in the Valuable Bitch
The "Normal" estrous cycle
The "normal" estrous cycle is considered to occur every 6 months, commonly in the spring and fall
Estrous is the entire cycle, estrus is the fertile period within the estrous cycle.
The bitch is in proestrus for 9 to 12 days (range 3 to 17 days); during this time she has a firmly
swollen vulva, a bloody vaginal discharge, and is not receptive to the male dog. During prcestrus,
most male dogs are attracted to the bitch, but most experienced males are only moderately
and containing nuclei, and many red blood cells in the background. A large number of bacteria of
many sizes, rods and cocci, may be present. Few white blood cells should be seen. Vaginoscopy
shows large, edematous, pink, moist folds, making the lumen diffcult to follow. Progesterone levels,
usually started approximately 6 days after the onset of bloody vaginal discharge, should be less than
going to miss their opportunity to breed the bitch. They tend to force breedings upon bitches who
are not receptive and males who know better.
the bitch is normally very receptive to the male. She may stand solidly for him or make advances
including play bows and mounting the male if he is reluctant to breed. Care must be taken to
not all bitches have lost the bloody color of their discharge. lt is easy to wait too long assuming she
become invaluable. The vaginal cytology should show /0 to 1o0% cornited epithelial cells - large
blood cells in the background. Vaginoscopy shows crenulated vaginal folds. Progesterone levels rise
from the baseline of less than 2.0 ng/ml to 5.0 ng/ml at ovulation, and into the 20s and 30s ng/ml
post-ovulation.
Diestrus immediately follows estrus and lasts from 56 to 58 days after ovulation. The vulvar swelling
diminishes and there is little discharge. The bitch is no longer receptive to males, but may continue
white blood cells, some bacteria, and no red blood cells. Vaginoscopy shows pale mucosa with no
higher.
Anestrus is the period between estrus cycles, typically lasting 2 to 9 months. There is no vaginal
swelling or discharge. She is not receptive to the male and the male is not interested in her. Vaginal
uterus undergoes involution.
The ideal age and frequency of breeding
Veterinarians and breeders have different views regarding the ideal age and frequency of breeding.
of their bitches and stud dogs. The breeder has performance based goals (putting titles on their
bitches) and screening based goals (screening for diseases, some of which cannot be ruled out until
a certain age).
Many veterinarians advise breeding as early as the bitch's second birthday. Fertility is at its peak
pre-breeding screening tests can be completed by this age. At one time, the recommendation was
to wait until she had 1 successful litter before breeding with frozen semen. Many veterinarians now
218 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
advise using frozen semen on these young bitches. Most bitches will have their largest and healthiest
litter at the first or second breeding. Litter size typically decreases after the third litter. Bitches over
age 5 have smaller litters than younger bitches.
Many veterinarians now recommend breeding the bitch back-to-back, without taking a season off.
There is no advantage to uterine health by skipping seasons. Each non-pregnant cycle ages the
uterus irreversibly. Some think the uterus is healthier pregnant than non-pregnant.
Non-pregnant cycles, when the uterus is under the 2 month influence of progesterone, lead to
uterine pathology such as CEH-pyometra. The recommendation is to breed the bitch as many times
as the breeder considers reasonable, then retire and spay her. The breeder may have other reasons
their program. If bred too frequently the bitch may become nutritionally depleted.
The number of C-sections that can be tolerated is based on medical and non medical considerations;
the medical question has more than cne answer. There is a great deal of individual variation between
how bitches tolerate the surgery, how much they enjoy raising puppies, and how well the uterus and
abdominal wall hold up. Many clients complain that their veterinarian told them the bitch should not
have any more pregnancies because the uterus is "paper-thin." It is normal for the uterine wall to
to the number of C-sections a bitch can have. Her fertility, individual uterine health and the breeder's
preference are the limiting factors.
Maximizing litter size
Many factors influence litter size, and the male has little to no control over it. His influence is
all-or-none - either he delivered enough sperm to produce a litter or he did not.
There are 3 broad categories of causes of apparent infertility: 1. Failure for fertile semen to reach
fertile ova, 2. Failure to conceive, and 3. Failure to maintain the pregnancy.
Unlike other“production”animals such ascattle and swine,few dogbreedershave selected forease
of breeding, ease of whelping, litter size, lactation, and maternal skills. There are non-genetic factors
as well as the concern that if only one trait is selected for, other valuable traits will be bred out of the
breeder's lines.
Small litter size
This discussion will focus on the bitch that successfully achieves a pregnancy but does not produce
the number of viable fetuses anticipated for her breed
Overall health
in great physical condition or has a heavy parasite burden. A pre-breeding physical examination,
fecal analysis, Brucella and heartworm tests should be considered prior to breeding. This is
her suitability as a brood bitch. A CBC and chemistry profle for all bitches undergoing surgical
insemination is advisable. Consider this protocol for other bitches to assure that the breeder is not
Oviduct and uterine pathology
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 219
or inflammation may obstruct the oviduct, preventing fertilization and passage of the fertilized ova
into the uterus. Endometritis, inflammation of the uterus, does not allow for implantation and fetal
area for implantation and fetal development to occur. Although these conditions can be diagnosed by
Nutritional health
The plane of nutrition is essential to the bitch's ability to conceive and carry a maximal litter to
term. Place the bitch on an ideal diet for pregnancy prior to breeding. Either a diet designed for
weeks prior to ovulation, and some nutrients such as folic acid need to be at increased levels prior
fo conception to maximize their effects.
Frequency of breeding
This relates directly to the bitch's nutritional health. Body store depletion of nutrients occurs during
pregnancy and lactation and may take up to 8 months for the bitch to fuly recover. Frequently, after
a large litter, the bitch will produce a smaller litter, and conversely, after a small litter, the next will be
larger.
Dietary components that influence reproductive capacity
Protein, carbohydrates and fats must be in the correct ratios. The ratio of Omega 6 to Omega 3
fatty acids is important for maximal fertility as well as fetal brain and eye development. Appropriate
levels of minerals such as copper, zinc, and manganese have been related to litter size. Folic
acid should be in appropriate levels prior to breeding to reduce the incidence of cleft palates.
Beta-carotene and tyrosine have have positive effects on hormone production and heat detection.
(Royal Canin June 20, 2009 Dr Bretaigne Jones, D.V.M.)
Timing of the breeding
If the bitch is bred too early, the sperm are too old by the time the ova are ready to fertilize. lIf she
is bred too late, either the eggs are aged or the cervix will have closed, preventing the passage of
sperm into the oviducts for fertilization.
Type of semen
Vaginal deposition of fresh semen leads to a 15% reduction in litter size compared to natural
breeding. Litter size is reduced by 15% using chilled semen and 25% with frozen semen. In general,
alo '(aenela pue uawas aun jo Ainb aun uodn uapuadap) sep / o g sans uawas ysay
semen survives 3 days, and frozen semen survives 1 day in the female's reproductive tract.
Type of semen deposition
Natural semen deposition has a high success rate achieving maximal litter size. Surgical Al,
of semen (fresh, fresh chilled, or frozen) used. When frozen semen is used, either TCl or surgical
 insemination is necessary.
Genetics
Her breed
Statistically, smaller bitches have fewer pups per litter and larger bitches have more pups per litter.
220 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Her inbreeding coefficient
fatal gene combinations, causing early embryonic death and resorption or apparent infertility
Family traits
Some family lines ovulate fewer eggs than others. There may also be familial tendencies toward
uterine pathology.
Age and parity, and environment
(See Chapter 5)
History and clinical hndings in the infertile bitch
Diagnostic workup for the infertile bitch
(See Appendix D-6, A-10, D-15, and B-1)
Use of a pre-written questionnaire, complete systematic physical examination and thoughtful
diagnostic work-up will help keep the busy clinician from overlooking the obvious. Although no
protocol or algorithm can be allinclusive, consistent and thorough evaluations can keep the work-up
 from derailing.
Remind the client to bring all the available breeding records, including prior breedings, stud dog
performance, test results, and medications to the appcintment. If the bitch has traveled for the
breeding, she may have left the care of your hospital so this may leave gaps in the information in her
medical file at your hospital.
The technician or doctor should take a complete breeding history. This should include:
Identihcation of the patient, including her breed, call name, microchip or tattoo number, date of birth
and date of the assessment;
fed, current medications, supplements given, and description of housing including lighting and
concentration of dogs housed;
Healthscreeninghistory;
Previous diagnostics - CBC/Chemistries/UA/Progesterone - Brucella testing - dates and results/
Thyroid/Lyme/Ehrlichia/Anaplasma/Ultrasound;
Information on her lifestyle and travel history;
History of all estrous cycles - from the first one to the most recent;
All successful breedings for this bitch, ages when bred, number of pups, method used for timing and
breeding, pregnancy and delivery details;
timing and breeding (natural/Al/Fresh chilled/Frozen), method used for pregnancy diagnosis, stud
dog used, his breeding history and semen analysis including Brucella testing;
Perform a complete physical examination; including a vaginal examination and evaluation of the
mammary glands
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 221
If there was questionable timing or semen quality, plan the next breeding with both to be improved;
If there was good timing and good semen quality, draw blood for progesterone level, other tests
based on physical examination tindings, and consider testing for herpesvirus and brucellosis;
Consider ultrascund to evaluate for uterine and ovarian pathology;
Consider either surgical insemination cr surgical uterine biopsy if there was good timing and good
semen quality.
Client history form
(See Appendix A-10)
Planning the next breeding
Two of the most important steps in breeding a bitch are planning ahead and having great
communication with the owner of the stud dog. This communication also includes the bitch and stud
The bitch owner should select a stud dog and contact the owner well in advance of the estrous cycle
at which she is planning to use him. This is regardless of the method of breeding. Even if the stud
dog has frozen semen stored at the same facility the bitch owner uses for veterinary care, the stud
a fl laumo sop pns au Aq pauais ag o spaau yomaded - aoou aouape spaau saumo opy
chilled semen is to be used, the stud dog's veterinarian should have shipping kits, extender, and the
skills to collect and ship the semen. Access to a teaser bitch on the stud dog's end of the shipment
can be instrumental in colleting the stud dog, especially if the stud dog or collecting veterinarian
 are inexperienced. The shipping arrangements should have been discussed, taking into account
weekend and holiday plans.
Use of a veterinary clinic with experience in handling breedings is strongly recommended,
particularly if using fresh chilled semen, frozen semen, or if either dog has a history of infertility
All veterinarians need to get experience somewhere. However, starting with fertile stud dogs and
Abnormal estrous cycles
(Figure 9-1 and 9-2).
Failure of the bitch to cycle
For some breeds and some individuals, it may be normal for a bitch under the age of 24 months
to not have had an estrous cycle. This bitch should be closely evaluated to assess her external
genitals. lf the vulva has a mature appearance, she probably had a silent heat cycle that the owner
failed to detect. This is less likely if there are male dogs in the same facility
If she has a prominent os clitoris or has characteristics more typical of a male of her breed, she
If the vulva has an immature appearance, it is probable that she has not yet reached sexual maturity.
No treatment or diagnostics are indicated until she is over 2 years of age.
Genetic intersex
There are several combinations of defects in sexual differentiation described in dogs over two
years of age. This can be diagnosed by karyotyping the DNA to evaluate the presence of X and Y
chromosomes, or by biopsying the gonads and performing histopathology to detect the presence of
ovarian and/or testicular tissues.
222Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Infertile 
Not cycling or
 Cycling @ 6-12
 Cycling < every 120 to 160
cycling @ > 12
 mo intervals
days esp German Shepherd 
month intervals
 Rottweller or Basset Hound 
PE
Under 2 yrs.
Over 2 yrs
Progesterone >
Progesterone < 5
Granulosal cell
Dx by seeing
1. Thyroid (low)
 5 ng/ml short 
 Premature decline 
ng/ml
tumor
cornified
2. Adrenal Hyperadreno
 in progesterone
- interestrous
 epithelium for
 Carefully examine 
1. CBC/CS/UA
corticism
 during diestrus
Cystic ovary
6 wks
periods
external glands and
2. Progesterone test
R/O Split cycle
 3. Hyperprolactinemia 
Ultrasound cyst
complete physical
 3. Weekly vaginal cytologies +
 4. Exposure to hormone 
exam for masculine
monthly progesterone
therapy including.
Rx Mibolerone 
Wait till it comes
 Utrasound guided
 traits including
 assays to monitor for silent 
 accidental ingestiony
 in and breed that 
aspiration of fluid
 GnRH or HCG +/-
heat
exposure
cycle
 from ovarian
[Deslorelin implant]
 prominent os clitoris
4. UItrasound with radiologist
Abbop, syoo7)
 a. Androgens
cyst(s)
to look for ovaries and 
b. Progestagens
uterus
 C. Anabolic steroids
Wait until > 2 yrs
 5. Drugs - including.
 5. 0varian cysts 
J0
Chapter
ofage
 accidental ingestion/
6. Environmental causes 
Surgery to rupture
 Then 
exposure
a. Low lighting
follicles/curette
6
6. Karyotype if not cycling
b. Poor nutrition
cyst
Infertility
7. Thyroid and TSH + T,
c. Overcrowding
8. 2 LH levels @ >24hr interval
 Breed next
Timing
 to check for presence of 
Pplo 0u sa-ao
and
ovaries
Sperm count and
in most cases to be
Repr
9. Adequate nutrition 
morphology
fertile in this cycle
10. Excess stress or work 2° to
housing or performance
tive
11. Last resort-R/0
Hermaphroditism or
Ps eud oherm ap hroditism 
Exploratory laparotomy with
biopsy of gonads
the
Vall
uable
Bitch
Figure 9-1.
Page 1. Female infertity
223
224
History evaluate for
Failure to copulate- 
1. Welltimed breeding
a. Dominant  Al required
2. Witnessed breeding or Al
Infertility 
b. Congenital/acquired
3.  & o past successful
vag abnormalities:
breeding history
strictures, vaginal
4. Ilness of 
 Bitch cycling, 96-12
Hyperplasia, bipartate
5. No adverse meds in hx
No pups at U/s, R/O
mos. Bitch Bred
vaginas
6.Toxin exposure hx-no toxins
OR
Require Al
pue
Failure to copulate-o?
60% of normal  have aerobic bact in cran vag
7. Good nutrition hx
 No pups at term
W
a. Prostate pain-treat
90% of normal  have sim bact in caud vagina
b. Spine or leg pain-treat 
Olson 1978 JAvr in Euk 97 book pg11
Breed next cycle with
<250x10 normal
c. Poor libido Rx
No diff in fertile vinfertile  Ct. Euk 97 pg11
ovulation Timing
Sperm Count +
+ Sperm Count
GnRH, +/- Lutalyse, Al
d. Penis abnorm alities
Adequate semen quality
Brucella
+ Brucella test 
& delivery
Culture/Serology
Qophoritis
a. Immune medicated 
Sperm count or
b. Inflammatory or 
infectious causes not
Next Breeding Plan
 reeval of info @
yet identified in dogs
1. Excellent ovulation timing
breeding-semen/α
2.Assess semen quality
substandard + cranal
Incomplete or obstructive
3. Assisted breeding
vaginal culture during
diseases of female 
a.AI
reproductive tract
b. TCI
 estrus Treat based on C
Cystic endometrial
C. Surgical Al
& S for 2-4 wks + T test
hyperplasia
4. Anterior vaginal culture during early proestrus.
Treat with appropriate antibiotic for 2 wks.
TCl or Surgical Insem 
 Brucella/Herpes/other
5. Uterine biopsy-endoscopic or surgical for:
@ next with timing of
 infectious diseases
a.Histology
b. Culture- aerobic/mycoplasma prior to
 ovulation 
 Poor ovulation Timing
 Subclinical uterine
next breeding
No Pregnancy
6. Different stud dog/type of semen used.
infection
Uterine Bx with C + S
On stud dog/low sperm
U/S ovaries
(aer + anaer) mycopl
count/poor quality semen 
+ Histopath @ Cornell
Progesterone level @
negative U/S to assess for
 30-60 d after ovulation
 luteal failure
Prog level-
hypluteoidism to R/O
Failure-
Herpes tite v PCR/DNA/
Try again with diff stud dog
Rad No pups atterm
 Resorption or Abortion 
Brucella test/C & S/
Pups +U/S
C +S of vag dischg @
other infectious causes 
proestrous + treat accordingly
Resoption <45 days
{Lepto/Neosporum} +
Abortion > 45 days of 
histopath on tissues
of pregnancy at time
Figure 9-1. (continued)
pregnancy at time of
passed
Page 2. Female infertity
of fetal demise
fetal demise
True hermaphrodites may occur with the
presence of ovarian and testicular tissues. This
has been described in many breeds of dog. The
true hermaphrodite chimeras have either XX/
XY or XX/XXY chromosomes. These affected
females have external female genitalia with an
enlarged clitoris and a combination of ovarian
and testicular tissue.
A pseudohermaphrodite has the external genitals
of one sex with the gonads of the opposite sex.
They should be classifed male or female based
on the sex of their gonads, not the external
 genitals. The female pseudohermaphrodite has
XX chromosomes and ovaries but the external
genitals are male. This condition is seen in
Figure9-2
Female external genitals with enlarged clitoris, genetic
many breeds. The male pseudohermaphrodite
intersex.
has testicles, usually retained, but female 
 recommended.
XX sex reversal occurs when the gonadal sex does not agree with the XX chromosomal sex. This has
been reported in the American Cocker Spaniel, Beagle, Chinese Pug, Kerry BlueTerrier, Weimaraner,
and German Shorthaired Pointer.
Ovariohysterectomy
A bitch may have been ovariohysterectomized by a prior owner and sold without incomplete
veterinary records. To determine this, a paired LH test can be performed. LH is canine specific,
and must be done with the Synbiotics ICG Status-LHR assay kit or at a referral laboratory using the
canine test. LH is secreted by the pituitary gland. If no ovaries are present, there is no feedback,
so the LH is persistently elevated. If 2 consecutive LH tests have a high result, the bitch has been
ovariohysterectomized.
Ovarian aplasia or agenesis
This is a rare cause of anestrus.
Previously cycled, now fails to cycle
Silent estrous
This is defined as ovarian activity with ovulation occurring but with no typical signs such as vaginal
swelling or discharge. This is a common cause of apparent infertility. To detect silent heats,
weekly vaginal cytologies can be collected by the owner and submitted to the veterinary staff
for microscopic examination. Alternatively, progesterone levels can be assessed monthly, with a
progesterone rise above 2 ng/ml as diagnostic of functional luteal tissue.
Pharmacologic interference
Several drugs can block the estrous cycle. Some, such as mibolerone, are intentionally used to
prevent estrous. Others such as corticosteroids, androgens, and progestagens (Megestrol Acetate)
may have this effect. Deslorelin implants, if used in proestrus, may also block estrous.
mlness
Bitches with many systemic illnesses may fail to cycle. A thorough clinical history and physical
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 225
diabetes melitus, hyperadrenocorticism and hepatic and renal failure may interfere with fertility
Bitches with diseases such as hepatic and renal failure should NOT be bred because the added
metabolic load from the pregnancy is likely to accelerate organ failure. Bitches with diabetes mellitus
are very challenging to manage during pregnancy.
Hormonal abnormalities
cycles. Typically, an affected bitch will have clinical symptoms of this disorder. Testing should
be done if either disorder is suspected. Test results should be carefully interpreted as there are
endocrinology interpretation of the results available. Some causes of thyroid disease are thought
to be heritable, so the breeder should be counseled regarding the wisdom of including a confrmed
hypothyrcid bitch in a breeding program. The heritability of hyperadrenocorticism has not been
established.
Functional ovarian cysts
Luteal ovarian cysts that are secreting progesterone may cause a failure to cycle. This may be
the cyst
Environmental causes
Environmental causes include high stress levels, high concentration of dogs housed, bitches who are
very athletic and/or are worked hard, bitches that have inadequate nutrition for their activity level,
low lighting conditions, and bitches who are housed with highly dominant bitches.
jo jap ieaa e lapun si no 'aw aun jo isow peou aui uo s! 'jaaal yay e pe suadwo si yog aun 1
  s  o      o i     s
induce estrous - similar to what is described in humans as the "convent" or "dormitory" effect.
Similarly, increasing the nutritional plane of a bitch with a body condition score that is less than ideal
for fertility may allow her to begin to cycle spontaneously. Crowded housing or housing with low light
spontaneous return to fertility.
Careful evaluation of the bitch's lifestyle, demeanor, and body condition may suggest an environmental
cause, thus recommendation of a modification of lifestyle.
Infertile estrous cycles
that endometrial repair is necessary, and too short an inter-estrous period does not allow for
adequate uterine health to support pregnancy.
There is breed variation, with German Shepherds, Labrador Retrievers, American Cocker Spaniels,
inherited trait.
hyperplasia can only be confirmed with uterine biopsy.
Another cause for short inter-estrous cycles is a functional ovarian cyst secreting estrogens.
226 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
These should be treated immediately. These bitches are infertile and long-term exposure of the
uterine lining to high estrogen levels may predispose them to CEH-pyometra complex and bone
marrow suppression, resulting in non-regenerative anemia. Diagnosis is best made by ultrasound,
recognizing hypoechoic cyst(s) larger than 1 cm on the ovary/ovaries. It is possible to surgically
able to aspirate the fluid from the cysts with an ultrasound-directed needle. Treatment with HCG or
GnRH used to be recommended, but there is strong evidence that this predisposes the bitch to a
pyometra within several weeks of treatment.
In the absence of functional ovarian cysts, cycles closer together than 4 months require treatment
to restore fertility. Mibolerone used daily is the only drug with historical label indications to treat
testosterone derivative, blocks the release of LH from the pituitary gland. This negative feedback
blocks maturation of the follicles, interfering with ovulation.
Mibolerone use may cause an elevation in liver enzymes. A liver panel should be run prior to the
heavier coat and musculature, and a sticky vaginal discharge similar to that of a puppy with
vaginitis (Figure 9-3). All handlers must be aware that this is not a vaginal discharge associated with
pyometra so she will not be inadvertently diagnosed with a treated for a non-existent pyometra.
years. Some reports suggest that mibolerone should not be used for longer than 3 consecutive
months. Treatment with mibolerone should be initiated 30 days prior to the anticipated estrous
but the range varies widely. The bitches should be bred on the first cycle after the cessation of
mibolerone treatment, because it is common for the bitch to relapse to short inter-estrous cycles
after treatment.
Short inter-estrous cycles must be distinguished
from split heat cycles. In split heats, the bitch
fails to become attractive to males, there is no
cornification of vaginal cytology, and no rise in
progesterone.
Prolonged inter-estrous cycle
A prolonged inter-estrous cycle is defined as
failure to cycle within 10 to 18 months after the
prevlous estrous.
This may be associated with silent heat cycles,
systemic illness, hypothyroidism, hyperadre
nocorticism, or recent pregnancy. It may also
Figure 9-3.
wolf-hybrid dogs.
Bitch on mibolerone showing enlarged clitoris and sticky
mucoid discharge typical when on this medication. Should
estrous prior to treatment. This can be done by progesterone assay - a progesterone level of less
than 2 ng/ml suggests that the bitch has not recently (within the last 60 to 90 days) cycled. She
possibility of hormonal abnormalities or illness.
The bitch may be treated with cabergoline and Deslorelin? as described under "Inducing Estrous."
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 227
Split heats
Split heats are defined as "successive short proestrous signs, at intervals of 2 weeks to 2 months
associated with short interestrus intervals.
will not be receptive to males and will have vaginal cytologies that begin to cornify, then return to
an ultrasonogram. No treatment is indicated for split cycles. Ihey do not cause intertility
Prolonged estrous cycle
proestrus. By contrast, most normal fertile bitches will ovulate, based on behavior, vaginal cytology.
bitch fails to ovulate within 21 to 30 days of the onset of proestrus, she is unlikely to conceive. If she
is having a split cycle, she may conceive when she had her next normal estrous cycle
Prolonged estrous cycles can be caused by a functional ovarian cyst, an ovarian tumor, the use of
Functional ovarian cysts are a relatively common cause of prolonged proestrus in clder bitches. If
a functional ovarian cyst is suspected, ultrasound to confirm the cyst and rule out an ovarian tumor
is recommended. Success in finding the ovary to assess for a tumor or cysts varies and depends
on the skill of the ultrasonographer and quality of the equipment. An ovarian cyst usually exceeds
11 mm in diameter and has a thicker capsule, usually flled with hypoechoic or anechoic fluid, than
a normal ovulatory follicle. An ovarian tumor is usually larger and has a more complex internal
structure than a cyst.
Treatment of the cyst should begin by day 21 of proestrus. The most common treatment is a
series of 3 hCG (Human chorionic gonadotropin) injections dosed at 10 IU/pound body weight/day
If the bitch has not ovulated by day 21 to 30 of her cycle, it is unlikely that she will have a fertile
cycle because of the age of the ova. It is theoretically possible for a bitch to develop anaphylaxis
from the use of hCG, but there are no reports to support this. hCG stings when administered IM.
Alternatively, GnRH can be used 3.3 mcg/kg/day
IM for 3 consecutive days. Bitches that develop
 a cystic ovary during one estrus cycle may have
a recurrence.There is no breed predilection for
 ovarian cysts.
If the bitch fails to respond to medical treatment,
surgical drainage and curettage of the cyst
can be used. This can be done via laparotomy
or laparoscopy. Closely evaluate both ovaries
for evidence of a tumor. Unless neoplasia is
suspected, it is not necessary to remove the
ovary. lf there are no plans to use the bitch
in future breedings, ovariohysterectomy is
recommended.
Figure 9-4.
Ovaries with cystic structures.
228 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Bitches treated for ovarian cysts are at increased risk of developing pyometra following a prolonged
estrous cycle. The patient should be closely monitored. Inform the client of the risk and discuss the
medical versus surgical treatment options.
of bitches with prclonged prcestrus. This tumor type produces estrogens, thus leading to prclonged
estrus. If ultrasound is unavailable or non-diagnostic, and the bitch fails to respond to hCG or GnRH,
be successfully resected if found early. Radiation and chemotherapeutic protocols have not been
extensively evaluated in the bitch.
Exogenous estrogen creams and gels prescribed for post-menopausal women may also cause
symptoms of prolonged estrous in dogs. They may be ingested (licking the application site on the
arm or chewing up a tube of cream) or absorbed transdermally. This is common in small breed dogs
 s    e       a  s   
sy e uei uaum payse ag pinous h ing 'uosanb ageooun ue ag re sul 'sia
Anovulatory cycles
Failure to ovulate was reported as 1% in one study. Here, the progesterone failed to rise above 3.5
ng/ml. When followed, 45% of the bitches had a normal ovulatory cycle during their next estrous. For
the bitches who do this recurrently, treatment with GnRH or hCG may be used on subsequent cycle.
Missed breedings
The most common cause of missed breeding, as a cause of apparent infertility, is thought to
be breeding at the wrong time; that is failure to deliver the semen into the oviducts 2 to 3 days
bitch is abnormal estrous cycles, suggesting ovarian or uterine pathology. There are many other
causes. Some result in failure to conceive and some result in pregnancy loss (See Figure 9-2).
Infertility
There are 3 basic assessments to consider when a bitch fails or appears to fail to conceive and
complete a pregnancy?
1. Did fertile sperm get to a fertile egg?
a. Was semen with a normal count, mortility and morphology deposited in the bitch's reproductive
tract?
b. Did the bitch ovulate?
c. Was the semen deposited at the right time?
d. Did viable semen get to the oviduct?
e. Did a viable egg get to the oviduct?
2. Did the bitch conceive?
a. Did the sperm successfully fertilize the egg?
b. Did the fertilized egg survive and become an embryo?
c. Did the embryo successfully implant and form a placenta?
3. Did the bitch successfully maintain this pregnancy?
a. Was a healthy fetus with a healthy placenta maintained?
b. Were the fetuses successfully delivered at full term?
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 229
Ultrasound for pregnancy 4 or more weeks after breeding can help to distinguish between failure
to conceive and failure to maintain pregnancy. Palpation is not useful in distinguishing viable from
non-viable feti. Blood testing lacks specificity, cannot be reliably used before day 28 of pregnancy.
have previously missed breedings.
    an  s  e     a s
both the male and female, how timing of the breeding was determined, sperm quality, and physical
examination of the bitch (See Appendix D-6, A-9 and A-10)
No pregnancy -- No pups seen on ultrasound
As obvicus as this seems, a bitch is often presented for evaluation for pregnancy or infertility when
no breeding has been witnessed. Unless the breeder was present and witnessed a tie, failure to
copulate must be considered. The female may not have been receptive because the male and
female were not left together at the correct time.
There can be psychological causes for failure to copulate. Sometimes, the female is very aggressive
toward the male and intimidates him, or she may be shy or timid. At times, the male may not be
assertive enough. Sometimes, the bitch or dog may have personal preferences and not like the mate
thebreederhaschosenfor herorhim.
There can be physical reasons for an inability to copulate. The male may have pain associated
with his prostate, back, hips or stifles. He may have a penile frenulum, a hair ring, or other penile
pathology making copulation impossible. He may not be tall enough to mount the bitch; she may
be too tall or too short for the male. Her vulva may be too small or too far cranial for the male to
reach. She may have a stricture, septum, mass, foreign body, vaginal hyperplasia or other vaginal
pathology making copulation impossible. These anatomical abnormalities may be congenital or
acquired from diffcult whelping, mating trauma, or a poorly healed episiotomy. These abnormalities
may be surgically correctable if planned for between estrous cycles.
Artificial insemination, using quality semen and accurate timing, is often an appropriate option for
the next cycle with a young healthy bitch and male dog. If there are greater issues, such as an aging
bitch or stud dog, or poor semen quality, more aggressive treatment options may be offered.
Timing
Poor timing is the most common cause for missed breedings. The incidence of apparent infertility
caused by missed timing ranges between 40% and 80% of all bitches presented for fertility
evaluations. I his Is a management issue, not infertility.
There is great variation between bitches and even between cycles of the same bitch for breeding
Many breeders believe that their bitches are ready to breed on day 12. However, it is clear from
someonday30.
Many breedings today are more complicated than in years past. Breeders who have historically used
2 dogs within their kennel or geographic proximity could rely on the stud dog and bitch to do their
   yoi  hn  n yn l   s us a asng ' uo
have higher expectations that we will be so successful, we will always produce a litter.
230 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
When presented with a bitch for apparent infertility, simply reviewing how the timing, if any was done,
often be all that is necessary for a successful cutcome.
Failure to ovulate
Some bitches will appear to cycle, but may fail to ovulate, either because of split cycles or cystic
ovarian disease. Careful monitoring of their cycle, with vaginal cytology, observation of the behavior
of the bitch and stud, and progesterone testing will usually detect this failure.
Poor semen quality
Inadequate sperm at the breeding is the second most common reason for apparent infertility.
Opinion varies regarding the minimum number of normal viable sperm required to successfuly
must include the total sperm count, and the number of forwardly motile morphologically normal
the important factor, not the volume of the ejaculate. An accurate sperm count is an essential
component of the fertility workup.
The typical male dog produces 10 x 106 (10 million) sperm per pound of body weight. This is 1 billion
fresh and frozen semen breedings. In general, 1o0 to 200 million sperm are used for a frozen semen
breeding, although it may be possible to use fewer in a small breed or young healthy bitches.
Sperm counts can be done manually with dilutions in a Unopette'M, with a sperm counter calibrated
for use in the dog, or at a commercial laboratory (See Appendix A-8).
warmed microscope slide with the sample under low power.
Although it is desirable to have 80% or more normal motile sperm in an ejaculate, stud dogs with
much lower percentages of normal sperm can still sire litters if the sperm count is high enough and
the bitch has good fertility. For example, if a stud dog has 1 billion sperm (1 x 109), with only 10%
normal, he still has 100 million sperm potentially eligible to fertilize the ova.
It is useful to know if this stud dog has been successful at impregnating other females within a short
time period prior to or following the bitch you are examining.
A stud dog is classifed as fertile if there are 1o0 million to 200 million or more viable forwardly
motile normal appearing sperm. If the stud dog the breeder wants to use does not meet these
        s         
the breeding than to compromise their stud dog selection.
Bacterial vaginitis
clinical signs. If white blood cells are seen on vaginal cytology during proestrus or estrus, an
appropriate antibiotic regimen may be considered.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 231
Semen delivery - Oviduct disease - Obstruction, inflammation
Semen delivery may be impaired by any cbstructive lesion along the bitch's reproductive tract,
obstruction, neoplasia, and inflammatory changes interfere with the delivery ot semen to the oviduct,
Immunologic infertility
This is not well documented in the bitch. On submission of a uterine biopsy to Dr. Schlafer at Cornell
the author has had one clinical case of infertility where this was suspected.
Failure to implant
after ovulation. There are no diagnostic tests for detecting pregnancy prior to implantation. It is
This cause of infertility or pregnancy failure cannot be diagnosed.
Failure to form and maintain a healthy placenta
Failure to form and maintain a healthy placenta cannot be determined prior to 24 to 28 days
post-ovulation.
Ultrasonography can be used to confrm pregnancy, detect fetal resorption, fetal death, and
abortion. In some cases, only part of the litter is lost; in others the entire litter is.
If fetal loss occurs prior to approximately day 45 of pregnancy, resorption occurs. If fetal loss
occurs after approximately day 45 of pregnancy, stillborn pups pass.
Resorption is a common event in the dog, with up to 33% of conceptions resorbing
Failure to maintain pregnancy - Pups seen on ultrasound.
pregnancy lost -- Resorption
Early embryonic death, resorpticn, abortion, stillbirth, and neonatal mortality have many causes.
Some causes cannot be determined but there are many infectious and noninfectious causes for
which we have good diagnostic, treatment and preventive protocols (Figure 9-5).
Brucellosis
Canine brucellosis, caused by Brucella canis, is the only documented infectious bacterial cause of
infertility in the bitch. The bacterium is nearly impossible to eliminate from the infected dog and it
can cause a long-term infectious disease in the human (Figure 9-6)
Recently there has been an increasing number of cutbreaks throughout the United States,
particularly in commercial breeding operations. As infected dogs move out of these facilities and
co-mingle with other dogs as breeding stock and rescued dogs, brucellosis may easily spread into
other breeding facilities and client's homes. Dogs may be exposed by routes other than venereal
and breeders who rescue dogs from breeding facilities. Veterinarians and breeders must be less
complacent about testing for this important and devastating disease.
232 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A
Figure 9-5.
Cystic endometrial hypoplasia (smafl white cysts) with sterile fetal resorption sites (large, beige plaques) attached to the
uterine lining, Close up view A, with CEH B.
Canine brucellosis as a zoonotic disease
Canine Brucellsis in humans can be serious and diffcult to diagnose. It is frequently overlooked
infections. It is more likely to occur and cause serious symptoms in the immune-compromised
patient (children, the elderly, patients on chemotherapy, patients on corticostercids or organ
rejection drugs, patients with HlV-AlDS, and those with chronic diseases such as diabetes or
protect our clients and staff.
Human exposure to Brucella canis can be by ingestion, mucus membrane contact, skin wounds,
or inhalation of the organism. Masks, goggles and gloves should be worn by personnel handling
suspected animals, bedding or tissues.
If a client or staff member is exposed or may have symptoms of brucellosis, he or she should
contact their physician. Early symptoms include intermittent (undulant) or prolonged fever; body
muscle and back aches; loss of appetite; headaches; sweats; fatigue; other flu-like symptoms and
enlarged lymph nodes. Early treatment with appropriate antibiotics is usually effective.
Figure 9-6.
A. Blood tubes for Brucella canis culture. B. Medlia used to culture Brucella canis.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 233
Symptoms of canine brucellosis in the bitch and puppies
Symptoms in the bitch include apparent infertility due to early fetal death, resorption, abortion, and
the delivery of weak or sick pups. Late term abortion after 45 to 60 days of pregnancy is common.
decomposition. Pups born alive may die soon after birth, or show signs of illness. The sick pups may
have enlarged lymph nodes, recurrent fevers, and uveitis. Affected bitches may also have fevers of
undetermined origin, diskospondylitis, and uveitis.
Testing dogs for canine brucellosis
           si   s
rapid slide agglutination test (RSAT). (D-Tec CB? from PZoetis). When the kit is available, the
RSAT test can be done at the veterinary clinic, or at a reference laboratory. lt is a test that can
be done in a few minutes, after the blood is drawn and serum is harvested. lt is inexpensive,
sensitive, and 99% accurate. lt also detects antibodies within a few weeks of infection. False
positives are in the range of 1% to 10%. The false positives are due to other bacteria that
2-mercaptoethanol reduces false positives. A negative test result indicates that either the dog
does not have an active brucellosis infection or that it was exposed in the past 8 to 12 weeks.
2. The agar gel immunodiffusion (AGlD) test is more specific and used to rule brucellosis in or out
Cornell University.
3. Isolation of Brucella canis by culture can be done at a reference laboratory. The advantages
2) The test will detect infections earlier than the RSAT and AGlD tests and 3) the test is not
expensive to run. The disadvantages are 1) Long turn-around time, up to 4 weeks, 2) the test
g  e   si  s       
is a difhcult organism to grow in culture so the diagnosis can be missed. Costs for these
different tests are similar.
Samples that may be submitted for brucellosis testing are blood collected sterilely, aborted
Brucella is a difficult to culture and is easily overgrown by contaminants.
Blood cultures must be taken sterilely into bacterial culture vacuum blood tubes with a surgical
prep on the skin. This tube has a yellow stopper, and contains SPS and ACD. Other blood
collection tubes cannot be substituted. Multiple tests may be needed to confirm the patient's
negative status.
Aborted fetuses should have stomach contents submitted for culture; pups that are born alive
4. lowa State University now offers a PCR test for canine brucellosis. Urine from males, vaginal
bacteria, not the antibodies developed in response to the infection. For this reason, PCR
testing can identify infected dogs earlier in the course of the disease. The test is hoped to
provide earlier and more accurate results.
234 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
lowa State PCR
Synbiotics RSAT
Advantages
Accuracy - no false positives.
Accuracy - no false negatives
Detects DNA of the bacterial
unless very early after
agent.
exposure.
Assurance of quality control
 Speed - in house, results in
when sharing results with other   under 1 hour.
breeders and veterinarians.
Disadvantages
Speed - takes up to 3 weeks.
Many false positives which
 require verification at outside
reference lab.
Old technology.
Transmission of canine brucellosis
 are more common - these include ingestion or inhalation of aborted materials, transplacental
transmission, and contact of any bodily secretions with the mucus membranes. One of the first
documented human cases (1966) was an air conditioner repairman who was exposed under a porch
where a bitch whelped a litter of infected pups.
Prevention of an outbreak of canine brucellosis in a kennel
stock. Test all dogs prior to introduction into a breeding colony twice at 4 to 6 week intervals.
Females that abort should be assumed positive and should be isolated until proven otherwise
Managing an outbreak of canine brucellosis
In many states, canine brucellosis is a reportable disease. This means if you confirm a brucellosis case,
that is confirmed on either blood culture, PCR, and/or the AGlD test. These veterinary authorities may
dictate the management of testing and culling infected dogs and those in contact with infected dogs.
antibiotic regimens are not curative and the disease has zoonotic potential.
During an outbreak, all dogs in the kennel should be tested monthly for 3 months until the all the
dogs housed in the kennel are negative on 2 successive tests. All females should be separated at
birthing to reduce transmission in the kennel.
If an individual dog is infected, he or she must be sexually altered (ovariohysterectomized or
 castrated) and placed on long-term antibiotic therapy or euthanized. Antibiotic regimens that have
IM BID x 7 days) and tetracycline (30 mg/kg po BID x 21 days) with streptomycin (20 mg/kg IM SID
been proposed but the side effects are considerable, including renal failure due to prolonged use
 of gentamycin. There is great cost associated with long-term antibiotic therapy, ongoing testing for
monitoring resolution of the disease, and side effects associated with treatment.
Spayed females pose little risk of disease to family members after they are ovarichysterectomized.
However, brucellosis can be harbored in the prostate, so it may not be possible to clear the male
n po yu  aui       a  sn  os
disease must be discussed with the client, particularly in households with young children or immune-
compromised members.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 235
If one or more individual dogs in a grcup housing situation are infected, the entire colony must be
euthanized or tested and culled multiple times. The following protocol has been recommended:
Confrm brucellosis is present based on PCR, blood cultures or cultures from infected tissues;
Report the disease as required by state laws;
Strictly limit movement of dogs in or out of the kennel, for any reason;
Identify ALL infected dogs. Try to determine the source of infection and all dogs in contact with
infected dogs. Blood cultures are the recommended test;
Cease breeding;
Test all animals in the facility, and cull all infected animals. This often means euthanasia of large
groups of dogs;
Retest all animals in the facility every month. Continue to cull infected animals;
Unless the kennel is closed to incoming and outgoing dogs and breeding is temporarily ceased, the
kennel may never be cleared of brucellosis.
Preventing a canine brucellosis outbreak in a household or kennel of breeding dogs
Breeders have a great deal at stake every time they breed naturally or introduce a new dog into their
household or kennel. Many have spent a lifetime developing their genetic lines; an outbreak of canine
brucellosis could destroy a lifetime of work in a moment of oversight or poor judgment.
All dogs and puppies the breeder is exposing their dogs to should have a negative canine brucellosis
test. This is particularly important if they are introducing a rescue dog from a breeding kennel into
the household or kennel.
Require that any stud dog or bitch the breeder uses for breeding have a negative brucellosis test. To
protect your bitch and kennel, it is reasonable to require a stud dog be tested before each breeding.
not just on a bl-annual basis as many breeders choose to do. This includes stud dogs having semen
shipped as fresh extended semen and stud dogs prior to collection semen for freezing. Freezing
preserves Brucella canis
Other infectious agents
Other bacteria reported to have caused fetal loss include: Camyplobacter and Salmonella spp. (from
raw meat diets);: Listeria; Leptospirosis brataslava; Coxiella burnetti (Q fever); and Chlamydia
Canine herpesvirus
The mere mention of canine herpesvirus will strike fear into the hearts of most experienced dog
breeders. For them and many veterinarians, this term is synonymous with certain death of an entire
litter.
Canine herpesvirus (CHV) is a viral infection reported world-wide in 6% to 88% of the canine population
236 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
In the adult dog, it causes mild respiratory symptoms, and is of little consequence. It is most
devastating in pregnancy and the neonate, frequently causing resorption, abortion, and early death
if contracted in the last 3 weeks of gestation through the first 3 weeks of life. There is no zoonotic
potential for canine herpesvirus.
Symptoms
Infection of an immunologically naive bitch prior to 6 weeks of pregnancy can cause apparent
infertility or reduced litter size, depending on the percentage of fetuses lost. Typically, the affected
bitch has no clinical signs of illness.
premature labor, delivery of stillborn pups, and premature delivery of sick or weak pups that die shortly
after birth. Iypically, the affected bitch has no clinical signs of illness, other than premature labor.
Pups may also be infected during birth by exposure to active vesicular lesions in the vulva, or shortly
after birth from oro-nasal and vaginal secretions from their mother, littermates, or other dogs in the
household.
Canine herpesvirus, like the human herpesvirus, tends to live on the mucus membranes of the
oro-nasal and genital regions. CHv thrives at slightly lower-than-core body temperatures. Because
puppies cannot thermc-regulate, they tend to have body temperatures between 96° and 99° F. This,
combined with a naive immune system, predisposes neonates to the systemic effects of CHV not
seen in the older pup or adult dog.
     s   d     a   
become sick and die soon thereafter, or be born healthy and thrive
Pups that are stillborn, born prematurely and fail to thrive, or that become ill within 1 week of birth
were probably exposed in utero. Pups that were born healthy and become ill within 1 to 3 weeks of
Herpesvirus is considered a common cause of neonatal death, from the pre-partum period up to 6
weeks of age.
persistent crying (mewing), respiratory distress, abdominal pain and bloating, hypothermia,
depression, anorexia, diarrhea, and weakness. This often progresses to death within 4 to 24 hours.
Testing for canine herpesvirus
Contrmation of canine herpesvirus can be difhcult. If the bitch failed to conceive or resorbed her
litter, herpes is one possible cause.
day period. However, this testing is often not possible if serum samples were not collected trom the
fall quickly. Alternatively, any titer of greater than 1:2 when seen with resorption, abortion, or neonatal
death is suggestive of herpes. Titers for CHV are available at several veterinary referral labs.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 237
PCR testing is also available at a limited number of veterinary referral laboratories. Molecular
swabs (from vesicles, the nasopharynx, conjunctiva, or trachea), whcle blood in EDTA (lavender top
tube) or ACD (yellow top tube), or fresh or frozen tissues from the neonatal post mortem. PCR in the
bitch will only remain positive transiently, so it is easy to miss a positive case.
A definitive diagnosis can be made on post mortem examination of aborted fetuses or dead neonates
necrosis and petechial hemorrhages on the surfaces of the liver and kidneys, caused by marked
thrombocytopenia. These organs have a speckled appearance on the serosal surface.
PCR on neonatal tissues can be definitive. In the bitch with a suspected diagnosis of CHV, PCR testing
Is most useful when paired with a positive antibody titer. when combined testing and clinical signs
demonstrate an active viral infection and an immunologic response, it is strongly suggestive of CHV.
Viral culture is not a routine method of diagnosis due to the labile nature of the virus
Transmission
CHV infection can be transmitted by sexual contact, transplacentally, via direct exposure to pustules
be shed, even in the presence of circulating antibodies
exposed bitch to protect subsequent litters.
During periods of stress, such as at whelping, the latent virus reappears. This can allow large
numbers of virus to be shed shortly after whelping, when the pups are most susceptible. Passive
immunity, usually from colostrum or from injected plasma, is the most successful method of
indicated to protect the pups. The antibodies appear to disappear in as lile as 3 months, allowing
the virus to reactivate (Merial website Canine Herpesvirus).
Managing an outbreak
There is no known treatment during pregnancy. Ireatment of the neonates is largely supportive
(See chapter 8). This includes 1) an environmental temperature of 90° to 95° F to keep the pups
rectal temperatures at or above 99° F. 2) supplemental oxygen 3) nutritional support, including tube
feeding if there is no vomiting 4) fluid therapy, via SQ, IV, IO, or PO route 5) antibiotics to reduce
secondary invaders 6) serum or plasma transfusion for passive immunity 7) Vitamin K if there is
hemorrhage 8) basic hygiene and assistance with eliminations and 9) any other supportive care,
including butorphanol, deemed helpful in keeping the pups comfortable. There are anecdotal reports
of successful treatment with Acyclovir.
Raising the ambient temperature can be used as an adjunct to treatment. Canine Herpesvirus lives
preferentially on the mucus membranes of the extremities where the temperature is slightly below
body temperature. This appears to be the main reason that CHV is more serious in the neonate
than in a mature animal with a body temperature over 1o0° F. Increasing the ambient temperature
overheating and dehydration.
Prevention
There is no vaccine or pharmaceutical agent available for treatment or prevention of CHV in the
United States. Some breeders attempt to reduce exposure of the pregnant bitch by staying home
with all their dogs from dog events during the bitch's pregnancy and the pup's early neonatal period
238 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
In Europe, a commercial vaccine is available for use in pregnant bitches. Use of the vaccine has
from Canine Herpesvirus.
Two doses of the vaccine are given during pregnancy, and need to be repeated during each
pregnancy. It appears unlikely that this vaccine will be approved for use in the United States.
Other viral infections
Other viral infections can cause resorption, abortion and neonatal death. These include canine
distemper virus, canine adenovirus, the canine minutevirus or parvovirus 1, canine parvovirus type 2
(CPV-2), and probably a multitude of others that are too rare or hard to confirm
2 (the parvovirus routinely used in commercial vaccines) and have mounted an appropriate
and colostral transfer of antibodies.
failure, birth defects, and early neonatal death. Symptoms of parvovirus 1 are vomiting, diarrhea,
respiratory distress, constant crying, and sudden death. It is clinically indistinguishable from Canine
Herpesvirus. Supportive care as used for Canine Herpesvirus (See chapter 8) is the only treatment,
but is often unsuccessful. Diagnosis is confirmed at post-mortem.
Subclinical bacterial uterine infections and mycoplasma/Ureaplasma
During estrus and whelping, the cervix opens. This provides the opportunity for the same bacteria
found in the cranial vagina during proestrus and estrus to ascend into the uterus. Many aerobic
bacteria can be found in the uterus of fertile bitches. The most common uterine bacterial infections
infection is through hematogenous spread. Anaerobic bacteria and mycoplasma found in the uterus
may be pathogenic
Any bacteria found in pure culture or high numbers in the uterus or carefully collected aborted
fetuses (kept sterile, from stomach contents or organs) are considered signihcant. The author
has had 1 case reported by Dr. Casal at the University of Pennsylvania where Serratia sp. were
To obtain clinically significant cultures, samples can be taken by high vaginal culture at abortion
onset of the next estrous cycle on the first day vaginal discharge is noted (using a guarded swab).
It is possible for an apparently healthy bitch to have a subclinical bacterial infection of the uterus
which would interfere with carrying a pregnancy full term. This type of infection is different from the
bacterial component of pyometra
bitches' reproductive tract. Their signiticance is unknown.
It is tempting to reach for antibiotics to attempt to solve infertility problems in the bitch and
recommended. It is normal to have a mix of bacteria, mycoplasma, and ureaplasma organisms in
the vagina. Like in the gut and on the skin, these resident bacteria play a role in protecting this area
ftrom pathogenic invaders. Unjustifed use of antibiotics, which will upset the normal flora, Is likely to
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 239
cause bigger problems, not resolve them. Unless there is a culture showing a subclinical or clinical
bacterial disease in the uterus, vaginitis, a bacterial cause of abortion from a previous litter, an 
active bacterial endometritis or placentitis, or a pure culture of bacteria from a guarded high vaginal
culture taken during proestrus, antibiotics should not be used.
Parasitic infections
disease in the neonate. These are rare unless the bitch has been fed a raw meat diet during or prior to
Hypoluteoidism
Hypoluteoidism occurs when the level of progesterone, supplied by the luteal tissue in the ovary.
Routine supplementation of progesterone should be avoided unless determined to be necessary
based on progesterone testing. Exogenous progesterone can cause masculinization of female
support the fetus and will lead to fetal death in utero.
The minimum level of progesterone shown to maintain a normal late term pregnancy in the bitch is
2.5 ng/ml. Levels below 5.0 ng/ml are inconsistent in preventing abortion. Levels below 5 ng/ml
prior to day 55 of pregnancy may indicate hypoluteoidism and may require treatment. Bitches who
the last 5 weeks of pregnancy to allow for intervention to save the litter. If test results will not be
available for 24 or more hours after submission, it may be necessary to initiate treatment at levels
Progesterone levels rise from a baseline of 2.0 ng/ml prior to ovulation, to 5.0 ng/ml at ovulation and
may reach 15 to 80 ng/ml in the trst few weeks after ovulation, whether the bitch is pregnant or not.
secondary to a failing pregnancy and imminent abortion. It may be diffcult to distinguish the
difference. Regardless of the cause, if viable pups are seen on ultrasound, the progesterone level
is below 5 ng/ml and the client opts to attempt to maintain the bitch's pregnancy despite the risks,
progesterone supplementation may be necessary.
When to treat
The first decision is whether to attempt to save this litter. If the pups are deceased and the owner
indicated. If the bitch is ill, other supportive care should be instituted. Ireatment is similar to that for
pyometra.
If all pups have been aborted, or appear dead on ultrasound, and the bitch is to be bred again,
the fetal tissues barring oversized or emphysematous fetuses. Judicious use of Lutalyse? may aid in
this but requires low doses and careful monitoring. If the bitch is sick or cannot deliver the pups, the
equivalent of a C-section, removing fetal and placental tissues, saving the samples for histology and
culture, flushing the uterus and treating appropriately, may be done.
240 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
sg aun pue sdnd suunau an aeds on Aunoddo an osie si aaun ing 'lal aun usoi jo ysu
pyometra and/or otherwise failing pregnancy.
If the cause is primary hypoluteoidism, the bitch will require frequent ultrasounds and progesterone
testing on all subsequent pregnancies. If the cause is secondary to a disease such as herpes, future
pregnancies are likely to be normal.
Treatment of hypoluteoidism
There are 2 kinds of progesterone that can be used for supplementation. There are pros and cons
to each, and often the choice is based on personal preference or availability. Both are available as
equine preparations, not labeled for use in the dog
Progesterone in oil
poog auoaisaond uo pansea si li 'saloeeud upunoduoo yanoun algeie Aensn si su
level; the disadvantage is that you cannot determine the need to repeat the dose or if the treatment
was even necessary. The dose is 1 mg/b of body weight administered IM every 1 to 3 days until day
61 post-ovulation, or more frequently if supported by progesterone testing or tocodynometry. The
preparation stings when administered. The more frequently the bitch needs to be supplemented, the
more likely it is to be a secondary hypoluteoidism.
synthetic hormone, it does NOT cause elevation of progesterone on blood tests; the disadvantage
is that you cannot evaluate if the dose you are using is sufficient to prevent abortion; the advantage
is that you can determine the need to continue or discontinue therapy. The dose is 0.088 mg/kg
administered orally once daily, no later than 61 days post ovulation.
Many bitches with increased uterine contractility will respond quickly to the administration of
considered high enough to support pregnancy. This treatment has initiated pyometra in experimental
models, so use with caution.
Antibiotic therapy
aw no auo jti pansui ag pinous h ing ouuand uunp paaisumpe Aaunou ag pou pinous si
fetuses have been expelled or there is an active vaginal discharge. Antibiotics are useful in treating
primary metritis or secondary ascending vaginal infections. Normally the cervix should remain closed
ascending into the uterus increases greatly
The antibiotic chosen should be one known to be safe during pregnancy and one the bitch is known
to tolerate well. Clavamox, cephalexin, enrofloxacins, and trimeth-sulfa are good choices as they
are broad spectrum, safe during pregnancy, and well tolerated by most bitches who are not allergic
to them. They should be administered at the labeled doses based on the pregnant weight of the
bitch and continued to term.
The only way to determine if the cervix is open or closed is with rigid endoscopy. It is not possible by
digital vaginal examination due to the length of the vaginal vault.
Terbutaline
This is a human asthma drug, given orally or by SQ injection which has in some cases been used
Chapter 9: Infertity and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 241
successfully as the sole therapy to quiet uterine contractions. Cardiac arrhythmias are a potential
risk in humans, suggesting caution if used in the bitch.
Combination of therapy
This can be used if the owner wishes to attempt to save the litter. Progesterone, terbutaline, and
antibiotics in combination can be used based on progesterone levels, tocodynometry and clinical
response. Treatment should be discontinued 61 days from ovulation. Metoclopramide can be started
at day 6l from ovulation to assist with lactation as progesterone therapy will suppress lactation.
Antibiotics should be administered if any fetuses have been expelled or there is an active vaginal
discharge that is anything more than clear mucus. An Adaptil@ collar will help the bitch develop
maternal skills
Pharmaceutical and nutritional supplements causing infertility
of fetuses from the uterus.
These may need to be used if the bitch has a life-threatening condition with no other treatment
options available and owner consent.
Prior to the use of any drug with a luteolytic effect, ultrasound must be used to assure that no
pregnancy and a pyometra. These 2 conditions may co-exist and in some cases can be treated
and injectables, luteolytic compounds - (Lutalyse?, Estrumate?), Aglepristone, and Raspberry tea
leaf preparations can cause expulsion of fetuses.
Genetic incompatibility
Genetic incompatibilities, or fatal genes, have been documented in humans and dogs. Confrmation
can be made on post mortem. If suspected, use of a different unrelated stud dog may be advisable
Litter sizes increased when out-crossed lines were compared to line-bred litters. This suggests
partial loss of a litter in those with some genetic incompatibilities.
Uterine pathology - CEH, Fibrosis, Neoplasia
Uterine pathology (metropathy) is common in the intact bitch. Metropathy includes cystic endometrial
hyperplasla (CEH), fbrosis, neoplasla, endometritis, pyometra, and subclinical uterine infections.
This causes irreversible pathology, suspected by some to damage the uterus more than pregnancy
(Figure 9-7).
Fertility decreases by 33% in bitches over the 6 years old. The reduced fertility is probably due to
aging of the cocysts, but some is also due to metropathy
242 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure 9-7.
A and B. Uterine lining with marked cystic endometrial hyperplasia. C. Uterine lining with marked cystic endometrial hyper
plasia. Note the distended appearance of the intact uterine horn. D. Cysts on the serosal surface of uterus. These do not
have anegative impact onfertility.
Ultrasound is useful in detecting significant ovarian and uterine lesions, such as severe cystic
endometrial hyperplasia or uterine or ovarian neoplasia. Some pathology is visible grossly and on
only detected by uterine biopsy.
Uterine biopsy for histopathology and culture (aerobic, anaerobic, and mycoplasma/ureaplasma) can
provide invaluable information. Infectious endometritis is a treatable cause of infertility. Some bitches
   s a  si n a  e ssa   s
severe that pregnancy is impossible and the best option is to stop trying. Sometimes the changes
 are reversible, and sometimes the prognosis is good because there is no pathology.
Uterine biopsy should NOT be attempted at the same time as a surgical breeding because of the
associated inflammation. If a metropathy is suspected or confirmed at C-section, uterine biopsy.
service to offer the client.
If a bitch is bred with quality semen at the appropriate time based on progesterone testing, and
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 243
is not pregnant based on ultrasound at 4 weeks post-ovulation, AND nothing in her history or on
physical examination suggests a cause for her infertility, a surgical breeding at her next cycle or
surgically obtained uterine cultures and biopsies should be considered. This is recommended only
 anesthesia and cannot be combined. Surgical breeding may lead to a pregnancy. Surgical biopsy,
si u poos pue uaas poo ynm supaang jenlains fl 'sisouaep pue sisouoid e apod Ae
unsuccessful, surgical biopsy at the end of diestrus should be done to determine the cause. The
decision is made by the client in consultation with the veterinarian and is influenced by the age of the
 transcervical catheterization collection technique which is a less invasive option than surgical biopsy.
The ideal time for uterine biopsies is near the time the bitch would whelp, 60 days after ovulation, if
she had goten pregnant. This is the time of maximal progesterone influence, the time which should
demonstrate the greatest pathological changes in the uterus (Figure 9-8).
BIOPSYPUNCH
BIOPSYPUNCH
CE
图D
A
Figure 9-8.
A. Uterine punches used to collect fufl thickness uterine biopsies. B. Surgical instruments and supplies used to collect
histology and microbiology samples surgically, as part of an infertility work - up in a bitch.
Uterine biopsy technique
There are 3 steps to the uterine biopsy technique.
Collect uterine tissues in Bouin's solution and formalin for histopathology.
Collect uterine tissues and fluid from inside the uterus for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycoplasma/
ureaplasma culture
si sood sauo no suoisaupe j reun adoy aun ym sats Asdong aun ynoun snain au ysn
present, there may be some therapeutic value.
The specifics of these techniques are laid cut in the Appendix D-11 along with the supplies needed
organized and can be certain all samples are collected and handled correctly.
The surgical biopsy procedure can be done by laparotomy or laparoscopy. Some clinicians collect
biopsies as cbtained at laparotomy. Using general anesthesia and a routine prep and abdominal
244 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
ovary(ies) may need to be exposed and the bursa opened, taking care to avoid trauma to the
oviduct. If cystic structures are found, they should be aspirated (save the fluid), opened and curetted,
and/or biopsied. If there are suspicicus lesions, a biopsy of the ovary should be cbtained. The bursa
au 'paioadsns Auons si eiseldoau ueeao fl pauosodan Aeo aun pue paso painns aq pinous
affected ovary may be removed surgically. This may be done by removing only the affected ovary, by
unilateral ovariohysterectomy. Submit the fluid for cytology and progesterone assays.
Inspect the uterus for pathology. If free fluid is palpated, pack off the uterus with moistened lap
towels prior to opening. Aspirate the free fluid and save it for cytologic examination (slides and
that can be closed without compromising the lumen of the uterus or pathway from the cervix to
the oviduct. The biopsy may be taken as a wedge with a scalpel blade or with 1 or more adjacent
punch biopsies (Miltex punch biopsy) in a 2, 4 or 6 mm size. This decision is based on the size of
the uterus and amount of tissue to be collected. The tissue samples should be divided between
formalin, Bouin's solution, and culture solutions. Prior to placing in fixative solution, those tissues to
e waun daay ol saldwes anss lot papioid sanasseo paly-ueof aun u paoeid aq pinous paxy ag
to minimize tissue distortion during fixation.
peritoneal cavity. Insert a sterile red rubber feeding tube of appropriate size into the incision site(s)
of the uterus, hold the uterine wall around the tube with one hand. Lavage with warmed Lactated
Ringer's or normal saline, creating gentle distension. This is not only to flush the uterus, it may
(optimistically) help open any mildly obstructive lesions in the tract.
Carefully close the uterus to minimize stricture formation that can interfere with future semen
transport and placentation. lf possible, close the incision perpendicular to the long axis of the
continuous pattern (See Figure 6-10) with 5-0 PDS for closure. Avoid penetration into the uterine
lumen. Lavage the abdomen with warmed Lactated Ringers or normal saline, and close routinely.
You need to maximize the chances of a diagnosis with excellent tissue samples. Meticulous sample
and tissue handling is critical to ensure that the bitch has the best chance of a return to fertility
preserved in Bouin's solution. Although this solution is more difhcult to obtain than formalin, the
histologic results are better. Store Bouin's solution carefully. If it dries out into a powder, it is
reported to have explosive tendencies.
Fixation
Establish a treatment plan based on the biopsy and culture results. If there is evidence of bacterial
infection, antibiotics should be chosen based on the culture and sensitivity results. If there is cystic
endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) causing implantation failure, mibolerone may improve the uterine
health enough to allow a pregnancy to go to term.
If indicated, use 30 mcg of mibolerone per 25 pounds of body weight once daily for 6 months
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 245
to low doses of corticosteroids used just prior to the expected onset of estrous and discontinued at
the time of breeding.
Hormonal alteration of estrous
Inducing estrous
There are several effective protocols to induce estrous in the bitch. The veterinary staff should
bitch is ready to breed. Once the commitment to induce an estrous cycle is made, there will not be
adequate time for "plan B" breedings.
Convenience is arguably the weakest reason to induce estrous. However, it makes arranging live
breedings much more manageable. This can be arranged around show schedules, stud dog and
bitch availability, and the special scheduling needs of clients.
performed prior to an attempt to induce estrous.
Prolonged inter-estrous.lf greater than 12 months, there is no reason for concern except that the
breeder may be ready to breed the bitch. This is reason enough for some breeders to request this
service.
Induction technique
op ae  p  y  g a    g  g
pituitary. Pregnancy rates may be lower in induced cycles than in naturally occurring estrous.
likely to cause vomiting. Deslorelin Is also used to induce estrous in the dog. Deslorelin increases
the levels of endogenous luteinizing hormone (LH), thereby inducing ovulation.
Cost for treatment with either cabergoline or Deslorelin is similar for the moderate sized dog
50 mcg/ml of cabergoline labeled as Galastop available in Europe.
Cabergoline, or Dostinex, is given orally once daily at 5 mcg/kg for 10 days. If the bitch has not
days. Approximately /0% of the bitches treated will show signs of estrous within 30 days of starting
the drug. This is a human drug, available through the pharmacy. It is not labeled for use in the dog.
Deslorelin, or Ovuplant, is a drug pellet, inserted under the mucus membrane of the lip of the vulva
with local anesthesia. Ovuplant? is an equine product, not labeled for use in the dog. The dose is 1
pellet per bitch, regardless of size. Check the serum progesterone prior to placement to be sure
the bitch is not in early proestrus. If the progesterone is greater than 1 ng/ml, the drug will block,
may be placed. It is best if a standard protocol is established for location of the pellet. The author
s         o    s 
This is significant, because knowing the location of the implant will make removal easier follwing
246 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
T
Figure 9-9.
A. Placement of ovuplant showing hand and needle position. B. The ovuplant can be removed using local anesthesia and
either a scalpel blade or laser incision. In most cases, the ovuplant can be lifted out as a pellet.
No shaving is necessary. Position the patient with her right side down, so there is easy access to
the inner right labia. Have 1 assistant hold the head and forelegs, and a second hold the right rear
leg with 1 hand and the tail with the opposite hand. With Nolvasan?, prep the inner lip of the vulva.
Instill the lidocaine mixed 10:1 with sodium bicarbonate with a TB syringe into the labia near the
mucocutaneous junction, halfway between the dorsal and ventral commissures. Put on sterile gloves
Carefully position the drug pellet into the needle before inserting the needle under the mucosa, as
this will make placement require less force. Be careful not to push the pellet cut of the needle or
allow it to drop cut during positioning. With a gauze square in the left hand, gently pull the tip of
the vulva toward the bitch's feet, separating the lips. The implant must be placed with the needle
directed from dorsal to ventral to reduce the chances that the pellet will dislodge while the tissues
are sealing over. Directed ventrally and bevel up, the needle should be inserted near the dorsal
the pellet through the mucus membrane as it slides into place, with the final destination halfway
between the ventral and dorsal commissures, adjacent to the mucocutaneous junction. To control
bleeding, a cotton ball or portion of one can be placed inside the vulvar lips. This will dislodge during
urination. She is discharged to the care of the breeder.
The estrous cycle usually starts within 3 days following placement of the Deslorelin implant. The
bitch must be monitored closely because the proestrus will be shortened. Rather than starting
progesterone testing on day 6 of the estrous cycle, these bitches should be started on day 3. It is
best to keep the bitch at home until she is in estrous. Most bitches who fail to cycle with Deslorelin
are the ones who have been sent directly to the stud dog after implantation. The typical bitch will be
ready to breed on approximately day 6 to 15 after insertion of the drug. Because of the shortened
a stud dog or semen available prior to starting the protocol. Progesterone testing and timing the
 in the patient's fle so all staff is aware that the Ovuplant? needs to be retrieved after breeding.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 247
(See Appendix D-2)
Supplies for insertion of the Ovuplante:
1. Ovuplant?
 2. Sterile gloves - 1 pair
 3. Sterile gauze squares
 4. Nolvasan® surgical prep
 5. Lidocaine
 6. Sodium bicarbonate
7. TB syringe
 8. Cotton balls
9. Ovuplant? stickers
10. Vetrap? or hair clips to control hair on long-coated bitches
11. 2 assistants to hold dog
Once the progesterone rises above 5 ng/ml and the breeding is completed, whether naturally, by Al,
or surgically, remove the Ovuplant?.
A client handout for managing the induced heat cycle and breeding is in Appendix C-4.
If the bitch is bred naturally, the Ovuplant? can be removed after the final breeding. In this way there
is no unnecessary discomfort from the incision during the tie with the stud dog. If bred by Al, remove
the Ovuplant? BEFORE the Al so restraint of the bitch does not contribute to semen escaping the
is difficult to find. If the pellet cannot be located, leaving it in will may not interfere with conception
and pregnancy.
To remove the Ovuplant?, the bitch is again positioned with her right side down with 2 assistants
restraining her. No clipping is necessary. The hair should be managed again with hair clips or
must be done prior to injection of the lidocaine bleb because the bleb will obscure the pellet and
the placement site. If not visible, palpate the right and left labial lips and compare to determine the
location. Prep the labia with Nolvasan?, and inject a 10:1 mixture of lidocaine:sodium bicarbonate
mixture. Sterile gloves are donned, a second prep is applied, and a small 2 to 3 mm incision is
made just over the Ovuplant?. The incision can be made with a scalpel blade or a cutting laser. Using
the cutting laser makes removal easier (the Ovuplant? sparks when located) as well as less pain
and blood is noted. In some cases, the Ovuplant? can be lifted out intact with the tip of the scalpel
blade. In other cases, the Ovuplant? must be gently scooped out in fragments. Flush the region with
saline to remove any remaining fragments. No suture is necessary, but 4-0 Vicryl? can be used if the
incision is extended. A cotton ball or portion thereof can be placed in between the lips of the vulva to
reduce bleeding. It will be flush out when the patient urinates (Appendix D-3)
248Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
(See Appendix D-3)
Supplies to gather to remove the Ovuplant:
1. Sterile scalpel blade and curved mosquito forceps
 2. Sterile gloves - 1 pair
 3. Sterile gauze squares
 4. Nolvasan surgical prep
 5. Lidocaine
6. Sodium bicarbonate
7. TB syringe
8. Cotton balls
9. 3 cc saline flush
 10. Vet-rap or hair clips to control hair on long-coated bitches
11. 2 assistants to hold dog
Preventing estrous
Mibolerone is one of two non-surgical option/pharmaceutical option currently available in the United
States to prevent estrcus cycles. The other non-surgical option is megestrol acetate. The other
alternative Is surgical alteration by ovariectomy or ovariohysterectomy.
Mibolerone, previously marketed by Upjohn as Cheque? drops, is now a controlled substance
the U.S.You must be careful to assure that your client receives the product you ordered at the
apparently an economic, not a medically based decision. The DEA has placed mibolerone in a class
of controlled substances because of human abuse of this anabolic steroid. Due diligence is a duty of
the prescribing veterinarian to assess the drug and pharmacy before prescribing.
The use of mibolerone in the breeding bitch is controversial. It was originally labeled by Upjohn as
       s   s       
that long-term use (l year or more) will thin the endometrium and reduce fertility.
Indications for the use of mibolerone
Client handout in Appendix C-5
Short inter-estrous cycles
Mibolerone is the drug of choice to extend the time between estrous cycles. The uterine lining
uterine health and allow her to be bred successfully after treatment.
Pyometras
If successfuly treated for pyometra, and the bitch will not be bred her on her next cycle, consider
mibolerone to prevent her from coming into estrous for up to 2 years, or until 2 to 3 months before
have one on every cycle. Based on clinical observations, veterinarians know this is not always the
case. However, no one can predict which bitches will have a recurrence at the next cycle and which
will not, so mibolerone may be used as a precaution
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 249
Convenience
For many breeders, particularly if they have multiple bitches and stud dogs, minimizing the number
of cycling bitches can be very helpful.
Competition
Control of estrus is useful when competing in conformation, field trials, agility, and other events.
Bitches in season are barred from competing in some events. Many breeders delay breeding their high-
performing bitches until they are retired and can stay home to raise puppies. As the ovaries and uterus
and the influence of progesterone on the uterine lining may be an option that appeals to the breeder.
Guidelines for mibolerone use
Mibolerone is a valuable but potent hormone, and must be used carefully
Never use the product prior to the first estrous cycle. Estrogen is necessary for growth plates to
Side effects
Vaginal discharge
This is a sticky discharge, similar to that of puppy vaginitis, caused by hormonal influence. It is NOT
A PYOMETRA - it is not possible for a bitch on mibolerone to have a pyometra. Be certain everyone
who provides care for this dog is informed of this. lf the dog is with a handler, and away from her
pyometra and whisk her off to surgery.
Epiphora
Tearing reported in 1%, but is probably higher. This is not clinically significant.
Enlarged clitoris
From the influence of testosterone. May be irritating to the bitch, but is not of great concern
Increased muscle mass and tone, and better coat
This can actually be beneficial for bitches in competition.
Never use Mibolerone for more than 2 consecutive years. If long-term use is indicated, she should
come off, have 1 cycle, and reinitiate treatment. There are reports of thinning of the uterine wall with
prolonged use, so inform the client of this.
Run a liver panel prior to starting the drug and every 3 to 6 months while she is on this product. Liver
enzymes often become elevated, but this does not appear to be clinically significant. It is recommended
Be sure the client is aware that mibolerone must be given EVERY day. Follow the dosage schedule
Mibolerone must be started at least 30 days prior to the cnset of estrous - once the bitch is in
estrous, the product will not interrupt it.
Mibolerone can only be ordered from a compounding pharmacy on a case-by-case basis. The
DEA will not allow it to be purchased in bulk quantities for dispensing cut of the veterinary clinic's
quality. Ihe product can be expensive (lable 9-1).
250 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Table 9-1 Dosages for mibolerone
Ibs
kgs
mcg/day
1-25
0.5-12
30
25-60
12-25
60
50-100
25-45
120
> 100
> 45
180
German Shepherd
180
Never use this product if a bitch may be pregnant because it will cause masculinization of the female
fetuses.
The average bitch will cycle 70 to 90 days after withdrawal of mibolerone. She may safely be bred
is 7 to 240 days after withdrawal. If the bitch fails to cycle when desired, the author has initiated
cabergoline or Deslorelin treatment after waiting 30 to 180 days, and successfully induced fertile
estrous cycles.
Cats - never use this in cats as they are reported to develop fatal liver or thyroid disease.
Megestrol acetate or Ovaban?, has been removed from the veterinary market, but can be purchased
reducing GnRH release from the hypothalamus. It may induce histologic lesions of CEH, predisposing
bitches to the development of pyometra. On the other hand, some practitioners theorize that megestrol
are also reports of mammary neoplasia and diabetes mellitus linked to the use of megestrol acetate.
Megestrol acetate can be used to prevent estrous with one of two protocols:
1. 2.2 mg/kg P0 SlD for 8 days if started within the first 3 days of estrus (92% effhcacy).
OR
2. 0.55 mg/kg P0 SID for 32 days if started 7 or more days prior to the onset of prcestrus.
This should not be repeated more often than every 6 months
GnRH agonists and antagonists may have a place in estrous control in the future
Prolonged estrous
There are several reasons for prolonged estrous. These include split heats, cystic ovaries, ovarian
her estrous cycle.
Pseudopregnancy
Hormonally, EVERY bitch has a pseudopregnancy for the 2 to 3 months following her estrous
ovulation, whether the bitch is pregnant or not. Some bitches are clinically affected and some are
clinically asymptomatic. The clinical slgns vary in severity and the type of syndrome noted
Prior to treatment, verifiy with ultrasound or radiographs that the bitch is not pregnant with a single
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 251
Symptoms of false pregnancy are more related to the progesterone drop than rising levels of
Symptoms of false pregnancy are:
Engorgement of the mammary glands with lactation
Secondary mastitis - rare
Nesting and whelping-like behaviors
Maternal behaviors, such as collecting soft toys and mothering them
Treatment of false pregnancy/False whelping
Water and food should be mildly restricted for several days. Avoid manipulation of the mammary
reduce licking and self-stimulation of lactation. Cabergoline and bromocriptine are drugs that block
prolactin secretion. Bromocriptine is less expensive than cabergoline, but is more likely to cause
vomiting. It is a human drug, dosed at 10 mcg/kg tid for 16 days po. Cabergoline is a human
drug, dosed at 5 mcg/kg/day once daily for 5 to / days po. Avoid the use of acepromazine,
there are no plans to use the bitch again for breeding
Diagnosis and treatment of pyometra
(Appendix D-17)
in heat in the last 6 to 9 weeks. In some cases, the owner may not have recognized her estrous
cycle or may not mention it unless questioned about it. Pyometras can occur at any time in an
intact female, so should be on the rule out list for any sick female. She may present with a varied
combination of symptoms, including feeling sick, lethargic, without a fever, with increased water
consumption, increased urination, dehydration, loss of appetite, and sometimes vomiting and/or
diarrhea. She may just seem vaguely unwell with no specific symptoms because the onset is gradual
and insidious. Rarely, she may have a history of recent treatment with estrogen or progesterone
hormones (mibolerone cannot cause pyometra). Golden Retrievers, Collies, Rottweilers, Bernese
Mountain dogs, and Airedale and Irish Terriers appear to be over-represented. lIt is most common
in the clder bitch that has never produced a liter. By 10 years of age 25% of all female dogs will
develop pyometra. Pyometra may be suspected in a female with a poorly documented medical
history pertaining to her ovariohysterectomy status and has been reported in male pseudoher
maphrodites (Figure 9-10).
fends to be sicker than her counterpart with an open cervix.
Apoog oi juanund-on snoido oi suos e aq uo alau - eaod uado - uado si xla aun H
vaginal discharge, often with a foul odor. She has probably been licking her perineum for several
cells, frequently with phagocytized bacteria, usually rods.
Some patients will have an elevated white blood cell count (70%), sometimes as high as 50,000.
while 25% will present with a WBC of only 12,000 WBC,. Some will have a classic left shift (25%),
some will not. Some may have leukopenia (an unusually low WBC).The left shift is less likely if the
bitch has endotoxic shock or an open cervix. Some will have a high BUN and elevated creatinine
252 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A
Figure 9-10.
A and B. Pyometra.
(30%), but some will not. Some will be borderline anemic, some will not. Some will have isothenuric
urine. Most (50 to 75%) will have an elevated SAP, but some will not.
may also be hyperproteinemic (from dehydration) and hyperglobulinemic (from antigenic stimulation).
If she presents with endotoxemia, she may have decreased GFR and be isothenuric. She may already
have a secondary membranous glomerulonephritis associated with the antigen-antibody complexes
against E. coli. Proteinuria, if present, may be predictive of renal failure
with pyometra, they are knowledgeable about them by association with someone who has. They will 
refer to it as a "pyo", which then quickly becomes a verb ("pyoing" or a variation on this). If the owner
presents a bitch to you with this suspicion, do not dismiss it until you are certain you have ruled it
cut. Pyometras come in all sizes and shapes. Ihey can occur after the trst estrous cycle. They can
present a few days after a heat cycle, or up to 12 weeks later. They do not always conform to what
we think of as "typical".
One cause of pyometras is probably due to prolonged progesterone influence on the uterine
lining, and associated bacterial invasion. whether the bacterial invasion is primary or secondary is
controversial. The pathogenesis involves estrogen stimulation of the uterus, followed by bacterial
invasion, progesterone influence creating endometrial proliferation, uterine glandular secretions,
closure of the cervix, and decreased myometrial contractions. The uterus retains fluid and has
 decreased inherent immunity at this time. Any uterine pathology complicated by a bacterial invasion,
ascending or hematogenous, may lead to pyometra. Because of the multitude of causes, pyometras
 may occur at any time in the bitch's cycle.
The same E. coli found in the gut of the patient is commonly found in her uterus. In less than 1o% of
cases, the E. coli release cytotoxin necrotizing factors - these are the sickest bitches, presenting
with hypothermia and septic shock. Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus spp., Pseudomonas
cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) and pyometra are always found together or if they are two
different diseases is controversial. This is probably more important in theory than in practice.
Pyometra is a separate disease entity from mucometra and post partum metritis.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 253
Diagnosis of pyometra
Physical exam findings, history, CBC, chemistry panel, vaginal cytology and imaging may all be
needed to confirm a pyometra. Collection of urine by cystocentesis should be avoided, because
it could lead to uterine rupture or abdominal contamination. Open-cervix pyometras are easier to
diagnose. Abdominal ultrasound, showing an anechoic or hypoechoic fluid flled uterus, either with a
consistent diameter or segmental loops, is invaluable in confirming a diagnosis. An ultrasound of the
that there is no concurrent viable pregnancy.
A pyometra can be difficult to visualize on abdominal radiographs; additionally, films cannot be used
to distinguish a pregnancy from a pyometra if the bitch is less than 45 days from ovulation. It is
possible that an owner may not realize that an unwitnessed breeding occurred.
If there is a possibility the bitch is bred and ultrasound is not available, referral to a veterinary
hospital where ultrasound is available should be offered. Many clients will prefer the option for
referral to having an ovariohysterectomy as the only option
Medical treatment versus surgical treatment
This is now considered outdated due to advances in diagnosis and treatment and increased
awareness of the need to stabilize patients pre-operatively. In the interest of full disclosure, medical
treatment as an alternative to surgical treatment should be discussed. Many patients may be more
There is no one-size-fits-all approach to treatment for pyometra. Each case requires consideration
of both treatment options. Neither the medical nor surgical option is 1o0% safe. There are
complications seen with both, with a 4% mortality reported.
heat cycle and not feeling well. While this is certainly appropriate to include in the differential, don't
assume that she has a pyometra until the diagnosis is confirmed. Many other conditions, including
a more straight-forward diagnosis, but there are other conditions with similar symptoms (Figure 9-11).
It may appear cbvious that surgical alteration is a better choice if a bitch is not to be used for
breeding. But this is not always the case. The
 main advantage of surgical treatment over
 medical treatment is that the opportunity for
recurrence is eliminated. There are several
advantages to medical therapy.
Figure 9-11
Vaginal discharge associated with an open pyometra.
254 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The following factors should be considered prior to instituting a treatment plan:
Is the bitch pregnant with a normal litter but isn't eating or feeling well because she is pregnant?
The most common clinical indicators of pregnancy are loss of appetite and mucoid vaginal
discharge. Lab values often show a mild elevation of the white blood cell count which is normal in
the pregnant bitch should not be construed as a response to an infection. Be CERTAIN that she
Is not pregnant before proceeding with treatment.
Is she pregnant with viable fetuses concurrently with her pyometra?
Is she a candidate to breed in the future?
ouoo pano lay u ains l api pooa e aq o eadde aus sao
Other than breeding, is there any other reason the owner prefers to leave her intact?
Is there evidence the illness and/or vaginal discharge is a pyometra and not some other disorder
that mimics pyometra? Diabetes mellitus can make a bitch PU/PD or can co-exist with pyometra
and pregnancy. Uterine or ovarian neoplasia can look like or cause pyometra. Vaginal masses
and foreign bodies can cause muco-purulent vaginal discharge.
Is the bitch currently on or been recently treated with mibolerone?
How old is the bitch?
What other organs appear to have pathology based on a current blood chemistry panel? Does
 as sa an  un d  au sl a a   gu e ay a
diabetes mellitus?
What other health conditions does she have? Cardiac function? Neoplasia? Coagulopathy? DlC?
Other health issues?
Can you improve her condition with supportive care and medical management of her pyometra
and take her to surgery later when she is a better surgical candidate?
Have you discussed the pros and cons of both medical and surgical options? You should discuss
both options, but it is your responsibility to guide the client to a medically appropriate treatment
plan.
Will she ever be a candidate for surgery?
Treatment of pyometra
Treatment can be surgical, medical, or a combination of both. There is some difference of opinion
supporting successful medical treatment of closed-cervix pyometras, with the bitches going on to
produce litters. Remember that the drugs given to induce luteolysis will also soften and open the
cervix, allowing the uterus to drain.
The client should always be advised that neither medical nor surgical treatment of pyometra can
be guaranteed to have a successful cutcome. Success is defined as a bitch that lives through
treatment. A subsequent successtul pregnancy is a bonus
(plo yeax g ol g lapun) pae aippiw oi sunox aui lol palapisuoo aq pinous juawean jepa
cost of surgical treatment. The value is the possibility of preserving the bitch for future breeding
surgical candidate.
Surgical treatment should be considered for bitches who have no breeding potential or who are
period, additional diagnostics, additional days in the hospital, additional fluid therapy, and additional
medications with at least I week of antibiotics post-op, making the cost of treatment much higher
than that for a routine ovarichysterectomy.
stable. All bitches should be stabilized pre-op with IV fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Many will
benefit from fluids, antibiotic therapy, and luteolytic treatment (Lutalyse? or aglepristone) for several
days to stabilize them and reduce the volume of purulent material in the uterus prior to surgery.
Medical management of pyometra
Lutalyse? is the backbone of pyometra therapy, but MUST be used concurrently with antibiotics. The
drug has multiple effects - it is luteolytic, lysing the corpus luteum which is producing progesterone;
it increases smooth muscle contractions to help evacuate the uterus; and it aids in relaxing and
opening the cervix to allow drainage. Lutalyse? is not a drug labeled for use in the dog, but there are
increased risk of respiratory distress; therefore many avoid the use of prostaglandins in these breeds
Lutalyse? should be handled with caution to minimize risks to the staff. It has abortifactant and
bronchospasm effects, even when the drug is in direct contact with the skin or is aerosolized.
Precautionary protocols should be established and followed specifically. These may include: not
allowing women of child-bearing age to handle the drug, particularly if pregnant; not allowing
individuals with asthma or other restrictive respiratory disease to handle the drug; only using
uer-lock syringes, not slip-tip syringes, to reduce the possibility of the needle dislodging and
aerosolizing the drug during injection; immediate disposal of the needle and syringe into a sharps
clients
Lutalyse? has the side-effect of causing not only the smooth muscle of the uterus to contract, but
also all smooth muscles. Using the following techniques can make the treatment easler on the bitch
and the veterinary staff.
ikelihood she will vomit the oral medications and food - usually I hour between the injection of
256 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
vomiting and diarrhea she may experience with the frst few injections.
Start with a lower dose of Lutalyse? (10 mcg/kg) and slowly increase to the therapeutic dose (50
mcg/kg) within 48 hours. Less that 15% of patients will experience side effects with this protocol
The side effects may include vomiting, diarrhea, panting and salivation.
Dilute the Lutalyse? with saline to a final volume of 2 to 10 ml - this will slow absorption and reduce
abdominal cramping, vomiting, and diarrhea. Administer the drug subcutaneously.
Include atropine or metoclopramide if needed to reduce side effects
mg/kg) SQ for the first 24 hours, increasing the dose to 25 mcg/kg SQ for the second 24 hours,
(3y o) punod gt e lof asop ay1 'skep g lo, 0s asop lad ay/ow 0g jo asop wnwixew e suyoea
dog is 0.2 cc of Lutalyse? 3 to 5 times a day at the maximum dose.
Continue treatment for a minimum of 5 days or until the vaginal discharge becomes scant and
ultrasound shows that the uterus is reduced by at least 50% in diameter. Ultrasound should be
repeated every 2 to 3 days to monitor treatment success. Ireatment can take up to 3 weeks. The
bitch may come into estrous 1 to 2 months sooner than expected
If medical treatment is unsuccessful, ovariohysterectomy may be indicated.
days, and continuing treatment for an additional 5 days. This seems to diminish the uterus's
tendency to become refractory to treatment. The WBC may lag behind the clinical response as the
uterus empties and monitoring the CBC can be misleading.
There are other medications that can be used in place of Lutalyse?, depending on availability and
familiarity with these products. Lutalyse? is the most commonly used drug for treating pyometras.
Alternative medications
Cloprostenol (Estrumate?) is labeled for use in large animals only. Administer 1 to 5 mcg/kg (0.00]
than Lutalyse?. The side effects and precautions for humans handling the drug are comparable
fo Lutalyse?. The advantage Is once daily dosing. If is not as effective in creating the uterine
contractions essential for emptying, thus requiring a longer treatment protocol.
Aglepristone Is not currently avallable in the United States and is relatively expensive. If blocks
produce a well known cascade of side effects. This protocol is only useful if the bitch presents with
uterine contractions, some practitioners combine agleprisone with prostaglandins
Dosage of aglepristone is 10 mg/kg administered cn day 1, 2, 8, 15, and 29. It can be combined
with cloprostenol (at I mcg/kg subq once a day from day 3 to day /) to increase uterine evacuation
dose. A success rate of 90% is reported after 28 days.
Aglepristone can be used to prevent pyometra recurrence if the bitch is not bred on the next cycle(s).
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 257
upon diagnosis. E. coli is the most common organism found and is usually sensitive to most
routinely used antibiotics. Culture and sensitivity testing are frequently recommended but are seldom
enlightening and antibiotic therapy should not be withheld pending these results. Clavamox? is most
commonly used. Amoxicillin and Cephalexin are also frequently prescribed, but are not preferred
because they do not penetrate the uterine lumen well. The enrofloxacins are also recommended, but
offer little that Clavamox? or cephalexin do not. Oral antibiotics are usually tolerated well. Injectable
cefazolin, Baytril? or Unasyn may be used for the first few days if the bitch is initially unable to
label doses. Antibiotic therapy should continue for 4 weeks beyond the end of Lutalyse? therapy.
Bromocriptine or cabergoline aid in luteolysis, rapidly dropping progesterone levels, and can be
useful in patients with progesterone levels over 2 ng/ml at the initiation of therapy. This accelerates
but not both of these drugs.
pharmacies. It does, however, cause more vomiting than cabergoline
Bromocriptine (Parlodel) is dosed at 10 to 25 mcg/kg BID to TID po for the first 8 days of therapy.
The tablets are 2.5 mg (2500 mcg), and for smaller bitches, should be dissolved in 10 cc of water
(to make 250 mcg/ml), and stored in the refrigerator in a dark amber bottle. Shake the boffle fo
resuspend before administereing.
Cabergoline (Dostinex), is dosed at 5 mcg/kg once daily po. These tablets are difficult to divide
toxic, septic, anorectic, and/or vomiting when treatment begins. IV fluids are recommended for sick
bitches. The dose and type of fluids are based on patient condition.
For patients that appear well-hydrated and are not vomiting until medications are initiated,
depressed, is not drinking well, or does not folerate subcutaneous fluids well.
For patients who never feel sick, are able to drink and eat well, and tolerate all medications well, fluid
therapy may not be required.
sil se a as al pe paiali ag uo pue du bs ya
Misoprostol can be instilled intravaginally (as far cranially as possible, to be close to the cervical os)
at a dose of I fo 3 mcg/kg once daly concurrently with Lutalyse" fo help open the cervix (lables
9-2 through 9-4)
What to expect during pyometra therapy and
how to monitor treatment success
The patient should be monitored closely and supportive treatments provided. In exceptional cases,
such as a client with profound financial restrictions and a patient who appears stable, cutpatient
therapy may be appropriate using cloprostenol and antibiotics. This is not ideal and the client should
be advised of the risks.
258 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Table 9-2 Pyometra treatment for a typical 9 hour veterinary hospital
Time
Drug
8 am
9 am
11 am 
12 noon
2 pm
3 pm
5 pm
Lutalyse? SQ, walk 20 min
X
X
X
X
Metoclopramide SQ if vomiting
X
X
X
 Bromocriptine (tid) or
X
X
X
cabergoline (sid) PO
 Antibiotic PO or by injection
X
X (ifTID)
X
Table 9-3 Pyometra treatment for a patient in a typical 12 hour veterinary hospital
Time
Drug
7 am
8 am
10 am
1 pm
2 pm
4 pm
7 pm
8 pm
Lutalyse? SQ, walk 20 min
X
X
X
X
X
Metoclopramide SQ if vomiting
X
X
X
Bromocriptine (tid) or
X
X
X
cabergoline (sid) PO
 Antibiotic PO or by injection
X
X(iftid)
X(ifbid)
Iable 9-4 Pyometra treatment for a patient in a 24 hour veterinary hospital
Time
Drug
7am
8 am
11 am
12
3 pm
4 pm
5 pm
7 pm
9 pm
11 pm
2 am
3 am
noon
Lutalyse? sQ, walk 20 min
X
X
X
 Metoclopramide SQ if
X
X
X
vomiting
Bromocriptine (tid) or
X
X
X
cabergoline (sid) PO
 Antibiotic PO or by
X
X
X
X
injection
(ifbid
(if TID)
(ifbid)
(if cid)
or cid)
The typical hospitalized patient should be on fluids, antibiotics, and prostaglandins, and may also
be on cabergoline and anti-emetics. She should begin to show clinical improvement with increased
appetite and decreased side effects within 48 hours. Her vaginal discharge should significantly
increase within 24 to 48 hours. Blood and urine chemistries should be monitored. The WBC will slowly
Uterine size should be reduced by at least 50% within 3 to 5 days. If this is not noted, administer
additional medical therapy or consider ovariohysterectomy. An underlying cause such as an ovarian
tumor may be the reason for a poor response to therapy.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 259
Summary
Diagnosis
History
CBC, Chemistry Panel, +/- coagulation panel to assess for DIC
Vaginal cytology
Ultrasound - be sure she is not pregnant
 Progesterone level - to determine if she will benefit from luteolytic therapy with bromocriptine
or cabergoline
Treatment
Lutalyse? or other luteolytic agent - walk the bitch
 Antibiotics
Fluid therapy
+/- Bromocriptine or Cabergoline
+/- Anti-emetic
+/- Misoprostol
Monitoring therapy
Ultrasound - treat until the uterus is 50% size originally treated. Repeat 2 weeks after
 completion of prostaglandin therapy.
Monitor volume of vaginal secretion
+/- CBC
Antibiotic therapy for 4 weeks
Surgical treatment risks
The risks of surgical treatment include anesthetic complications including death, peritonitis, renal
failure (which may become apparent up to several weeks post-op), DIC; and incision dehiscence.
Myocardial injury may occur secondary to endotoxemia, inflammation, septicemia, or infarction and
may contribute to unexpected deaths.
Medical treatment risks
The risks of medical treatment include uterine rupture, peritonitis, inflammation of the oviducts, renal
failure, DIC and death.
been utilized to treat pyometra, there are no reports supporting the use of this protocol.
260 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
evaluated and because of the variety of clinical presentations. The incidence may be no higher for
the affected than unaffected bitch. Fertility rates in bitches who responded rapidly (less than 5 days)
also appear to be unaffected.
One report showed a 93% rate of clinical resolution of pyometra after treatment with prostaglandins,
with 38 of 44 whelping healthy pups.
These patients are often valuable older bitches and they should be bred on each subsequent cycle
she relapses, pyometra reoccurs, if she later fails to become pregnant, or she is at the end of her
breeding career.
If it is more appropriate to delay breeding a young dog, mibolerone or other novel therapies to delay
estrous may be utilized.
Miscellaneous disorders of the female reproductive tract
Miscellaneous disorders of the female reproductive tract
associated with vaginal discharge
should always be a priority to diagnose early, other causes should not be overlooked. Bitches who
pyometra (Table 9-5).
Ovarian neoplasia
 Ovarian pathology exists in up to 29% of ovaries examined histologicaly according to one study
from 1960 (Figure 9-12)
exception of infertility or atypical estrous cycles
There are several kinds of ovarian neoplasia. It is relatively uncommon in the bitch. The most
common types of ovarian tumors are: adenocarcinoma, papillary adenomas and cystadenomas
(50%), and granulosa-cell tumors (40%) (GCT). Some are benign and some are malignant. The
unilateral, they tend to cause the opposite ovary to become inactive. Boxers, Boston Terriers,
German Shepherds, and English bulldogs may be predisposed to GCT; English pointers may be
Table 9-5 Miscellaneous disorders of the female reproductive tract
Abortion
Ovarian neoplasia
 Urinary tract disease
Brucellosis 
Ovarian remnant syndrome
Uterine neoplasia
Escrous
Pregnancy
Uterine scump pyometra
Hypoluteoidism
Prolonged estrous wich ovarian cyst
Vaginal foreign body
Intersex
Pyometra
Vaginal hyperplasia
 Metritis
Puppy vaginitis
Vaginal neoplasia
 Mibolerone use
SdIS
Vaginal polyp
 Mucometra
Transitional cell carcinoma
Vaginitis
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 261
In general, ovarian neoplasia has a low
 metastatic rate (30%), with the exception of
 teratomas and adeonomcarcinomas.
Patients with ovarian tumors may be
asymptomatic or may have anestrus, atypical
estrous cycles (prolonged or increased
frequency); pyometra; lactation; hair loss;
non-regenerative anemia or thrombocytopenia; or
show signs of abdominal distension, abdominal
 distress, vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss.
Diagnosis is best done by a skilled ultra-
 sonographer. These masses may be as large
as 30 cm. lf a mass is found, fine needle
Figure 9-12.
aspirate is NOT recommended, as this can lead
Ovarian neoplasia
to metastasis. Ovarian masses may also be
submitted for laboratory evaluation and discussed with the owner.
Suspicious ovarian tissue should be handled with care to minimize seeding the abdominal cavity
Some ovarian neoplasias are functional, secreting hormones, and some are not. Even the metastatic
lesions are sometimes functional. Metastasis may have already occurred by the time of diagnosis.
advanced or so invasive at the time of diagnosis that resection is not possible
pregnancy. The tumor usually contains tissues from 2 to 3 embryonic cell lines, and may contain
grotesque accumulations of hair, skin, other epithelium, fat, bone, teeth, and muscle. The prognosis
Is poor because of the high metastatic rate.
the resected tissues carefully to reduce exfoliation of tumor cells. Lavage the abdomen and remove
as much fluid as possible prior to closure
lf a breeding bitch has a unilateral tumor that is not a teratoma, unilateral ovariectomy may be
time of ovariectomy should be discussed with the client. There are reports that bitches treated with
unilateral ovariectomy have become pregnant.
Treatments for neoplasia are updated frequently. Referral to a veterinary oncologist should be
offered to all clients.
Uterine neoplasia
Uterine neoplasia is rare, accounting for less than 1% of cases in dogs, and is usually but not always
benign. The most common tumor types are leimyoma (found in 3 forms - intramural, intraluminal,
or expansile from the serosal surface); fbrolelomyoma, lipoma, tbroma, adenocarcinomas, heman
glosarcomas, and lymphomas (Figure 9-13)
It is most common in the intact bitch, but is reported to occur at the uterine stump.
262 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure 9-13.
A. Uterine polyp at surgery. B. Uterine polyp with uterine
wall opened, showing mass diagnosed as uterine polyp on
histology. The bitch presented with a fever and leukopenia
C. Lymphoma in a uterine horn. The bitch presented as in
estrus.
Bitches with uterine neoplasia usually present with a vaginal discharge which may be mistaken
for estrous. The diagnosis may be made on abdominal palpation, or imaging with radiographs or
abdominal ultrasound.
Treatment starts with ovariohysterectomy which may be unilateral, if the bitch is to be used for
breeding. The prognosis for benign neoplasia is excellent. The prognosis for future reproduction
remains guarded.
Patients with malignant neoplasia should be referred to a veterinary oncologist.
Ovarian remnant syndrome
Ovarian remnant syndrome is suspected when a dog that has undergone complete bilateral ovario-
behavioral signs of being receptive and attractive to male dogs. Vaginal cytology at the time of the
discharge should show cornifying epithelial cells and the associated red and white blood cells typical of
weeks and running a serum progesterone test. If the test results exceed 2 ng/ml, some remaining
 one or both ovaries, or ectopic ovarian tissue not appreciated during surgery (Figure 9-14).
It is important to determine if the bitch is indeed intact, and to rule out bladder infections, or
d pe   e s ae e  n s g a  
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 263
testing can confrm or rule out these disorders.
LH testing (canine specific) can also be done to
detect ovarian tissue which may not have been
removed or to determine if a female is intact prior
to surgery. Two LH tests, run 24 or more hours
apart, both with positive results, will confirm the
 presence of functional ovarian/tissue.
Treatment consists of exploratory laparotomy
and excision of remaining ovarian tissue.
Exploratory laparotomy during estrus or diestrus
makes locating the ovarian remnant(s) easier. A
non-surgical alternative is to use mibolerone or
GnRH agonists, but this should be reserved for
non-surgical candidates
Figure 9-14.
Ectopic ovarian tissue along the ovarian ligament (in a cat).
Without careful examination, this could easily be left behind
Mucometra and hydrometra
at an ovariohysterectomy
Mucometra is an accumulation of sterile mucus
in the uterus. Hydrometra is an accumulation of sterile fluid in the uterus. Ihese are frequently
diagnosed at routine ovariohysterectomy in the mature bitch. The incidence is unknown and is
complicated by bacterial invasion.
If a bitch is diagnosed with this at uterine biopsy or ultrasound for an infertility work-up, she can be
treated with Lutalyse? or cloprostenol as the only drug, at the doses recommended for pyometra
degree of uterine distension, vaginal cytology showing few bacteria and wBCs, and normal CBC. The
prognosis for return to fertility has not been reported.
Post-partum metritis
Pyometras differ from metritis in the timing - metritis occurs as a post-partum infection and
predisposing or preexisting metropathy. The patient tends to be acutely ill, febrile, and has a foul odor
to her vaginal discharge. Treat with an appropriate antibiotic, Lutalyse? or cloprostenol if indicated
needed if she is toxic or the uterus is in poor condition (See metritis, Chapter 7).
SIPS
Subinvolution of placental sites or SlPS is failure of the placental attachment sites to heal completely. It
is most common in bitches after their first litter. The only symptoms are an ongoing vaginal discharge
o suis mous ou o sdnd pue yg aul 'ned-isod syaam g ised snn apooa no pooa y
usually normal.
Diagnosis is usually based on vaginal cytology showing red blood cells, with only a few
morphologically normal white blood cells and a few bacteria. A CBC with a normal red blood cell.
white blood cell and platelet count will assure the veterinarian and owner that she is not anemic,
thrombocytopenic or suffering from metritis.
There is generally no indication for medical or surgical treatment. lt is a self-limiting disease that
problematic, prostaglandin F2 alpha can be used at 50 mcg/kg subcutaneously twice daily until
264 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
the red blood cells disappear on vaginal cytology. IF the prostaglandin F2 alpha is dispensed for
administration at home, carefully discuss the risks to human handing the product with the client. If
the bitch is ovarichysterectomized for another reason near this time, bands of green tissue may be
noted in the uterine lining. Ovariohysterectomy for SlPS is rarely indicated. (See Chapter /).
Segmental aplasia
Segmental aplasia of the uterus is a rare condition in dogs. lt occurs when a portion of the uterus is
not fully formed, leaving a blind pouch in the proximal uterine horn. When found, it is most commonly
seen in the right horn, and in West Highland White Terriers and related breeds. Most veterinarians
know this as "white heifer disease", the equivalent in cattle (Figure 9-15).
Diagnosis may be on ultrasound when evaluating
a bitch for infertility or pyometra, or at routine
ovariohysterectomy or C-section. The affected
horn may contain an accumulation of mucoid
fluid. The opposite horn is usually normal.
Treatment is by complete ovariohysterectomy
for a non-breeding bitch, or unilateral ovario-
hysterectomy for a bitch with reproductive
potential. Bitches can be successfully bred
following unilateral ovariohysterectomy.
Uterine torsion
Torsion of a pregnant uterine horn can occur in
late stage pregnancy. If dystocia is recognized
early and treated surgically with C-section, the
Figure 9-15.
prognosis for puppy and bitch survival and
Bitch at C-section with segmental hyperplasia and pyometra
sparing the uterus is very good. Many cases are in one uterine horn and viable fetus in opposite horn. The
mild and cause only dystocia. The typical labor 
affected horn was removed at surgery but the pregnant horn
was not removed. The bitch went on to produce a litter of 4
begins to progress, and then stops.
Overzealous use of oxytocin or delays in C-section may lead to uterine rupture, loss of life of the
fetuses, loss of the uterus, and potentially the loss of the bitch's life as well.
There is no specific method for diagnosis of this condition. Early recognition of abnormal labor patterns,
horn is necrotic from ischemia, the affected horn or the entire uterus may need to be removed.
Uterine prolapse
Uterine prolapse is less common in small animal medicine than in large animal medicine. It is rare in
addressed. Tissue trauma and swelling often make repositioning the uterus into the abdominal cavity
Vaginal fold prolapse or Hyperplasia
During proestrus and estrus, some bitches may have such marked edema of the vaginal folds that
this tissue will prolapse through the lips of the vulva. The amount of tissue exposed can be quite
startling. This has the appearance of a large red doughnut, with varying amounts of tissue exposed.
This should not be mistaken for a tumor or other form of neoplasia (Figure 9-16).
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 265
Figure9-16.
A-D. Vaginal hyperplasia. E. Vaginal hyperplasia after repair.
266 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
This is the vaginal tissue's response to estrogen. It typically resolves as the bitch enters diestrus,
and on rare occasion will recur near whelping. If the hyperplastic tissue reappears at whelping, a
C-section may be required.
Treatment consists of protecting the tissues from trauma and excessive licking. Gently clean the
the exposed tissues. Using a water-soluble gel such as K-Y Jelly? or witch hazel and a pair of boxer
a e   e  a         a 
tissues. Hormonal intervention to induce ovulation does not speed resolution and may increase the
risk of pyometra development.
Rarely, if the tissues do not spontaneously diminish in size, the excess may need to be resected
resection. Preserving the integrity of the urethra should be foremost. It can be identified and
and may have associated risks.
This is common in the Boxer, but is also seen in other brachycephalic and giant breeds. Occurrence
on one cycle predicts to recurrence at subsequent cycles.
by ovulation, vaginal Al may be required. Following resolution, the bitch may develop an unusual
vaginal discharge several weeks after the start of diestrus as the fluid trapped upstream is permitted
to escape.
Dysuria is rare despite urethral displacement. Several clues help to differentiate vaginal fold
Second, vaginal fold hyperplasia usually originates on the ventral floor of the vagina (assessed with a
gloved tinger manipulation). Third, vaginal fold hyperplasia will usually regress after the bitch enters
diestrus. Fourth, bitches with vaginal fold hyperplasia often have a family history of the condition.
Vaginal masses
Neoplasia of the vagina is relatively rare, representing 2.5% of all canine tumors, with 70% of these
masses being benign. Leimyoma is the most common benign mass of the vagina. Transmissible
TVTs are seen regionally, in warm or tropical climates.
Vaginal masses occur in both intact and spayed dogs. Symptoms include a visible vaginal mass,
in that the prolapse is seen in prcestrus and estrus and resolves spontaneously. They also differ in
appearance - the masses are usually smooth and pedunculated whereas the fold prolapses are
usualy doughnut-shaped. The I Vl is offen ulcerated and irregular on the surface.
masses. The prognosis and treatment varies with the type of mass. Infrequently, a transitional cell
      a    
Vaginal foreign bodies
Any unexplained vaginal discharge should be evaluated for vaginal foreign bodies. This can be
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 267
anesthesia may be required for most bitches, particularly if they are not in estrus.
Although not common, foreign bodies should part of the differential. Objects may be introduced
accidentally, iatrogenically during veterinary procedures, or intentionally as seen in animal abuse cases.
Puppy vaginitis
Puppy vaginitis is very common in the pre-pubertal bitch. The typical patient is a normal healthy
unnoticed by the owner, until it is pointed out during the wellness visit (See Figure 8-15).
There is a sticky yellow vaginal discharge from the vulva, which is also frequently pasted in the
surrounding haircoat. She may lick her vulva, and have urinary accidents or the puppy will be norma
clinically. Diagnosis is made on vaginal cytology, vaginoscopy, and physical examination. Frequently
the culture is unremarkable.
In mild cases, when neither the pup nor owner are affected, benign neglect (i.e. no treatment) may
be the best option.
Treatment of the puppy with no urinary signs is accomplished by instiling antibiotics in the vaginal
vestibule, inserted gently with a syringe, and sending her cutside for 10 minutes to keep the carpet
clean. Ireat for a maximum of 5 days to prevent development ot a secondary fungal infection. The
dosed at 20 mcg/kg twice a week or every 4 days for 2 weeks will relieve symptoms. Long-term
antibiotics and premarin.
heat cycle will allow the vaginal epithelium to mature and symptoms will resolve. Many bitch puppies
allowing it to develop a mature contrmation. Allowing the bitch to go through puberty can lead to
Allowing the bitch to experience one heat cycle predisposes her to a negligibly increased risk of
 o  ua  sn s a oi od s s aus s s A 
lifetime of vaginitis, dermatitis, and/or chronic urinary tract disease.
Uterine stump pyometra
This occurs in the previously ovariohysterectomized bitch. The bitch typically presents with a
muco-purulent vaginal discharge and may also be ill with depression, loss of appetite and elevated
WBCs. Closed-cervix uterine stump pyometras can be difficult to diagnose without abdominal
ultrasound, and should be included in the differential for any sick female dog. Uterine stump pyometra
is often very near the bladder. One half to three quarters of the affected bitches have residual ovarian
  d   n l   i s e    - 
Ireatment is surgical and requires removal of the affected uterine tissue, remaining non-absorbed
suture material, and residual ovarian tissues. Resection of the uterine stump Is sometimes
complicated by adheslons fo the urinary bladder.
with a faster post-op recovery. In many practices, it is now done laparoscopically. If done with
268 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
complete removal of both ovaries, there is no increase in the rate of uterine stump pyometra over
the traditional ovariohysterectomy.
Other findings
Determining all the causes of infertility is not possible. There are almost certainly infectious causes
that have not yet been determined. Assessing patency of the oviducts is not a technique available.
There are aberrant findings that may or may not be tied to infertility. Visceral larval migrans, can
cause unusual and suspicious lesions, but is probably not a cause of infertility. More study is needed
to determine the etiology of these lesions (Figure 9-17).
The accidental breeding
that one took place in their absence.
The first thing the client can do is have vaginal cytology done to determine the stage of her estrous
cycle and to look for sperm. Progesterone testing should also be considered. The presence
of cornified vaginal epithelial cells, a progesterone between 3 ng/ml and 30 ng/ml, and/or the
the bitch will not conceive. No treatment should be administered at this time.
1
Figure 9-17.
Visceral larral migrans lessions. A. Ascarid lesion on the
kidney. B. Ascarid intestinal lesion. C. Ascarid lesion on the
liver.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 269
In a study done by Autumn Davidson, only 60% of allbitches with 1 witnessed breeding were
conhrmed pregnant. The current recommendation is to wait until 28 days, assess for pregnancy on
ultrasound, and develop a treatment plan based on the results.
Side effects include pyometra, pregnancy that continues despite treatment, and death due to bone
marrow suppression caused by the estrogens. Better alternative treatments are available
Options for the brood bitch
If the pregnancy is confirmed on ultrasound at day 26 to 28, 3 options can be offered to the client
1. Allow the bitch to carry the litter to term. This can be an opportunity for her to learn to care
for pups. Some clients will be open to this - particularly if she is pregnant with a litter of pups
from her breed or if she was intended to be bred to that male, just at another time.
the bitch will end her breeding career. For bitches who were not intended to be bred, who are
likely to have a difficult pregnancy, or who are pregnant with mixed-breed pups, this may be a
reasonable option.
3. Interrupt the pregnancy pharmacologically with a luteolytic drug. The protocal is a safe and
effectivealternativetoovariohysterectomy.
Interrupting the unwanted pregnancy
Luteolytic agents have changed the treatment options for clients who tind themselves with a bitch
pregnant with an unwanted litter.
owner. Ihe dose ranges from starts at 10 mcg/kg and is increased to 50 mcg/kg 3 to 5 times a
day given subcutaneously for a minimum of 5 days.
Ireatment may take up to 12 days in young large breeds with large liters. Use ultrasound to assess
fetuses pass.
Lutalyse? has some potential risks for the staff handling the drug and predictable side effects to the
patient (See Pyometra earlier in this chapter).
Cloprostenol (Estrumate?), is an effective alternative and is less costly. It should be used instead of
Lutalyse*, not along with it. Although the side effects are similar to those of Lutalyse*, it is easier on
the bitch because only need 2 or 3 doses are needed and no hospitalization is required.
The protocol is as follows:
On day 26 to 28 from breeding, the bitch should be scheduled for abdominal ultrasound. If she is
pregnant, the first dose of cloprostenol is given - the dose is 1.0 to 2.5 mcg/kg IM, with large
breed bitches, Labradors, Rottweilers, and bitches pregnant with large litters receiving the
upper end of the dose. Diluting the drug with sterile water will minimize side effects. The bitch
should be walked for 15 to 20 minutes following the injection, prior to traveling, to minimize
the side effects of vomiting and diarrhea. She does not need to be hospitalized. Advise the
client that fetuses may be seen to pass if treatment is initiated late in pregnancy.
270 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Four to five days later, the bitch should return for a second ultrasound and progesterone
testing. Administer the second injection of cloprostenol at the same dose and with the same
progesterone level is over 2 ng/ml, she should return for a 3rd injection in 5 more days. IF the
fetal structures look like they are collapsing inward and the progesterone is less than 2 ng/ml
treatment is completed with only 2 injections.
If the progesterone at the second visit was greater than 2 mg/dl, five days later, the bitch should
return for a 3rd ultrasound, progesterone testing, and 3rd injection. If her ultrasound and
should be added to the protocol. Although this is seldom necessary, in some large bitches
pregnant with large litters, this may be indicated.
The third option is cabergoline OR bromocriptine alone, or combined with Lutalyse?. The
cabergoline only protocol causes the least severe side effects but is not consistently effective
in terminating a pregnancy.
can be started. The dose is 5 mcg/kg once daily until ultrasound confirms that the pregnancy
is terminated. For small bitches, cabergoline can be compounded in cil by a compounding
to aid in passing the pups. Aglepristone is an effective alternative but is not an FDA approved
drug in the US.
Special breedings
The American Kennel Club recently began to accept registrations of liters as purebred AKC
without DNA proot of paternity
This policy includes breedings done intentionally with the semen of 2 or more fathers as well as from
breedings planned by the dogs but not their owners.
DNA must be collected and submitted on all pups, the mother, and all potential fathers. As the DNA
is collected from the pups, some form of permanent identification must be used so the correct
father's name is on the pup's registration. Although microchips are not labeled for use in pups this
young, this is a successful means of permanent identification. No microchip migration problems
The samples are submitted for testing at an AKC-approved laboratory, and the results can be
 o ag oi pun ae sdnd au fl 'aat leope ue lot a  no lapaag au ag paaudia
than 1 father, there is a special form and an additional fee to register the litter. More information is
Mammary tumors
Most mammary tumors are discovered by the client, the veterinary staff, or the veterinarian on
digital examination of the mammary chain (Figure 9-18).
Mammary tumors are the second most common neoplasia in female dogs, second only to skin
tumors. They represent 42 to 50% of all tumors seen. Approximately one half are histologically
tumor is noted.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 271
Figure 9-18.
A. and B. Inflammatory mammary carcinoma. This tumor
carries such a poor prognosis that excision should not be
attempted. C.Adenocarcinoma.This tumor has a guarded
prognosis.
There are 2 basic types of mammary tumors: 1) the solitary mass or masses, in varying sizes,
shapes, and textures, located anywhere along the mammary chain and 2) the inflammatory
mammary carcinoma.
An inguinal hernia may be confused with a mammary mass. Other mammary pathology includes:
fbrous hyperplasia, seen after an estrous cycle pseudopregnancy/pseudowhelping; galactostasis;
mastitis; abscesses; foreign bodies; granulomas; and other non-mammary neoplasias. Mammary
hypertrophy or fibroadenomatous hyperplasia is seen in young cats. Most mammary pathology is
Inflammatory mammary carcinoma
This is a devastating, highly malignant form of mammary cancer that is rarely seen in dogs.
Bitches with this disease will present acutely ill. They have warm painful diffuse nodular or rash-like
dermal lesions, often covering the entire mammary chain. Regions may be ulcerated. Although the
mammary chain is uniformly frm, there are no discrete masses like those seen in most patients with
mammary tumors. Clinically this may mimic mastitis, but is usually seen in an older bitch who is not
postpartum or even intact. Frequently they have edema to the rear limbs, associated with blocked
lymphatics and had previously had one or more benign or malignant mammary tumors diagnosed.
By the time they present, 1o0% of the affected bitches have lymph node metastasis. By
presentation, 32% have metastases to the lungs, visible on thoracic radiographs. Many present in
DIC with petecchial hemorrhages visible. This is a grave disease, with only a 25 day average survival
272 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
time. Surgical resection is NEVER indicated, because they will die of the disease prior to surgical
48 hours! Confirmation of disease may be done, if necessary, by biopsy of a small sample and
histopathology. The only therapy is palliative - anti-inflammatory and pain medication. Piroxicam has
been reported to lead to a longer survival time than doxorubicin.
Primary mammary tumors
examination. All bitches, whether intact or spayed, should have a complete palpation of the mammary
chain during wellness visits, at presentation for illness, or while under anesthesia for other procedures.
When discussing mammary tumors with clients, you may find when you use the term mammary
tumor or mammary neoplasia, you get a blank look from your clent(s). Substitution of the term
"breast cancer" will not only improve the client's understanding of the disorder, but will move them fo
action. This small difference in terminology can save your patient's life.
Palpation is the basic method of detecting mammary tumors. Although fine needle aspiration of
the tumor is often suggested for diagnosis, this Is primarily of value for ruling in other mammary
diseases, not ruling cut mammary tumors. The mammary tumors seen in dogs are offen
heterogeneous, and the small sample taken by needle aspirate or biopsy will not be representative
of the mass - only 67.5% of FNAs are accurate. This may mislead the veterinarian into believing
there is no evidence of neoplasia. Each mammary mass must be individually evaluated because
each individual tumor has a 50% chance of being malignant. The preferred method of diagnosis of
mammary gland disease is to remove each gland for submisslon to a pathologist.
Most mammary tumors in dogs are of epithelial origin, with half being malignant and half being
benign. As a rule of thumb, small dogs with small tumors have the lowest malignancy rate and
large dogs with large tumors have the highest malignancy rate. Some of the more malignant types
originate from other cell lines; tumors such as sarcomas or mast cell tumors should always be
considered malignant.
Risk factors
There is strong evidence in the dog that early ovariohysterectomy is protective.
Other risk factors include previous mammary tumor - 65% of bitches with 1 tumor will have a
increased risk when the bitch has been treated with progestins; and size of the mass - the larger the
mass, the more likely it is to be malignant (Table 9-6)
There is no sparing effect of pregnancy and lactation in the dog, as is seen in women.
Table 9-6 Incidence of mammary tumors associated with ovariohysterectomy
Age of ovariohysterectomy
 Incidence of mammary tumors associated wich ovariohysterectomy:
Prior to che frst estrous
0.5%
Prior to the second estrous
8%
Prior to che chird estrous
26%
After the chird estrous
No protective value
(adapted from Schneider R, Dorn COPYRIGHT, Taylor DO: Factors influencing canine mammary cancer development and postsurgical survival. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1969; Dec; 43(6): 1249-1261.)
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 273
Diagnosing and staging mammary tumors
Most mammary tumors are firm, round to cblong nodular structures. The masses can vary in size,
have a higher number of masses than the cranial glands.
Over 50% of bitches affected have multiple mammary tumors; 1 study has shown that 37% of
needle aspiration and/or biopsy of the tumor often produces misleading results. Complete excision
and submitting the entire mass for histology will lead to a more accurate prognosis
Determining the type of tumor and staging the tumors: (modified Owen)
The following are the types of mammary tumors described in the literature:
Adenocarcinoma
Anaplastic carcinoma
Inflammatory carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Malignant Mixed Mammary Tumor
Carcinosarcoma
Sarcoma
CBC/Chemistry panel/urinalysis (if collected by cystocentesis, be careful to avoid placing the
suspected of having inflammatory carcinoma or that have a high risk of metastasis because of the
associated risk of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DlC).
Abdominal radiographs or ultrasound to assess regional lymph nodes, particularly the sublumbar
ymph nodes.
Thoracic Radiographs, with 3 views. Although CT has a slightly higher yield in detecting metastases,
the WHo staging protocol still relies on radiographic detection.
Palpation of regional lymph nodes.
As with all veterinary diagnostic and treatment plans, the client's resources must be factored into
offered to owners of dogs with all but the least complicated disease.
Treatment of mammary tumors
                 
outgrowing its blood supply. Appropriate treatment dictates that all ulcerated or necrotic tumors
274 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
conservative therapy (attempting to close the wound). IF an owner does not consent to surgery,
euthanasia should be discussed as the most humane alternative.
Surgical therapy
Ovariohysterectomy should be done before tumor removal to prevent seeding the abdominal cavity
with cells from the mammary neoplasia. The abdominal incision should be placed away from the site
of a tumor for the same reason.
Dogs have 5 pairs of mammary glands and cats have 4 pairs, in most cases. They are numbered
tends to anastomose. A surgical anatomy book should be consulted prior to surgery if the surgeon
ymphatics, while mesenchymal tumors tend to spread via the bloodstream.
the size of the tumor. This can be very helpful in patients with medium to large tumors, who are
lactating, or with bloody fluid in the gland. Cabergoline should be dosed at 5 mcg/kg once daily for 5
the surgeon, and the client (less expense).
The surgeon should plan an aggressive surgical approach. The entire affected mammary gland should
humans do not apply to the dog - the post-op bitch does not have a body image concern.
The following principles of surgical oncology should be applied to removal of mammary tumors, and
to other potential neoplastic tissues:
Change gloves and instruments if additional surgical incisions are to be made after the mammary
and fine needle aspirate tracts; because mammary tumors are not uniform in cell distribution, fine
needle aspiration and biopsies may lead to an inaccurate diagnosis and prognosis.
Ligate all vessels early, particularly venous supply to minimize metastasis;
Take wide margins;
Keep the manipulation of the tumor minimal and gentle;
In general, drains are contraindicated as they can lead to tumor seeding through the drainage tract
Some clients need to be reassured that surgical removal of the primary tumor has greater
the entire affected gland (mammectomy) to radical mastectomies. There is ongoing controversy.
Current recommendations are to remove the entire affected gland on most patients. There is no
evidence supporting that a radical mastectomy provides a longer survival time than a single gland
mastectomy. Cancer death in dogs is not thought to be caused by the primary tumor, but by the
metastases. The most important factor is to remove all of the affected tissue, plus 1 tissue plane
deep to the tumor. "Peeling cut" a mammary tumor is poor surgical technique because it leaves the
most aggressive components of the tumor behind
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 275
in your hands. Under anesthesia, positioned on her back, you can determine how much tissue there
granulate in is preferable to a wound with tumor cells left behind.
sharp dissection, using excellent hemostasis. Electrosurgery and laser surgery can interfere with
Anu patea agnop pue payuapi ag pinous Aayi 'spuea Aeweu yg pue yt a Addns
prior to being incised.
Extend the incision through the subcutaneous tissue down to, but not including the body wall unless
the tumor involves the body wall. Once the gland is elevated one tissue plane deep to the tumor,
pair of Metzenbaum scissors through the tissues in the plane established. The underlying muscle
should generally not be incised. Even if the muscle wall requires some excision, in all cases, avcid
tumorcells
A radical mastectomy as a first surgical procedure is only recommended if so many neighboring
glands are involved that they cannot be removed individually. This is especially true when the 4th and
staging of the resection. In this way, enough involved glandular tissue can be removed fo atfempt to
cure the patient, but also fo allow closure of the surgical wound.
It is better to remove too much tissue than too little. "One study of dogs with incompletely resected
mammary gland tumors revealed that /5% were dead within 2 years of initial presentation"
tissue that must be removed. Drains are best avoided as they are messy for clients to manage, and
the suture line. These include the use of skin flaps, releasing incisions, "walking sutures" or including
tubing or buttons in the suture to ease tension on the skin. Walking sutures can cause increased
post-op pain because of the immobility of the tissues post-op. The reduction in suture tension
and seroma formation usually offset the disadvantages. Small suture material, such as 3-0 or 4-0
monoflament absorbable with a taper needle should be used. The technique for walking sutures Is
as follows:
The suture placement should be sequential from cranial to caudal or caudal to cranial.
The skin is elevated by lifting with a thumb forceps.
The first bite of tissue is taken into the dermis at the deep margin of the undermined skin, well back
from the edge of the cut margin of the skin.
The second bite is taken on the body wall side, into the fascia, closer to the center of the wound. A
row of sutures can be pre-placed in the same row as far from the skin incision as possible.
Sutures should be placed 2 to 3 cm apart, in 1 row.
Once the row furthest from the incision has all the sutures pre-placed, the knots can be tied.
276 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A second row of sutures can be placed, staggered with the first row, on the same side of the
incision, but closer to the cut edge of the skin. Again these can be pre-placed and then all tied.
This can be repeated on the opposite side of the skin incision in 1 to 3 rows as needed based on the
extent of the surgical incision.
During placement of the sutures, towel clamps may be used to hold the skin in apposition, to reduce
heat loss and drying of the tissues.
are recommended.
The patient must be kept well-hydrated and warm throughout the procedure. The extensive size of
the incision and length of time in surgery will cause both fluid and heat loss. Continuously infuse
warmed IV fuids. The patient should be kept warm with circulating water blankets, warm air
circulating heaters, or other techniques, taking care not to cause thermal burns.
Post-op complications
Surgery on the mammary glands is relatively painful. Radical mastectomies lead to very painful
recoverles. Ireatment should include excellent pre-operative, intra-operative, and post-operative pain
management. Drugs often used include opioids, CRl pain medications, Fentanyl? by CRl or patch
local anesthesla, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories. Cold compresses post-op are also helpful
Lymphedema - one or both rear limbs may develop edema if the surgical excision is extensive
Seromas commonly develop at the surgical site. Careful closure of the wound to minimize dead
space in the subcutaneous tissues will minimize seroma formation. They are not painful but may
delay wound healing. The only reason to aspirate a seroma is fo differentiate it from an abscess
aspirate all the fluid is non-productive because it will re-accumulate quickly. Minimizing post-op
Post-op wound infection is associated with fever, pain and wound dehiscence. Antibiotics should be
started as soon as fluid is collected for culture and sensitivity testing. Ihe antibiotic can be changed
depending on the test results.
Ovariohysterectomy remains controversial. There is no protective effect. The bitch will not benefit by
reducing the likelihood of developing more tumors.
The only advantage is that she will not have additional heat cycles, there will be no accidental
breedings (remember, dogs do not go through menopause), and she will not have fo endure another
Some owners opt fo leave the bitch intact because they may plan to breed her again (please leave
her some mammary tissue and the associated nipples if this is fo be the case) and some owners
females with mammary tumors had a 16 times greater incidence of ovarian pathology than those
without mammary tumors. This is strong evidence that the bitch will benefit from ovariectomy or
If a breeding bitch with a planned surgical insemination has a single mammary mass, a lumpectomy
and histopathology Is recommended. The nipple should be left if possible to allow for lactation. A
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 277
tumors, the owner should be advised and future breeding plans reconsidered.
Removal of the lymph nodes does not change the prognosis or survival time post-op. However, the
inguinal lymph node(s) are frequently included in the inguinal fat pad excised when the 5th mammary
preterably through a separate skin incision.
Medical therapy of the mammary tumor
In almost every case, surgery should be recommended, with other therapies used to augment
treatment.
Chemotherapy is only recommended for dogs with the highest grade of malignancy. This includes
tumors shown to have vascular invasion, lymph vessel invasion, a high mitotic rate, and/or infiltrative
Cats, by contrast, have much more aggressive tumors, with 85% malignant with metastases. Cat
Referral to a veterinary oncologist for paliative radiation therapy may be considered as an adjunct to
surgery to improve local control in dogs with non-resectable lesions.
tumors (93/100) lack the hormone receptor that is the key to its use. There is some research that
therapy in the future.
There is strong evidence that COX-2 receptors have been found on certain highly malignant
mammary tumors. This suggests that COX-2 inhibitors, specifically Piroxicam, may be of use in the
treatment of malignant mammary tumors. This is similar to work being done to treat other canine
other COX-2 inhibitors such as meloxicam or carprofen available, but they are under scrutiny.
             s  
to continue it for the rest of the dog or cat's life. It is theorized that this may reduce the metastatic
behavior of the tumors. Piroxicam should be dosed very carefully as the margin of safety is narrow
    n  u    o si       s m
every 48 hours. Often, these will need to be compounded by a compounding pharmacy because
with the side effects of piroxicam and advise the owner of them prior to starting therapy. Piroxicam
Prognosis
Tumor markers are not useful in clinical practice.
Age should not be considered a poor prognostic indicator nor a reason to deny a patient a surgical
option. If lung or other metastases are found pre-op, palliative removal of the mammary tumor(s)
may still be considered if quality of life is likely to be improved.
tumors. There is a longer survival time in general in dogs with tumors smaller than 3 cm. Dogs with
survival times. A cure can be achieved in most cases with complete surgical resection of a benign or
low-grade mammary malignancy.
278 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The prognosis should be based on the most malignant mass removed. The general impression is
approximately 15% of bitches diagnosed with mammary tumors die of their disease.
prognosis than dogs with epithelial tumors.
Vascular invasion, lymph vessel invasion, a high mitotic rate, and/or intltrative growth are all
considered in the prognosis. The histologic features of each tumor submitted should be evaluated
separately. The pathologist who read the tissues should be contacted regarding the completeness of
radical mastectomy may sometimes be recommended.
Mammary tumors in cats are very different than in dogs. Cats have an 85% malignancy and
  t    e           
cat should go back to surgery. Cats with malignant mammary tumors or a tumor(s) larger than 3 cm
 at presentation should have bilateral radical mastectomies and be referred for chemotherapy.
Summary of surgical recommendations for mammary tumor removal
understands what you are worried about and why they should opt for surgery early on in the course
of the disease.
bloody fluid in the gland.
Use ligatures early in the procedure to minimize vascular metastasis.
Do not use drains. Instead use "walking sutures" to minimize tension and dead space in the incision.
Excise biopsy and tine needle aspirate tracts.
Change gloves and instruments prior fo wound closure.
Go back to surgery to perform a radical mastectomy if indicated based on histopathology.
Use excellent pain management for any patient with surgical removal of mammary tumors
particularly for patients who have had radical mastectomies.
Although the surgery is done aseptically, many patients benefit from post-op use of antibiotics.
Chapter 9: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Bitch 279
Offer a referral to a veterinary oncologist.
Consider the lifetime use of piroxicam in any malignant mammary tumor.
Remember to treat cats differently than dogs.
280 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
CHAPTER
10
Infertility and Reproductive
Disorders in the
Valuable Stud Dog
Breeding soundness evaluation including complete physica
examination, history, and semen analysis
(Table 10-1)
estrus bitch; abnormalities in the ejaculate; abnormal testes, scrotum, prepuce or penis; discharge
  n  s      d e 
p ns an jo una ui dais on ue si Aosy ydapi pue uoxa gisyd aiad 
The evaluation should include information on his libido, ability to copulate and ejaculate normally, and to
BREEDING SOUNDNESS EVALUTION form available on their website for use of SFT members.
Breeding history
A complete history needs to include the call name and registered name of the stud dog, the owner
birth and registration, microchip and/or tattoo numbers.
dogs may be transiently infertile and older dogs have a multitude of age-related reproductive
problems. Previous illnesses and results from diagnostic testing may shed light on the current
health concern. Any history of recent thermal insult to the testes or scrotum is particularly
Table 10-1 Summary of causes of infertility or sterility
 Potential cause
 Diagnostics and treatme nts to consider:
General illness
Complete physical examination, CBC, Chem panel, consider ultrasound
Incomplece ejaculate
Alkaline phosphacase on ejaculace, teaser bitch at next attempt
Thyroid disease
Thyroid profile at Michigan State
Fever
History
Hernia — scrotal or inguinal
Physical examination
Intersex chromosomes
Karotype - especially consider for Kerry Blue Terrier, Pug, English Cocker, Beagle,
Weimaraner, German Shorthair Pointer.
Trauma or torsion
History, palpation
Orchitis
Physical examination, Brucella test, culcure
Autoimmune disease
History, palpation, size, testicular biopsy
Testicular cumor
Palpation, ultrasound the testes
Obstructive disease
Palpation, ultrasound, testicular biopsy, alkaline phosphatase on ejaculate
Retrograde ejaculation
Urinalysis by catheterization post-ejaculation
Stress/work
History ofbreeding overuse
Adrenal gland disease
ACTH stimulation, and/or low dose dexamethasone tests
Infection
Culcure, Brucella test
Prostate disease
Rectal examination, ultrasound, prostate biopsy, CPSE blood test, culture
Medications
History of sceroids, cancer drugs, ketoconazole, hormones
Contaminated equipment
 Repeat using disposable equipment
 Immotile cilia syndrome
 Electron microscopy on sperm cails, choracic radiograph
282 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
inflammation of the testicles or scrotum could cause impairment of spermatogenesis.
If the dog has never sired a litter, congenital causes of infertility should be investigated. If he has
sired a litter in the past but not recently, the condition could be either acute or chronic. lf the dog
has recently sired a litter, acute conditions should be investigated first.
Housing conditions should be evaluated, preferably with a personal visit to the kennel or home.
Crowding, stress due to other intact males, or multiple bitches in season in the household may
contribute to physical and psychological concerns. Excessive heat and cold conditions in sleeping
as well as shampoos and other topical treatments and chemicals applied to the surrounding areas
such as agricultural treatments may cause infertility. Iravel, particularly without the owner, may
diseases not typically seen in the dog's home area. Marginal nutrition may also lead to infertility.
Trauma to any portion of the urogenital tract can lead to infertility. Scrotal trauma may cause
wounds, foreign bodies (both accidental and malicious) and fractures of the os penis will create pain
and/or an inability to copulate.
by oral or injectable routes as well as those applied topically, are known to cause reduced sperm
mediated infertility, these conditions must be considered. Information regarding related dogs may
help decide which diagnostics to run first.
Previous semen analysis, use of a teaser bitch, techniques and equipment used to collect and
evaluate the semen are important factors. No intact male dog, without an exceptional reason,
should be classifed as infertile or sterile on one semen analysis alone. Some dogs are reluctant
to ejaculate in unfamiliar surroundings or without a teaser bitch. In some instances, contaminants
assumption that the sperm quality is poor. For this reason, several evaluations should be made prior
to classifying him as infertile or sterile.
The physical examination should be thorough and begin with the non-reproductive systems. Many
apparently unrelated disorders can influence fertility (such as orthopedic disease) or may reveal
abnormalities related to fertility (such as alopecia suggesting an endocrinopathy).
The reproductive aspects of the physical examination
Palpation of the scrotum
The scrotal skin should be evaluated for thickening, tumors, or skin lesions. Abnormal contents could
suggest an inguinal hernia.
Palpation of the testes
Iwo testes should be present. They should be trm, oval, and symmetrical in consistency, size
and shape. The epididymis should be palpated and should be felt to wrap around the testicle and
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 283
variation in size between the 2 testes should be noted. If one or both are noticeably soft (indicating
atrophy) or have a noticeable firm nodule (indicating a mass) or firm texture (indicating acute
orchitis or other swelling) within, this should be investigated. The testes should be measured in all 3
dimensions with a caliper to detect subtle differences in size between the 2 testes and to document
the size as a baseline as the dog ages. Ultrasound is more sensitive than palpation in detecting
changes in the testicular architecture.
Evaluation of the penis and prepuce
held in lateral recumbency and the non-erect penis can be exteriorized gently. It is best to reflect
collection. The os penis should be palpated for evidence of trauma or congenital abnormalities.
Palpation of the prostate and pelvic urethra
   ad ae i d s     t o    s s
in the rectum so the size, shape, and the character of the entire prostate can be appreciated. The
the two lobes notable on palpation
Evaluation of the mammary chain
The mammary glands should be small and unremarkable.
Collecting the stud dog
Ideally, the stud dog should have a minimum of 5 days of sexual rest prior to semen collection
for analysis. If significant abnormalities are noted in the ejaculate and the dog has had prolonged
abnormalities.
Supplies for semen collection and evaluation
A clear plastic disposable artificial vagina with a clear plastic disposable graduated centrifuge tube
attached will be needed. Clear artificial vaginas with clear centrifuge tubes allow the collector to
assess for the stage, volume, and content of the ejaculate. lf urine, blood, or excessive prostatic
fraction of the ejaculate (Figure 10-1)
Some who collect prefer to use a funnel system and change tubes between the 3 fractions of the
collection. The supplies needed include:
Artificial vagina with collection tube
Non-latex exam gloves, rinsed with saline to reduce the powder on the surface;
Non-spermicidal lubricant;
Microscope;
Microscope slides and coverslips;
Waterbath, slide warmer, or heating pad;
284 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure 10-1.
A. The disposable collection sleeve is preferred over
reusable sleeves because there is no cross contamination
and no danger that disinfectants will alter sperm quality
B. Small dogs are more easily collected on a table than on
the floor if they have secure footing and are accustomed
to being handled on a table. C. Large dogs, or dogs that
are unfamiliar with a table are better collected on a non-slip
surface on the floor.
Hemocytometer;
Unopettes? or alternate lysing solution
Sterile saline, replace with a fresh bag or bottle after no more than 24 hours;
Live-dead stain;
Eosin-nigrosin stain
Centrifuge tubes
Centrifuge that can spin at 1000 rpm.
Semen collection by manual ejaculation is a procedure done daily in the busy reproduction-oriented
practice. However, there are many other occasions in veterinary practice that this technique is valuable.
The obvious uses for semen collection are insemination, shipment of semen for breeding at remote
requested by clients with intact male dogs - sometimes hoping they are still fertile and sometimes
hoping they are not. Evaluation of ejaculated prostatic fluid with or without the sperm rich fraction is
au uunmexa sapnoun sul pauexa aq on si aeisod aun uaum dn-yom onsouaep Aue un algenga
prostate for benign prostatic hypertrophy, prostatic abscessation, and prostatic malignancy.
Not only can the ejaculate be evaluated for the presence of sperm, it is also useful for determining
the sperm count, sperm morphology, sperm motility, semen viscosity, pH, color and the presence of
other cells
Chapter 10: Infertity and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 285
In many cases, ejaculation is the best or only way to obtain these samples. Semen cannot be
blood-testicular barrier so necessary to maintain fertility. Prostatic massage produces a substandard
sample of prostatic fluid, whether to be used for cytology or culture.
e paau no sao au ane so aela ue pao on nno io sop an 'sas aos u
associated with his reproductive organs, or is too ill to focus on the process. It can also be difficult
to arrange in advance for a teaser bitch, well known to aid in semen collection by ejaculation, when
the demand of the veterinary clinic's schedule does not allow for access on short notice to an estrus
bitch. In these cases, the best alternative must be sought.
Location
The following is a description of the "ideal" situation for semen collection. In general, the stud dog
should NoT be allowed to urinate just prior to collection for 2 reasons. First, the ejaculate is likely to
be contaminated with urine, which will alter sperm motility and longevity. Second, older dogs are less
likely to retrograde ejaculate with a fuller bladder.
The ideal location is in a quiet room with good footing. Rugs are used not only for providing good
ao Aeo oi ose ing laauy oi suoao uoshad aun ot aold os e pue siop aun lapun suo
the odor from the previous bitch in season. These rugs are infrequently laundered to enhance the
aroma of the area for the stud dog. lIt is best to use the same entrance to the hospital and the same
collections easier. For dogs that are easily distracted, telephone ringers, timers and cell phones
should be turned off. Staff should not knock on the door or enter during collection of a distractible or
shy dog.
Staff and doctors
If the dog has a preference, when possible, the person collecting should remain consistent as this
again is psychologically beneticial to the dog. Some dogs develop "white coat syndrome." If the
dog is reluctant to collect, removing lab coats and stethoscopes from the collector can improve the
dog's level of comfort. Two staff members should be present - one to steady the teaser bitch and
one to collect the stud dog.
The audience
Most dogs will do well with the owner or handler present. The handler may stand next to the dog
but should be instructed to hold the leash loosely (assuming the dog does not bite) and should keep
handlers and talking can be misinterpreted by the dog to mean they are doing something they should
not be doing. Other people should not be in the room.
The teaser bitch
This is an essential component of the collection effort. The ideal bitch is of the same breed as the
stud dog and in standing heat. Many stud dogs prefer their own breed and even individuals within
the breed. If the stud dog's one true love is available but not in season, she may be used if scented
with the secretions of an estrus bitch that has been preserved in the freezer and resuspended in
saline. In most cases, an estrus bitch will needed. In general, any bitch in standing heat will have to
However, a match of size, temperament, color, or body type may improve the level of cooperation of
a reluctant stud dog.
286 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
If there is contact between the stud dog and bitch, including sniffing or licking secretions and
mounting, both must have a current negative Brucella test. Even casual contact is considered an
exposure. Ihis precaution should always be taken to reduce liability to the hospital.
It is usually best to have the bitch in the collection room first, well positioned, and restrained prior to
 d   n pe  n s  e u  p ps a a  sd  a
collection. A shy dog can turn off very quickly if the collector intervenes prematurely.
Step by step semen collection
Exam gloves, either latex-free or rinsed to be free of powder on the outside of the glove are needed
for the person collecting the semen. These should be donned prior to the stud dog entering the
room. Provide 2 collection sleeves with centrifuge tubes attached, top rolled back, labeled with the
stud dog's name. Check the brand of non-spermacidal lubricant with a fresh collection fo assure it
will not be detrimental to sperm motility.
The comprehensive examination of the stud dog should be completed AFTER the semen is
collected. The only evaluation that should be done in advance is to be certain the collection will not
be detrimental to him or the bitch. Work in a quiet room with 1 to 2 assistants and 1 collector, 1
Brucella canis negative estrus bitch, with good footing.
The bitch should be positioned in the room prior to the male dog's entrance. She should be facing
away from the male, near the front of the rug used for footing so as to leave enough room behind
her to allow the male to have all 4 feet on the rug as well. She should be held by the veterinary
  u n    sa   i    si  
 ym aop isag si sui uosod upuis e u sau oddns ot uaoge ay sapun se auo an
assistant facing a wall, with the bitch between the assistant and the wall; this aids in keeping the
yoeodde sop pns au ot poalgo ot Aall s! yog au t uoraloo suunp aunapum wo sop pns
or mount, she should be muzzled.
If the stud dog is trustworthy and unlikely to swing his head around to the person collecting him, the
IF the stud dog does not allow easy handling of his genitals, the owner should not be on the leash.
Instead, an experienced veterinary assistant should handle him. This assistant should direct the stud
dog's attention to the bitch and protect the person doing the collection. Although it is unusual for
  o    d n      n o i  
veterinarystaff.
The stud should be given the opportunity to sniff the bitch. At this point, the confident dog is easily
wu puag io apisag juasaid si loiao aun seui aeme apeu ag uau ueo op pns aui pasnoe
suad aun jo qing aui se sjuad au ouo paddis aq ueo aaais aui uaui :dwnu siy on yonoi auaa e Ag
caudally to expose the bulb. In most cases, dogs are more comfortable during ejaculation if the
prepuce is slid caudal to the bulb of the penis prior to full erection. If his erection is too advanced to
allow exposure of the bulb without causing pain, the stud dog should be walked away from the bitch,
moistened towel to cleanse the area.
Chapter 1 O: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 287
As the prepuce is slid caudally, exteriorizing the penis with one hand, the collector can slide the
collection sleeve over the penis with the opposite hand. Care should be taken to avoid touching the
penis to the tube as this can cause superficial hemorrhage. Gentle but firm stimulation of the shaft
of the penis proximal to the bulb will increase the stimulation of the male and retain the prepuce
caudal to the bulb, helping him to maximize his erection and ejaculate. Once he is stimulated, the
collector should firmly encircle the base of the penis proximal to the bulb with the thumb and fingers,
simulating a tie, allowing him to complete his ejaculation. Some dogs will thrust vigorously as they
ejaculate while others are quietly non-demonstrative.
When possible, only the second portion of the ejaculate, the sperm-rich fraction (the milky-white
standing steadily enough to avoid losing a portion of the sperm-rich fraction. In many cases, the first
between 0.5 ml and 4.0 ml in volume. The first and third fractions vary widely in volume, and may
exceed 15 ml in larger dogs. At this point, the dog will often swing his leg over the arm of the
collector, directing his penis backwards between his rear legs, as in a normal tie. The third fraction
of the ejaculate is usually clear (unless the prostatic fluid is bloody or purulent). During the third
fraction, the urethra can be felt to pulsate and the anal sphincter can be seen to contract. As this
portion containing only prostatic fluid does not need to be collected, the sleeve should be removed
or changed. Clients should be assured that this fluid does not contain any valuable sperm
Once the sleeve is removed from the penis, a water-soluble non-spermicidal lubricant should be
im mois inuid si siun asnnaq auega snon aun jo sup uaad o suad aun on padde
of the dog away from the presence of the bitch may aid in retraction. The dog may be allowed to
lick himself to accelerate retraction of the penis into the prepuce. In some cases, particularly with
long-haired or thick-bodied dogs, they may need assistance retracting the penis into the prepuce.
fully retracted and he is comfortable.
Shy dogs should be allowed more time to introduce themselves to the bitch. Sometimes, off-leash
courting can help his contidence. Care should be taken though that the bitch is not so cutgoing as fo
frighten him. This Is when a temperament mis-match can be a problem
After the less confident stud dog has had the opportunity to familiarize himself with the bitch, she
should be steadied by an assistant and he should again be allowed to approach her. In some cases,
the assistant can assist the male by holding the bitch with an arm under her rear legs; but in other
cases, this Is a deterrent fo the male to approaching or mounting the bitch.
Some stud dogs are easily collected with no bitch in the room - these are the dogs who are
a bitch is present. Some stud dogs are content to sniff the bitch and collect well this way. Other
stud dogs must mount the bitch once or multiple times before they will collect. This often requires
becomes a deterrent to the stud dog to collect so there are times the collector's experience will
from having a negative experlence that will interfere with his next efforts at collection
trained not to collect, and those with an associated medical condition that causes them discomfort
dogs with reluctance to collect. These include:
288 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
1. Having the handler or owner leave the room, and changing the veterinary staff or way the staff
to finesse the dog into relaxing and ejaculating.
3. Changing locations - a different room in the veterinary hospital, or outside if the weather
permits. Leaving the room with either the dog or bitch and reintroducing them.
4. Pharmaceutical and hormonal intervention. This can include a prostaglandin or GnRH injection
fo improve the quantity of sperm in the ejaculate. Lutalyse? can be administered subcutaneously
15 minutes prior to collection. This is thought fo both help to improve libido in the stud dog and
The prostaglandin dose should be carefully calculated, with the lower end dose used for the larger
dogs to minimize side effects of vomiting and nausea. Use of Lutalyse? at the frst visit or routinely
for dogs who collect well without should be avoided because of the negative psychological effects
it may produce. It is most helpful for the young or nervous dog on a second or subsequent visit.
The dose is 0.05-0.1 mg/kg sq 15 min prior to collection. Lutalyse? is most effective when
used with an estrous teaser bitch. Nausea and vomiting are a common side effect, and can be
reduced by walking the dog between the time of the injection and the time of the collection. In
addition to vomiting, the collection volume may be smaller (but with a good sperm count) and the
drug. It should not be given to elderly patients or those with airway disease such as asthma or
brachycephalic patients. To limit potential liability, the drug should not be handled by women of
child-bearing age who could potentially be pregnant, or around staff with a history of respiratory
disease including asthma. Lutalyse? is an extra-labell use in the dog, and owners should be advised
of this prior to administration. The effect of Lutalyse is short-lived and can be repeated at the next
collection. Lutalyse? coupled with the presence of a teaser bitch is reported to have an additive
effect, meaning its greatest effect was when an estrus bitch was present in the room.
GnRH increases libido in the male dog by increasing the release of endogenous testosterone. It
can be administered at 3.3 mcg/kg IM once daily 60 minutes prior to collection (typically found
as 50 mcg/ml). GnRH should be used with caution in males with testosterone-related disorders
such as benign prostatic hypertrophy and perlanal gland tumors. GnRH can be used daily during
a breeding cycle or once weekly preceding breeding.
Exogenous testosterone, or testosterone as a supplement, should never be administered
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory can be helpful. The delay in response may mandate the next
aftempt be rescheduled after the drug has begun fto relieve inflammation. In aged dogs with
It is recommended to collect only the Znd of the 3 ejaculate fractions - that which is the
sperm-rich fraction. The pre and post-ejaculate consist largely of prostatic fluid and sometimes
urine, both of which are detrimental to semen survival. In some dogs, particularly those who
collect with great enthusiasm, splitting the fractions without losing a portion of the sperm rich
fraction can be diffhcult. As a result, it may be necessary to dilute the ejaculate with normal saline
and centrifuge the ejaculate after collection to remove the supernatant.
Chapter 1 0: Infertiy and Reproductive Disorders in the Vvaluable Stud Dog 289
Sperm count and morphology
(AppendixA-6)
A complete semen analysis includes evaluation of the semen volume and gross appearance,
entire analysis with a centrifuge, microscope, Unopette? and hemocytometer. The mere recognition
of sperm in the ejaculate is not sufhcient to determine if the dog is fertile or subfertile.
The semen analysis should be performed as soon after collection as possible. While the semen
is awaiting analysis, it should be maintained at room temperature. If there is a delay in using the
sperm, it should be covered with Parafilm?, kept away from any chemicals, centrifuged if necessary,
extended and refrigerated. The semen motility evaluation must be done when the semen is still
        n        n
at least 1 drop on a microscope slide prior to evaluation. There are several techniques for warming
dop auo 'ans Apog e isue alds au suioy no ' lano jamoi e ym mol as pd ueay e
of semen should be placed on the warmed microscope slide, a warmed coverslip applied, and
evaluated immediately. If the slide begins to cool, it should be rewarmed and re-examined. If the slide
Semen volume
The volume of the ejaculate is simple to determine, particularly if the semen is collected in a sleeve
with a clear plastic graduated centrifuge tube attached. When possible, only the sperm-rich fraction
should be collected. The typical dog's sperm-rich fraction varies from 0.5 ml to 4.0 ml. Some dog's
total ejaculate volume, when all of the prostatic fluid is saved, can exceed 30 ml. A larger volume
of ejaculate does not correspond to greater fertility. Many clients expect to see a greater volume
and are disappointed that their stud dog "didn't do very well" if only the 1ml of sperm-rich fraction is
total sperm count.
Gross appearance of the ejaculate
The normal sperm-rich fraction of the ejaculate should be a dense milky white color. It should not be
yellow suggests white blood cells; and red, brown or copper color suggests blood. Blood can be
the result of trauma to the penis, prostatic disease or a neoplasia in the urogenital tract. Blood in
the ejaculate of the dog does not interfere with fertility, but the underlying cause such as prostatic
disease can.
Sperm count
sperm count: manual with a hemocytometer, by spectrophotometry using a sperm counter, and
actual sperm count with motility and morphology is necessary to assess the male's fertility. As a
corollary, the absence of sperm in a single ejaculate is not sufficient to classify a male as sterile; he
may have had sperm at a previous time or in the future.
A normal dog should have 10 million sperm per pound of body weight in the total ejaculate. The
concentration is dependent on the volume of the ejaculate and does not correlate with fertility. The
There are anecdotal reports of lower doses successfully achieving a pregnancy.
290 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The least expensive but most time-consuming method of counting sperm is manually with a
UnopetteTM and a Neubauer hemocytometer. UnopettesTM are being discontinued and other
e aq pinous pue pasodod suag ane aenoela au ui sllao lauo au sussk pue sunp jo spoia
viable option in the future. To perform a manual sperm count, the collection should be covered with
of the diluting chamber is used to pierce the No. 5853 Unopette1M, and rotated to make a wide
opening in the sealed chamber, taking care not to flex the cap so much that the interior pipette is
is drawn up into the pipette by capilary action. With one hand holding the chamber and the other
opening in the chamber, and the pressure on the chamber is released as the pipette is firmly
   i     e       s 
Squeezing too hard will create a spout cut of the top of the chamber and lead to an inaccurate
sperm count. Both chambers of the hemocytometer should be loaded (first place the calibrated
should be swirled to make certain the sperm are evenly distributed. The hemocytometer should rest
for 5 minutes to allow the sperm to settle into the same visual plane.
After the hemocytometer has rested, it should be placed on the stage of a microscope, with the
stage moved down to allow the objective to clear the coverslip. Because the hemocytometer is
much thicker than a regular glass slide, care must be taken to avoid hitting the coverslip with the
cbjective. One of the central squares comprised of the 25 small squares should be moved under
the objective. At 200x magnification, all the sperm in the 25 square grid should be counted, with
sperm falling on the upper and left lines counted and those falling on the lower and right lines not
being counted to avoid counting the same sperm twice. A hand-held counter can make this process
be averaged. If the difference between the 2 counts exceeds 10%, repeat the count. Multiply the
multiplied by the volume of the ejaculate to calculate the total sperm count.
Sperm motility
Place a drop of semen on a warm glass microscope slide, apply a warm coverslip, and evaluate
after collection with a warm slide and coverslip. A normal evaluation should show 80% or more
spermmovingforward.
There are 2 components to the motility evaluation. The first is the percentage of sperm that are
otherwise abnormal but moving should not be included. If a high percentage of the sperm appear
to be gently curved and are moving in a circular pattern, the semen should be rewarmed and
reevaluated because this is often the motion of cool sperm. The second component is based
on how fast the sperm are moving forward. This is frequently done on a scale from 1 to 4, with
P1 moving slowly forward and P4 moving rapidly and deliberately forward. If the semen is very
improve visibility of individual sperm.
Live-dead stain can be used to help distinguish between dead and imomotile sperm
Although this may be appealing, expensive technology is not necessary to do an accurate semen
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 291
Spermmorphology
on unstained semen allowed to cool enough to render them immotile. Unstained semen is best
evaluated for morphology using phase-contrast microscopy. Staining the sperm cells may cause
some artifacts but will allow the examiner to detect defects not visible in an unstained sample.
Eosin-nigrosin stain is preferred for this application. Once the sperm are immotile, 100 sperm cells
should be counted with the following defects noted: head abnormalities, acrosome abnormalities,
midpiece abnormalities and tail abnormalities
by the significance of the defect. Clinically, the significance of the defect is more applicable: major
defects which interfere with fertility and minor defects which do not impair fertility. Defects that
occur in the testicle during sperm cell production are considered a primary or major defect. These
include altered head size or shape, bent midpieces, and detached heads. Defects that occur as
handling are considered secondary or minor defects. These defects include bent or coiled tails, and
distalcytoplasmicdroplets.
tail. Sperm with proximal droplets may be immature sperm or may represent a morphological
abnormality. If the dog has been recently collected and the sperm motility appears normal, there
the proximal droplets are still present in large numbers, the motility is slow and deliberate, or the
dog has a history of infertility, these droplets probably represent a defect and not a lack of time in
the epididymis to mature. Semen that is abnormal at collection but motile may not chill and ship or
freeze well but may still produce a pregnancy in the bitch when used as a fresh breeding.
stain is used as for a blood smear - the semen is placed on the slide, a second slide is used to
smear it, and it is stained in each of the solutions for 5 minutes. After rinsing and drying, the slide
may be evaluated under cil emersion. The eosin/nigrosin stain is used by placing 1 equal sided drop
of each sperm and stain on one end of a slide. These 2 drops are mixed, and made into a smear.
The slide should be dried quickly on a slide warmer to prevent artifacts.
When the Wright's stain is used, sperm will appear purple on a clear background. When the
eosin/nigrosin stain is used, normal (live sperm when collected) will appear white against a dark
background in some species. This live-dead ratio has not been correlated with fertility in dogs.
To evaluate the stained sperm, 1o0 spermatozoa should be counted using oil immersion. The
abnormal sperm should be classified by defect: primary defects including defects that occur during
spermatogenesis (defects in head shape, detached heads, bent midpiece, persistent proximal
bent tails). There is a poorly defined correlation between specific defects and fertility in dogs.
Ihe semen should also be assessed for the presence and quantity of red blood cells, white blood
292Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Sperm agglutination
anti-sperm antibodies which are thought to develop as the result of disruption of the blood-testicular
barrier, allowing sperm to be exposed to the immune system. This leads to the development
 of antibodies, causing agglutination. Trauma and testicular infections may lead to antibody
have reduced motility and an alteration in penetrating the zona pellucida, fertilization may be
compromised. Intrauterine insemination may improve fertility.
Semen pH
The pH of the semen can be useful if there is poor semen motility or quality. This can be measured
by placing 1 drop of semen on pH paper (do not immerse the paper into the semen). The normal pH
of semen should be between 6.5 and 7.0; any alteration from this could reflect a prostatic infection
and be useful in determining the antibiotic of choice.
Longevity
If semen is to be extended and refrigerated or shipped for use within a few days, assess with a
test chill using the specific extender. The type and ratio of extender used should be recorded. The
progressive motility should be assessed at 24 and 48 hours after warming a drop of semen. Some
extenders are reported to retain semen viability for up to 10 days.
When the semen is aspirated or extender is added to the ejaculate, it should be done slowly to avoid
mechanical damage or shock to the sperm cells.
Diagnostic workup for the infertile stud dog
Endocrinopathies and hormonal diseases
(See Appendix D-16)
Several endocrine disorders can interfere with normal sperm production. These include a hormone-
secreting testicular tumor, thyroid disease, hyperadrenocorticism (Cushings), hypoadrenocorticism
(Addison's), Diabetes Mellitus and corticosteroid administration.
A hormone - secreting testicular tumor
There are 3 kinds of testicular tumors: the Sertoli cell tumor (most commonly found in the abdominal
retained testes, which can secrete estrogen),
the seminoma (the most common type in
subcutaneously retained testes) reported to
cause paraneoplastic syndrome, and the
interstitial cell tumor (which can secrete
testosterone). Any or all can occur in the same
patient, even in scrotal testes. Larger tumors
are palpable, some are too small to palpate but
can be seen on ultrasound, and some can only
be diagnosed by biopsy or fine needle aspirate.
They are seldom malignant. Unilateral or bilateral
castration is usually curative. Unilateral castration
should only be considered in a valuable breeding
dog and if the opposite testicle appears normal
on ultrasound. Because a unilateral testicular
tumor can cause poor semen quality, the
decision to remove only the neoplastic testicle
Figure 10-2.
should not be determined by semen quality at
Testicular tumors in both testes. Both testes from this dog
the time of the tumor diagnosis (Figure 10-2).
had multiple tumor types.
Chapter 1 0: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 293
Thyroid disease
Is often discussed and implicated as a cause of infertility in both the male and female dog.
However, the literature does not support this as a common cause of infertility. Dogs that are
profoundly hypothyroid may exhibit lower libido, but not diminished sperm production. "lt appears
cats." Johnson CA Clin Iech Small Animal Practice 2002 Aug: 1/(3): 12932
animals and people with thyroid disorders may also have reproductive disorders, usually disorders
other than thyroid disease are the cause of reproductive abnormalities."
knowing the thyroid status of an individual dog: if he has lymphocytic thyroiditis or another form of
their breeding lines based on this and his other qualities.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's Disease), Hypoadrenocorticism
(Addison's Disease) and Diabetes Mellitus
All 3 of these endocrine disorders can be implicated as a cause of infertility. Low dose
dexamethasone suppression testing or ACTH stimulation testing may help determine the underlying
cause. Abnormally high or low levels of glucocorticoid may alter the metabolism of hormones,
leading to deterloration of the seminiferous epithelium.
Corticosteroid administration
There are many undocumented references indicating that corticosteroid administration may interfere
Oral, injectable or topical corticosteroids should be used judiciously in any valuable stud dog.
Disorders of the prostate
(See Appendix D-14)
including rectal palpation, CBC, chemistry panel, urinalysis, cytology and culture of prostatic fluid
(collected by ejaculation and prostatic massage), x-rays, ultrasound, an ELIsA test, and ultrasound-
guided needle biopsy.
Prostatic fluid is secreted continuously in the intact male dog, with secretions either flowing into the
urethra externally or retrograde into the urinary bladder.
BPH - Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy
100%) intact male dogs who are middle-aged to clder are affected but many are asymptomatic. BPH
is part of aging and alterations in hormones, with both an increase in cell number and increase in cell
size contributing to the enlargement of the gland.
Diagnosis of BPH
              s
294 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
dripping blood from the penis of an intact male dog independent of urination. Other symptoms
include: blood in the urine or ejaculate, poor semen quality, infertility, straining to defecate, and
flattened stools. Dogs rarely have diffculty urinating. The CBC and chemistry profle are typically
normal. The urinalysis may be normal or may show hematuria (and sperm).
veterinarian to place their opposite hand on the ventral abdominal wall to direct the prostate caudally
BPH from cysts inside the prostate and paraprostatic cysts. The only way to definitively confirm
paeioads y laydeouosen palys e :rsdoig Aq s! eiseidoau pou pue Hda sey aop aun ieu
equipment can collect an ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy sterilely with a needle biopsy from an
histology and culture via laparotomy is another alternative to confirm a diagnosis. An ELiSA test to
distinguish BPH from other causes of prostatic disease is available in Europe.
Cytology by evaluation of the third fraction of the ejaculate, prostatic massage or prostatic
 i  si n  s d an n    asn a  
be submitted for culture to distinguish the patient with BPH from the patient with prostatitis or a
prostatic abscess.
Technique for prostatic massage
Under general anesthesia, pass a urethral catheter into the bladder to remove all urine. A urinalysis
and save the fluid. Label this specimen Sample 1. Retract the catheter tip and align it with the caudal
gland for 1 minute, with care to avoid possible rupture of a prostatic abscess. Flush 5 ml sterile
physiologic saline solution slowly through the catheter while the urethral orifice is occluded around
the catheter to prevent retrograde loss of the sample. Advance the catheter into the bladder as fluid
is aspirated. Save the fluid and label Sample 2. Submit for cytology and culture. Quantitate bacterial
numbers in both specimens to ascertain signiticance of bacterial growth in prostatic fluid specimen
(Sample 2). Perform a culture and sensitivity test on the sample collected.
Treatment of BPH
Castration is curative but is not the only treatment option available. The prostate is usually half
its pre-castration size within 3 weeks, and will continue to involute. A follow-up rectal exam is
recommended at 3weeks post-op.If theprostate does notrespond to castration or one of the
medical therapies, other causes of prostatic enlargement should be considered.
Many dogs are valuable as breeding dogs and their owners may wish to delay castration. Antibiotics
are not useful in treating uncomplicated BPH. If urinalysis supports a diagnosis of cystitis,
appropriate antibiotic therapy is recommended in addition to medical treatment of BPH.
Chapter 1 0: Infertiy and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 295
Medical treatment of BPH
There are several drug therapies that can reduce the size of the prostate and simultaneously
maintain the stud dog's fertility. These drug therapies include progestational compounds and
antiandrogens.
The most commonly used and available synthetic progestin drug in the U.S. is megestrol acetate.
perpoundonce a week.
Megestrol acetate can be used on a long-term basis. This will reduce the volume of the ejaculate but
be available in other countries.
Antiandrogens, such as finasteride, reduce the size and secretions of the prostate. Finasateride
works by manipulating 5 alpha-reductase, the enzyme that metabolizes testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone, which affects the prostate. Finasteride, available for human use in the U.S. can
be dosed at 0.1 fo U.5 mg/kg once daly P0. lablets are avalable in I mg and 5 mg sizes.
of the US. This drug will not alter libido or semen quality and can be used long term.
Relapse will occur as soon as either mediation is discontinued. lt is essential that you as the
prescriber give notice to the owner to restrict the handling of tablets to only people who could not
be pregnant as finasteride can harm the male fetus. Liver disease is a contraindication to use in
humans.
Both drugs uses listed are considered extra-label uses. There are no reports showing harm to the
fetusessiredbydogsonanti-androgens.
Response to treatment can be monitored by clinical signs, rectal examination, serial semen
evaluations, and serial measurements of the prostate by ultrasound. Due to side effects, estrogen
therapy Is not currently recommended.
GnRH agonists are under investigation but cause infertility and/or sterility, so their use is not
Bacterial prostatitis and prostatic abscesses
the prostate gland. Bacterial prostatitis or abscesses may occur secondarily to these age-related
alterations of the prostate gland. Other causes of prostate inflammation include trauma, stricture,
uroliths, and neoplasia. Prostate infections can either cause or result in urinary tract infections and
infections of the testicle and/or epididymis. Aerobic bacteria are most commonly implicated, with
E. coli being the most common. Staphylococci, Streptococcus, Proteus, Klebsiella, Brucella, and
are rare. Blastomycosis and cryptococcosis causing granulomatous prostatitis are rare but do occur
(Figure 10-3).
Acute prostatitis
Dogs affected by acute prostatitis are often very il systemically. This is often due to sudden
inflammation of the prostate caused by bacterial infection. This may develop from a recent or
long-standing prostate infection or from a hematogenous spread. These dogs can be acutely and
296Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A
B
Figure 10-3.
A.Normal prostate with the pelvis cut away.B.Prostate with benign prostatic hypertrophy with the pelvis cut away
profoundly ill. lt is possible for septicemia to develop or for prostatic abscesses to rupture and
gait, urinary incontinence, hindlimb pitting edema, and caudal abdominal pain. Some patients may
paeiosse ue Aensn si aaui uoeuun jo juapuadapun siuad aun wo suddup pooig no ping aey
infertility, either because of diminished semen quality or because of reluctance of the male to breed.
Chronic prostatitis
Dogs with chronic prostatitis may present without symptoms suggesting that the prostate is
involved. Some may be lethargic, reluctant to move, or vaguely il; others may present with fever,
pain, and signs of septic shock. Many will present with symptoms of recurrent cystitis, fluid dripping
from the penis independent of urination, or blood in the urine. Dependent upon which area of the
prostate is involved, the dog may present with difficulty passing stool or urine. Some may present
due to a history of infertility, either due to diminished semen quality or reluctance of the male to
breed. Many will present with no clinical signs, making a diagnosis of chronic prostatitis difficult.
Often the prostate will be enlarged, asymmetrical and with variable consistency but non-painful.
Diagnosis of acute and chronic prostatitis
should always include a rectal examination), lab results, imaging, and response to treatment.
In acute prostatitis, the CBC often reveals an elevated WBC, often with a left shift; in chronic
prostatitis, the WBC is usually normal. In acute prostatitis, blood chemistries are often normal but
an elevated alkaline phosphatase may be noted. Some will have elevated bilirubin and up to 40% will
have hypoglycemia. Dehydration with pre-renal changes may be noted. In both acute and chronic
forms, urinalysis will usually show bacteria, WBCs, RBCs and protein in the urine.
Ejaculation and evaluation of the sample may be useful in dogs with chronic prostatitis, but dogs
acutely ill from prostatitis are usually too painful and too sick to ejaculate. Ihe small risk of causing
peritonitis by ultrasound-guided FNA should be considered prior to recommending this procedure
Urine and ejaculates should be submitted for culture, with more than 10,000 CFU per ml of prostatic
fluid or urine diagnostic for prostatic infection. The same organism is usually found in the urine
and the prostate fluid. If Blastomyces prostatitis is suspected, the sample should not be submitted
for culture due to the risk to lab personnel. The current diagnostic test of choice is to test for
Blastomyces antigen in the patient's urine.
Imaging
Radiographs may be normal or may show poor radiographic contrast, an enlarged symmetrical
or asymmetrical prostate, or enlarged sublumbar lymph nodes. Ultrasound may show an enlarged
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 297
Medical therapy for prostatitis
Treatment of acute prostatitis should include hospitalization on IV fluids, and IV antibiotics for the
first 24 to 48 hours of therapy. Fluoroquiniclones are an appropriate antibiotic choice while culture
and sensitivity results are pending. Based upon clinical response and antibiotic sensitivity results,
the patient may be switched to oral antibiotic therapy. During the acute phase of prostatitis, the
a           s  s
alone. Antibiotic therapy should be continued for 4 to 6 weeks. Appropriate antibiotic choices
for treatment after the blood-prostate barrier is reestablished include trimethoprim-sulfonamide
erythromycin, fluoroquinolones, and clindamcyin, with side effects considered. Fungal prostatitis can
be treated with itraconazole at the normal recommended dose
Re-evaluation of thepatient should beperformed twice,at 1 and 4 weeks after the completion of
antibiotic therapy. The follow-up should include a complete physical examination including a rectal
examination, urinalysis, urine culture, and culture and cytology of the prostatic fluid. The importance
of this ongoing evaluation should be stressed to the owner as one way to minimize the development
of chronic prostatitis. Castration should be considered as it may improve the long-term prognosis
However, castration should be delayed until the patient has been on a minimum of 5 to 7 days of
antibiotics, both to stabilize him and to reduce the likelihood of post-op development of scirrhous cord
Hormones to manage BPH are an alternative to castration.
Acute prostatitis may also be associated with blood in the ejaculate, orchiepididymitis, and immune
mediated orchitis (Figure 10-4).
There may be a decrease in morphologically normal sperm due to an alteration in the quality of the
prostatic fluid.
Although patients with chronic prostatitis are not as ill as patients with the acute form, the treatment
is more diffcult because the blood-prostate barrier prevents adequate penetration of antibiotics.
made. Antibiotics that can penetrate the blood-prostate barrier include trimethoprim-sulfonamide,
erythromycin, fluoroquinolones, and clindamcyin. Treatment should continue for 4 to 6 weeks, with
follow-up 1 and 4 weeks after the cessation of antibiotic therapy. The re-evaluation should include
a complete physical examination including a rectal evaluation of the prostate and culture of the
prostatic fluid. This is to assess for resolution of chronic prostatitis. Either castration once the
m
AD
B
Figure 10-4.
A. A stained sample of ejaculate of a dog with prostatitis, showing a large clump of white blood cells, epithelial cells and
sperm. B. Lnstained appearance of a large clump of white blood cells and sperm coalesced, typical of a dog with prostatitis
at semen evaluation.
298CanineReproductionandNeonatology
patient is stable or treatment with one of the previously described drugs to modify the size and
to improve the prognosis by resolving the underlying BPH. Antibiotics alone may be insufficient to
resolve prostatitis
Prostatic abscesses
Prostatic abscesses have a poor short-term and long-term prognosis with a survival rate of
approximately 50%. In addition to IV fluids, other supportive care as indicated, and long-term
appropriate antibiotic therapy, drainage of the abscess is indicated. Drainage techniques include
surgical insertion of a Penrose or tube drain, marsupialization of the prostate gland, and ultrasound-
guided aspiration of the contents of the abscess. Blood cultures and cultures of the abdominal fluid
culture at laparotomy. Complications include septic shock, peritonitis, urinary incontinence, recurrent
urinary tract infections, and recurrence of abscesses. Long-term antibiotic use, castration, and
follow-up evaluations at 1 and 4 weeks post-op will reduce long-term complications
Cysts and paraprostatic cysts
The prostate may be affected by two different types of cysts. Cysts may either be within the
prostate gland (retention cysts), or adjacent to the prostate (paraprostatic cysts)
pasno eiseideia snoenbs on Aepuooas aq no Hda Aq pasno aq Ae puea aun um sis
by estrogen-secreting Sertoli cell tumors. Up to 5% of dogs with prostatic disease may have
paraprostatic cysts (Figure 10-5).
interfere with urination or defecation or unless they abscess. On physical examination, they may be
palpable through the abdominal wall or rectally. CBC and chemistry panels are not diagnostic unless
an abscess is present. Ultrasound is more useful than x-rays in identifying cystic structures.
Treatment
alone is not likely to be curative. Alternatively, medical therapy with tinasteride or megestrol acetate
may reduce recurrence and the need to repeat drainage.
prognosis.
Neoplasia of the prostate
Unlike other pathology of the prostate, neoplasia occurs 4 times more frequently in neutered male
adults. It may be hormonally related, but does not only involve testicular hormones. Like many other
aging dog.
The most common tumor of the prostate is malignant adenocarcinoma. The prognosis is uniformly
the lungs. Even if no metastatic lung lesions are noted, 40% of patients have metastases by the time
of diagnosis. Other rare types of malignant prostate neoplasia include transitional cell carcinoma,
metastatic lymphosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, and squamous cell carcinoma.
Chapter 1 0: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 299
Figure 10-5.
A.The appearance of a paraprostatic cyst,in situ,at exploratory laparotomy.B.Aspirating the fluid from a paraprostatic
Cyst in preparation for omentalization. C. The paraprostatic cyst after the fluid was aspirated in preparation for omental-
ization. D. The paraprostatic cysts, after the omenum has been introduced to create drainage.E. Closing the repair of the
paraprostaticcyst.
300Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
The typical patient with adenocarcinoma is a medium to large breed dog with a mean age of 9 to 10
with one or more firm irregular immovable nodules palpable on rectal exam, sometimes with pain on
palpation. He may be febrile and depressed. The CBC may reflect a normal leukogram or a left shift.
a    gd a  a u  n u  
reveals blood, and some may have WBCs and tumor cells that have exfoliated into the urine.
to detect the tumor marker (PSA) as there is in humans.
Imaging
Radiographs of the abdomen may show an asymmetrical irregularly shaped enlarged prostate. Lysis
of the vertebrae may be noted. The normal prostate should not exceed 50% of the width of the
distance indicates that prostate neoplasia, prostatic cysts, or a prostatic abscess is present.
Both ultrasound and x-rays may show mineral densities. Qltrasound may show an irregular prostate
with hyperechcic regions. Metastatic lesions in the lungs, long bones, vertebrae, ribs, pelvis and
digits suggest a diagnosis of prostate cancer.
Prognosis
Unless a voided urine cytology reveals tumor cells or metastatic lesions are noted, a biopsy
is necessary to differentiate prostatic neoplasia from other forms of prostate disease such as
paraprostatic cysts and prostatic abscesses. This differentiation is important because of the
difference in treatment and prognosis of prostate cancer.
of the disease and the severe complications related to excision. Intra-operative radiation therapy is
is not recommended. No chemotherapy protocols have been developed. Hormonal therapy is under
investigation.
Disorders of the testes
Unilateral and bilateral cryptorchidism, ectopia
Cryptorchidism or ectopic testicles is the failure of one or both of the testes to descend into the
scrotum by 6 months of age. The ectopic testes can be located anywhere from the caudal pole
of the kidney to the subcutaneous region just cranial to the scrotum. This is considered to be
congenital, with an inheritance pattern that has not yet been determined.
Testicular descent should occur in puppies by 3 to 10 days of age. Careful palpation should reveal
the testes presence in the scrotum by 3 to 4 weeks of age. If the testes are not initially palpable, the
him in the abdominal or inguinal region or startling him, and palpated again. At a young age (6 to 8
have their testes move along the ventral abdominal wall transiently when handled. If the testes are
aeap aaey Ae dnd aun 'paxean si dnd au uaum ae jo syaam ot Aq wns au ui algeded pou
Chapter 1 0: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 301
The retained testicle(s) in dogs are predisposed to testicular neoplasia at a rate 14 times that of the
normal dog. These include sertoli cell tumors in testes retained in the abdomen and seminomoas
in testes retained in the inguinal canal. Additionally, the undescended testicle is at increased risk of
produce testosterone. If both testes are retained, the dog is likely to be sterile. If only one testicle
is retained, he may still be able to sire litters. Like other congenital defects with a hereditary basis,
the affected dogs and their parents and siblings may not be ideal candidates for breeding. All
factors influencing testicular descent are not known. This, of course, must be balanced against other
genetic traits.
Medical and surgical treatment of cryptorchidism is considered unethical by the breed registries.
descent of the testes. In the control group, all 28 puppies remained cryptorchid (Feldman). If medical
therapy is successful, the affected pup is spared the more invasive surgical procedure of locating
and removing the retained testicle. Surgical translocation of the retained testicle may be possible if
the spermatic cord is long enough. However, this is considered unethical and use of such dogs in a
Because of health risks, dogs with one or both retained testes should have the retained testicle
surgically removed, preferably prior fo age 3. The retained testicle may be located by palpation or
imaging by a skilled ultrasonographer. X-rays are unrewarding.
Prior to and after anesthetic induction, careful palpation may reveal the retained testicle present in
of the retained testicle. If the testicle is suspected to be subcutaneous or inguinal, this region
should be explored. If the testicle is located in the abdominal cavity, routine laparotomy should be
performed. The abdominal testicle(s) is usually dorsal and slightly lateral (on the retained side) to the
urinary bladder. If not present there, the vas deferens can be located as it passes over the ureter
followed by routine abdominal wall closure.
Ectopic testicular tissues
Ectopic testicular tissue is rarely found after both testes have been surgically removed. This tissue
can become neoplastic or the testosterone it produces can cause secondary health concerns such
noted at the site of the original prescrotal incision or in the scrotum, or the testicle was intra-abdominal
at the time of the original surgery.
Agenesis
Actual failure of one or both testes to develop is very rare in the dog. These patients should be
Hypoplasia of the testes
Testicular hypoplasia results from abnormal development of the seminiferous tubulular germinal
epithelium. Based on the degree of the lack of tubules, both decreased testicular size and fertility
treatment.
302Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Aplasia of the testicular duct system
This is the failure of any part of the testicular duct system to develop. It may be unilateral
accumulation with secondary testicular degeneration. If bilateral, the patient will be sterile. Surgical
correction is not practical.
Testicular tumors
              
descended and undescended testicles, but with different frequencies. The three most common types
tend to occur at approximately equal frequencies in the descended testicles. In the retained testicle,
within the body of the testicle.
visible and palpable; despite their accessibility, few clients notice that they are present.
Sertoli cell tumor
in highest incidence in testes retained within the abdomen. They arise from the cells that support
secrete estrogen, causing feminization.
ae aui a on mo aied ae kaun 'ans ino au uo pue snou pue wy ae kaul
slow-growing and tend not to be invasive but up to 20% may be malignant, spread to local lymph
nodes and metastasize to distant sites (lungs and spleen).
Seminoma
Seminomas are the second most common type of tumor in the retained testicle. Ihis type is found
in highest incidence in the testicle retained subcutaneously in the inguinal canal. They arise from
the cells that form mature spermatozoa. They do not secrete hormones, but a poorly understood
paraneoplastic syndrome has been reported. They are usually soft and lobulated and on the cut
surface, they are gray to white. Ihey are slow-growing and non-invasive. Up to 10% may metastasize
to local and distant sites (reports include metastases to abdominal and thoracic viscera, brain, eye
and lung).
Interstitial cell tumor
testicles and arise from interstitial cells that surround the seminiferous tubules. They may secrete
testosterone or estrogen, causing a paraneoplastic syndrome.
slow-growing, non-invasive and of low malignancy.
Other tumors found in the testes
lumors such as hemangiosarcomas, fibrosarcomas and embryonic carcinomas are rare in the
testes.
Diagnosing testicular tumors
Most tumors in the scrotal testicle are found on routine physical examination or at a fertility
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 303
the scrotum. IThe primary physical exam tinding is that one or both testes are abnormal in size
Semen quality and quantity can be profoundly or mildly affected at the time of diagnosis. This
can be distinguished from orchitis and torsion of the spermatic cord by the lack of swelling, heat,
and discomfort of the affected testicle(s). If the tumor has metastasized or is secreting estrogen,
symptoms related to these conditions will also be noted.
testicle, having atrophied due to altered hormonal feedback and increased local temperature.
one tumor type is found in the same testicle. Ultrasound should be used to assess the testicles
prior to surgery if removal of only the affected testicle is an option the client wishes to pursue -
the attending veterinarian needs to assure they are removing the affected testicle and that the
contralateral testicle Is indeed normal.
A retained testicle that is subcutaneous or inguinal may also be found on a thorough physical
examination or as a presenting complaint by the client. If the retained testicle is intra-abdominal,
detection of the tumor and cause of the dog's illness is more difficult. He may present with signs
tumor, or signs of paraneoplastic syndrome related to excess estrogen production by the tumor.
Abdominal radiographs may reveal an intra-abdominal mass. Ultrasound is more useful because a
skilled ultrasonographer may locate not only the retained testicle, but also the tumor(s) within the
testicle and evidence of abdominal metastases.
include a combination of: estrogen-induced pancytopenia, bilaterally symmetrical alopecia of the
trunk and flanks, hair loss, enlarged mammary glands, an enlarged prepuce, an enlarged prostate
festosterone secretion includes BPH, perineal hernla, perianal adenoma and perianal and tail gland
hyperplasia.
Treatment
Relatively few intact male dogs have retained abdominal testes because veterinarians have been
syndrome typically develops.
Removal of the affected testicle(s) is the treatment of choice for all types of testicular tumors.
Bilateral castration is recommended for most patients without future value as breeding dogs.
Unilateral castration may be very useful for dogs considered valuable breeders. His semen quality
and quantity usually improve within 3 months of removal of the affected testicle. Ultrasound
confirmation to assure that the affected testicle is the one to be surgically removed and that the
contralateral testicle is normal at the time of the study is recommended if the client opts to retain
not just the tumor from the testicle. IThe prognosis Is good if there are no metastases and the
affected testicle(s) is removed.
with tumor(s), whether intra-abdominal, subcutaneous, or scrotal, should include, a CBC and serum
chemistry profile, all 3 radiographic views of the thorax to check for metastatic disease, abdominal
304 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Aue pue juaaoaui apou ydua pue sasisia jusopqe not yool oi sydeoipen no punosen
other assessments routinely done by the hospital. Biopsies of the tumors prior to castration tend to
be of litle use. All testicular tissue removed should be submitted for pathology.
be sought.
Orchitis/Epididymitis - Inflammation or Infection
Orchitis is inflammation and/or infection of the testicle; epididymitis is inflammation and/or infection
of the epididymis. There are many causes. Bacterial infections of the testicles or epididymis can
Autoimmune disease causing inflammation can be primary and associated with other immune
the blocd-testicular barrier. Other causative organisms include Blastomyces and Mycoplasma.
phase. Diagnostics include CBC and chemistry panel, Brucella testing, cytology and culture of the
ejaculated semen (if not too painful), ultrasound and FNA of the affected testicle and/or epididymis.
Ultrasound is useful in differentiating orchitis from torsion of the spermatic cord. Cultures should be
taken for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, and Mycoplasma. Urine testing for blastomycosis can be
of the bacteria. FNA can be submitted for culture and cytology. A large number of PMNs supports a
diagnosis acute orchitis and/or epididymitis.
save the affected testicle. Some patients are septic and should be hospitalized for IV fluids and IV
antibiotic therapy. Antibiotics should be started while cultures are pending. The antibiotics of choice
at initial therapy include trimethoprim-sulfa, cephalosporins, or oxacillin.
Pain can usually be managed with non-stercidal medication but corticosteroids may be considered.
o ysu aui anpai oi sop pns se anea anng inom sao iot paapisuo ag pinous uoese
scirrhous cord, castration should be delayed until the infection is controlled and the patient is stable.
Unilateral orchiectomy may be considered if the owner opts to retain him as a stud dog. Removal of
the damaged testicle may be protective to the remaining normal testicle. Because the contralateral
testicle was also insulted, fertility may not return to normal for 2 to 6 months. Nutritional supportive
Immune-mediated orchitis
antigens to the immune system. This leads to invasion of the interstitial tissues by lymphocytes and
or other immunosuppressive drugs may be benetcial.
familial tendency toward immune - mediated orchitis has been proposed. Some dogs with immune -
mediated orchitis are younger than expected when fertility problems develop. These dogs may be s0
  s  s a  s    l  e      
age-matched counterparts. Diagnosis Is made by FNA or biopsy of the testicle.
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 305
Thermal damage
The testes and scrotum are susceptible to extremes of both heat and cold. The owner is often
unaware of the risk and damage. Frostbite or necrosis of the scrotal skin can occur at or below
freezing. If the damage is mild, supportive care may lead to recovery. If the damage is severe,
castration may be the only option. Heat trauma can include heat absorbed by the testes when the
dog is resting on asphalt in hot climates or from frequent hot baths and hot blow-dryers
the testes are not permanently damaged, they may return to fertility with supportive care
In addition, any elevation of the temperature of the testes (fever from systemic illness or inflammation)
or any interference with normal thermoregulation of the testes can transiently or permanently interfere
Trauma
Blunt trauma or punctures (from bite wounds, hunting accidents, and other sources of trauma) to the
testes may lead to immune-mediated orchitis and epididymitis. Early intervention and supportive care
and a reluctance to walk normally.
Encircling foreign bodies, inadvertently or intentionally applied around the scrotum, can cause
thereis a longcoator they aredeeply imbedded intothetissues.
Torsion of the spermatic cord
This condition is casually referred to as testicular torsion. Although it is more common in the retained
testicle, it is easier to diagnose in the scrotal testicle. There is no breed predilection (Figure 10-6).
An intrascrotal spermatic cord torsion will present with an acutely enlarged and painful testicle,
edema of the scrotum, a palpable thickened spermatic cord, and a discolored and cold scrotum.
Ultrasound with color Doppler may be useful to confirm the diagnosis and assess blood flow. The
present. Differentials include inguinal hernia, orchitis/epididymitis, and testicular neoplasia.
If the duration and degree of torsion are not too great, and the owner wants the dog to retain both
testes, the intrascrotal testicle can sometimes be salvaged. Testicular fibrosis and atrophy is a
common complication, even with detorsion. Surgical correction involves general anesthesia with
a full through and through suture from 1 side of the scrotum to the other and back, then placing a 
spacer on either side of the scrotum to avoid the suture cutting through the scrotal skin. The suture
can be run through a 20 or 22 gauge needle so it can be placed with minimal trauma to the already
compromised testicle. The testicle will need at least 90 days to recover its ability to produce sperm.
Intra-abdominal torsion of the spermatic cord is more difhcult to diagnose than an intrascrotal
torsion, particularly if the dog is bilaterally cryptorchid and there is a vague history of castration
A dog with a retained testicle typically will present with an acute abdomen. Symptoms include
vomiting, abdominal distress, shock, lethargy, loss of appetite, and stilted gait. Although retained
testes that have enlarged due to a tumor are more commonly involved in a torsion, even young
other signs related to paraneoplastic syndrome.
306 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
4
Figure 10-6.
A. and B. A long - standing testicular torsion, showing the
testicle removed surgicaly. C. The same testical in (A and
B),showing the contralateral testical removed surgically
C
Diagnosis of spermatic cord torsion can only be confirmed by exploratory laparotomy. Diagnosis
is supported by CBC, chemistry profle, abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound. Surgery
will reveal either an enlarged abnormal testicle or a small necrotic testicle. Bilateral castration
is recommended. Histology of the abnormal testicle is useful in confirming the diagnosis and
developing a prognosis.
Sperm granuloma/Spermatocele
A spermatocele is a localized area in the epididymis that retains sperm. A sperm granuloma is
an area of the epididymis with retained sperm that causes an inflammatory response, which is
palpated as swellings along the caudal epididymis. This may result from trauma or infectious causes.
Diagnosis is confirmed by surgical biopsy. If the granuloma is unilateral, the dog is likely to be fertile;
if bilateral he is likely sterile with no therapy currently available.
Scrotal hernia
A scrotal hernia results when abdominal contents are contained in the scrotum. They can occur when
scrotum. They may be unilateral or bilateral. Clinical signs include intermittent or continuous swelling
of the scrotum. If the abdominal contents become trapped, the dog will show signs of an acute
orchitis. Careful palpation and ultrasound may differentiate these conditions from a hernia. Surgical
correction is the treatment of choice.
Chapter 10: Infertity and Reproductive Disorders inthe Valuable Stud Dog 307
Varicocele
A varicocele is a dialated spermatic vein that develops a thrombosis. This disrupts blood flow and
temperature regulation of the testes. Although the thrombosis is usually unilateral, the contralateral
testicle may be affected due to changes in thermoregulation within the scrotum. Diagnosis can
unaffected testicle to return to normal.
Testicular degeneration and senile atrophy
Degeneration and atrophy of the testes occur for many reasons. Often there are no presenting
clinical signs other than a smaller softer testicle (unilateral or bilateral) and a report of recent
infertility. Causes include fever, trauma, infectious and non-infectious inflammation of the testes and/
or epididymis, and neoplasia. Senile atrophy is a common change with aging. In many cases, even
with a complete history and physical examination, no etiology can be found. FNA or testicular biopsy
active spermatogenesis, the prognosis for return to fertility is poor.
Drug or Radiation therapy
A small number of drugs are known to interfere with spermatogenesis or libido. These include
certain corticosteroids, anabolic stercids, testosterone, progestogens, estrogens, ketoconazole,
amphotericin B, cimetidine, GnRH agonists and antagonists and anti-neoplastic agents. Radiation
therapy in the region of the genitals will also interfere with spermatogenesis. The prescribing
veterinarian should review the literature for contraindications to the use of all new drugs in the active
stud dog. The veterinarian should always discuss the risks and benefits in a situation where the
owner is faced with saving the dog versus saving his fertility.
Accidental or inadvertent topical or cral exposure to estrogen creams used by owners can cause a
hormonal imbalance. Careful history taking may reveal this.
Bilateral castration
bilaterally cryptorchid or if he has been castrated. A skilled ultrasonographer may be able to locate
may be very small. Testosterone levels alone are often not diagnostic. As an alternative, a hormonal
stimulation test may be useful
Protocol for testorerone stimulation test
determine if plasma or serum is requested;
Administer GnRH (50 mcg SQ) or hCG (100 I0 IM);
Draw additional samples at 12 and 24 hours post-injection;
A 2 to 4 fold increase of the testosterone level from baseline suggests the dog has retained one or
both testes.
Diagnosis of testicular disorders
Ultrasound of the scrotal testes of the intact male dog is a relatively simple process. The dog can
be standing, or in lateral or dorsal recumbency. Sedation is not usually needed and no clipping
is necessary. Gel is applied to the scrotum. Either a 5.0 or /.5 MHz transducer can be used
Ihe normal testicle should have a coarse and homogenous echogenicity. Both testes should be
308 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
usually visible centrally in the testicle as a hyperechoic band. If a tumor is present in the testicle,
it will be visible as a discrete region that has an altered echogenicity (hyper or hypoechoic or
multiloculated cystic areas within the testes) as compared to the rest of the testicle
The epididymes are dorso-lateral to the testes. They are normally hypoechoic when compared to the
testes.
culture can be used to confrm or rule out disorders with minimal expense to the owner and minimal
trauma to the testicle and epididymis.
cells, bacteria, and fungal elements. Culture for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria as well as
Mycoplasma can also be performed on this sample.
FNA technique
Brief general anesthesia or sedation is recommended. Gently apply a surgical prep on the scrotal
skin over the area of the testicle and/or epididymis to be aspirated. Use a 22 or 23 g butterfly
should direct the needle into several areas of the testicle carefully without pulling cut of the testicle
several times while an assistant applies strong suction on the syringe, but should release suction
prior to the operator removing the needle from the testicle. Remove the needle from the syringe,
pull air into the syringe, reapply the needle, and blow the contents of the needle onto a slide for
one location.
Stain the slides for cytology. A normal testicle should have many sperm cells, many without tails
during spermatogenesis. If only sertoli cells are found, this testicle is sterile and will not produce
sperm cells. If normal sperm are found but none are noted in the ejaculate, blocked efferent ducts
may be the cause and may transiently respond to prednisone therapy. If bacteria and inflammatory
cells are found, the patient should be treated with an appropriate antibiotic, based on culture.
Bacterial cultures should be prepared from the remaining sterile sample.
Testicular biopsy
The blood-testicular barrier is disrupted at biopsy, potentially leading to immune-mediated orchitis
and progressive testicular degeneration. Hematoma formation is also a risk. The risk for both is
greater with biopsy than for FNA. On the other hand, for some patients with a poor prognosis for
testes appear to be equally affected, only one should be biopsied, to reduce the risk of irreversible
damage to the contralateral testicle.
Procedure for testicular biopsy
After appropriate pre-surgical evaluation, place the dog under general anesthesia and position in
advance the testicle to be biopsied to the incision site.
For a Tru-Cut biopsy, pass the biopsy punch into the portion of the body of the testicle of interest,
taking care to avoid the epididymis. Collect the sample and place in Bouin's solution. Reserve a
portion for culture if indicated.The tunic,subcutaneous tissue and skin should be closed routinely
Chapter 1 0: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 309
with a scalpel blade (or remove a wedge if the testicular tissue does not bulge), and place in Bouin's
suture, then close the subcutaneous tissue and skin routinely.
Submit the samples to a pathologist familiar with testicular pathology. Bouin's solution is preferred to
formalin for preserving testicular architecture.
The primary advantage of testicular biopsy over FNA is the opportunity to evaluate the testicular
architecture.
Unilateral castration
Unilateral castration is discussed in multiple sections in this chapter. This is a viable option for
testosterone-dependent disorders such as BPH or perianal tumors.
The procedure is the same as any other orchiectomy, with the primary difference that the testicle
to be spared should be evaluated by ultrasound for abnormalities in advance of the procedure and
should be carefully protected from trauma at and following the procedure. Even testes that do not
show normal fertility pre-op may be able to produce sperm within 2 to 6 months post-op. Removal
of the offending testicle may eliminate the source of inflammation, allowing the remaining testicle to
recover. The remaining testicle often compensates, producing sperm at a quantity of 75% of what
would normally be anticipated based cn the dog's weight. With this type of recovery, many dogs can
be maintained or returned to use as a successful stud dog.
Culture from different parts of the urogenital tract
Culturing different fractions of the ejaculate or use of multiple FNAs from the testes, epididymis and
prostate may be useful in determining the source of a bacterial nidus. The 1st and 3rd fractions of
the ejaculate are from the prostate, the 2nd fraction is from the testes. Careful fractionation may
bacterial prostatitis or cystitis.
Scrotal disorders
Scrotal dermatitis
The scrotum can be irritated by trauma, thermal exposure, both hot and cold, generalized dermatitis,
chemicals on the surface or secondarily by acute orchitis. Chemicals and disinfectants used to
clean kennels may be the cause, taking a detailed history may reveal the problem. Treatment of
Elizabethan collar may accelerate healing.
Scrotal tumors
of skin tumors of this region are: squamous cell carcinomas, melanomas, and mast cell tumors. The
treatment of choice for all 3 is wide surgical excision and histopathology of the lesion. Castration
if additional therapy is sought by the owner.
Scrotal trauma
Irauma to the scrotum may lead to bacterial invasion, orchitis and epididymitis, and self-mutilation.
Supportive care should be provided to protect the testes. Symptoms may be mild or may include
excessive licking and an abnormal gait.
310 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Disorders of the penis
Hypospadia
Hypospadia is a congenital abnormality in the formation of the penile urethra, penis, prepuce and/
ventral opening in the urethra in a variety of locations: perineal (most common), glandular, scrotal, or
gestation. They can be diagnosed by visual evaluation of the urinary tract. Although some males may
not be affected by this defect, it may be the reason for urinary incontinence, urinary tract infections,
and urine scalding (Figure 10-7)
a  p  ne sn a ss as   o  po ap a
either euthanasia or surgical correction when the pup is considered to be a surgical candidate. When
surgical correction is required, it may be best done by a referral to a surgeon. Depending on the
location of the defect, it may be closed by reconstruction or require penile urethrostomy. Dogs s0
affected should be castrated at correction and not be included in a breeding program.
Figure 10-7.
A. A newborn pup, ventral view, with hypospadia, a failure of the midline to close. B.A newborn pup, caudal view, with
hypospadia, a failure of the midline to close
Penile hypoplasia
to irritation of the prepuce. lIt may be associated with female pseudohermaphrodism. lt is most
commonly reported in the Great Dane, Collie, Doberman Pinscher, and Cocker Spaniel.
Persistent penile frenulum
A penile frenulum is a thin band of tissue that joins the ventral penis to the prepuce or to the body of
the penis. It may be of litle to no clinical significance in the sexually inactive dog, neutered dog, or
dogs not intended for breeding. Some dogs will exhibit signs of excessive licking of the penis and
unusual urinary patterns and urine scald on the skin (Figure 10-8).
In breeding dogs, the penile frenulum interferes with normal erection and copulation, as it is
exaggerated with erection, forcing the erect penis into a ventral or lateral position. It may frst be
noted at a fertility evaluation of a stud dog with a history of being unable to copulate normally. All
male dogs with an inability to insert the penis into the bitch should be evaluated for this condition. It
is easily detected by visual examination of the exteriorized penis.
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 31 1
B
Figure 10-8.
A. The penis, exterorized, showing a penile frenulum, the band of tissue along the surface. B. The same penis showing that
the further the penis is exterorized, the more obvious the deviation of the penis due to the penile frenulum.
Correction is simple, painless and straightforward. If the band of tissue is not vascular, it may
be snipped without anesthesia. If it is thick or vascular, brief anesthesia may be used to allow
transection. An inherited tendency is suspected.
Os penis deformity
Deformity of the os penis may cause an inability to copulate or retract the penis into the prepuce.
Penile trauma and foreign bodies
Irauma to the penis can result from a breeding accident, a bite wound, trauma caused by reflecting
the prepuce in the field, hair rings, malicious application of rubber bands or other restrictive devices,
or general body trauma. Clinical signs include pain, bleeding, difficulty urinating and penile paralysis.
hemorrhage. Rapidly reducing the erection (by general anesthesia if necessary) will minimize blood loss.
Thorough inspection of the exteriorized penis is indicated, with sedation if necessary. If present
remove the foreign body. Lacerations of the penis can be sutured like any other mucus membrane
Iwice daily exteriorization of the penis will diminish the likelihood that it will adhere to the lining of the
prepuce. Appropriate topical and antibiotic therapy as well as pain management may be indicated.
The patient should be carefully monitored to ensure that normal urination is possible; catheter
placement may be required. House the patient where sexual stimulation is minimal. In severe cases,
penile amputation may be indicated.
Os penis fracture
This is a rare sequella to trauma. The affected dog may either present at the time of the injury or
later if healing is diffcult. Clinical signs may include pain, difficult urination or urinary obstruction,
or penile deviation. Treatment consists of relieving the urinary obstruction. Repair of the penis and
associated other trauma may be indicated.
Preputial stenosis
infection. In rare cases, it may cause neonatal septicemia and early death.
312 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Phimosis
secondary to trauma, hair, inflammation or neoplasia. Young patients may develop urine scald and
Paraphimosis
Paraphimosis is the inability to retract the non-erect penis completely into the prepuce. This is a
genuine and relatively common emergency; immediate care is needed to prevent permanent injury to
Paraphimosis occurs most commonly after sexual stimulation or copulation. lt can also be caused
by neurologic disease. The longer the penis is exteriorized, the greater the damage. Ireatment
consists of repositioning the penis in the prepuce. Sedation or anesthesia may be indicated. If
the mucosal surface of the penis has been damaged, it should be cleansed and foreign material
removed from the surface. Gentle cranial traction on the prepuce and lubrication of the penis and/or
to maintain a slightly larger opening.
After reduction, a pursestring suture can be placed at the preputial opening, whether it was
surgically enlarged or not, to protect the tip of the penis from exposure. lf the surface of the penis
is ulcerated, the penis should be exteriorized twice daily to reduce the likelihood of adhesion to the
prepuce. Antibiotic therapy and lavage of the prepuce may aid in healing. Rarely the urethra may be
extreme cases, penile amputation may be indicated. The patient may need to wear an Elizabethan
collar to reduce the chance of severe self-mutilation. To prevent recurrence, minimizing sexual
arousal may be required.
A
B
Figure 10-9.
the penis was returned to the prepuce, done with lubrication and patience, the prepuce was temporarily closed to protect
the penis from trauma until the decreased sweling reduced the chance of recurrence.
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 31 3
Urethral prolapse/Eversion
Urethral prolapse frequently presents with intermittent bleeding, especially when sexually aroused,
 uaas aq osie Ae sui 'ae jo sea z lapun Aiensn 'op uno e jo sjuad aun jo dn aun wo
neutered males. The diagnosis may be difficult as the prolapsed tissue may not be visible unless the
tissue to be visualized to confirm the diagnosis. Pexy of the prelapsed tissue should be curative.
Following recovery, the dogs may be used for breeding, although most affected dogs are castrated
at pexy.
Neoplasms of the penis
Penile neoplasia is rare. If found, Transmissible Venereal Tumors (TVTs) and squamous cel
carcinomas are the most commonly seen. Other tumors include mast cell tumors, plasma cell
tumors, and chondrosarcomas of the os penis. Diagnosis is made based on visualization of the mass
inability to copulate. TVTs are spread venereally and can also cause mass lesions in bitches. Surgical
excision should be considered for all tumors of the penis. TVTs may be treated with vincristine.
Balanitis, posthitis and balanoposthitis
This is an assortment of inflammation of the penis (balanitis), prepuce (posthitis) and both at the
Ae u uoo si hl 'wo pi shl u eo leou nsn ae punog eag aui 'andad a
young male dogs, comparable to puppy vaginitis. In its more severe form, it may require lavage
(with saline or dilute betadine), topical and/or systemic antibiotic therapy. Underlying causes such as
allergic dermatitis, foreign bodies, neoplasia and structural congenital abnormalities should be ruled
out based on complete examination of the prepuce and exterlorized penis.
Lymphoid follicular hyperplasia
The base of the penis may be affected by multiple small follicles on the mucosal surface. The
etiology has not been determined. They are of little clinical significance.
Failure to achieve sexual maturity and intersex
There are many combinations of disorders of chromosomal sex. Although the different syndromes
are interesting, they usually have few clinical symptoms and are almost always infertile. They may
is confirmed based on careful gross and microscopic evaluation of the urogenital tract and/or
karyotyping
Disorders of erection
Pain from any source including prostate, testes, penis, back and orthopedic pain can cause erectile
dysfunction. Pain from many sources can impact the stud dog's wilingness and ability to breed
a female. If a formerly willing stud dog begins to show resistance or fails to mount and breed a
bitch, his reproductive organs, limbs and back should be evaluated as a source of pain. His penis
should be exteriorized and examined, including at the base to assess for masses and hair rings.
His testes and prostate should be palpated for swelling and other changes. Not as obvious are
sources of orthopedic pain. Back pain or bilateral orthopedic disease may be sufficient to prevent
his willingness to mount and tie with a bitch, but may not be lateralized enough to cause lameness
disorders such as Lyme disease and rheumatoid arthritis.
314Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Detecting and treating the cause of the pain may restore his normal libido and improve performance.
Use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may reduce pain quickly enough to allow him to mate
during the current estrus cycle. Megestrol acetate may also reduce the size and discomfort of the
prostate as well as the amount of blood in the ejaculate in only a few days, making his use during
the bitch's intended estrus cycle plausible. Both non-steroidal antinflammatories and megestrol
prostatitis may not be able to be corrected quickly enough to allow him to breed to the bitch during
her current estrus. Additionally, the white blood cells and bacteria in the ejaculate of a dog with
with frozen semen) may be sought.
If the affected stud dog has sufficient semen quality and libido but is merely unable to mount and
 i d ai o s  s    s  an s  'a
               
 appropriate mate), manual collection of the semen and artificial insemination would be appropriate.
Care should be taken when collecting semen from every stud dog to prevent any negative
dogs are psychologically more delicate and need to be handled with care when approached and
touched. Dogs who are inherently shy or who have been taught not to become sexually aroused are
more difficult to teach to be collected. There is a learning curve for the dog when he is allowed to
breed or be collected for the first time. Some dogs require several visits to the veterinary clinic and
certainsettings.
Some dogs, even those with experience, can have a painful or frightening experience that will
negatively impact their willingness to be manually collected. The penis should be handled with care
to prevent trauma while stimulating to ejaculate and it is exteriorized. Drying, and hair catching as it
retracts into the prepuce should be avcided to prevent possible unwillingness to be handled at future
collections. When using a teaser bitch, she should be carefully selected and restrained to prevent
and/or ejaculate, he should be allowed to relax prior to a second attempt. If he fails at the second
try, it is best to stop and assess the timing of the bitch and his physical condition to be certain he is
Disorders of ejaculation
Retrograde ejaculation caused by bladder sphincter incompetence
Retrograde ejaculation of semen into the bladder is an infrequent cause of low sperm numbers in
after semen collection and comparing the number of spermatozoa in the urine to the number in
the collected ejaculate. This is more commonly seen in older dogs. Causes include weakening
Ireatment consists of not allowing the dog to urinate prior to collection, to increase pressure in the
bladder and the use of sympathomimetic drugs. The drugs include Phenylpropanoloamine at 3 mg/
kg P0 BlD or pseudoephedrine at 4 to 5 mg/kg PO TID, repeated several hours prior to collection or
breeding can be used.
Collection of the urine followed by centrifugation to concentrate the sperm and adding an extender
to protect the sperm from the toxic effects of urine has not successfully resulted in pregnancy.
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 315
Infections of the prostate, testes or epididymis
An infection in the reproductive tract can lead to decreased sperm quantity and quality. Scarring in
lead to pain and unwillingness to ejaculate.
The correlation between finding white blood cells and bacteria in the ejaculate and positive cultures
is not strong enough to eliminate infection as a possibility based on microscopic examination of the
ejaculate for white blood cells alone. white blood cells in the ejaculate may be considered a normal
finding because semen is not sterile. Culture of the ejaculate and growth of more than 10,000
bacteria per ml ot semen is the basis of a detinitive diagnosis.
Infections of the male reproductive tract are not generally considered to be a cause of disease
including pyometra in the bitch. Brucella canis is an exception.
Sexual immaturity
The age of sexual maturity varies between breeds as well as individuals within a breed. The size of
the testicles corresponds to sexual maturity.
Several products, some available in countries cutside the United States, will reduce
cause aspermia. Other products include the deslorelin drug pellet implant, radiation therapy,
chemotherapy, and hormone exposure that may be inadvertent. A complete drug and vaccine history
may reveal the previous use of the drugs.
Sexual overuse
Sexual overuse can cause depletion of sperm reserves, resulting in lower sperm numbers per
ejaculate. As few as 5 consecutive daily ejaculations can result in depletion in normal healthy dogs.
Orthopedic/Arthritis/Back pain as causes of copulation failure
Use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, pain medications including tramadol, heat, veterinary spinal
manipulation therapy, acupuncture, and artifcial insemination as an alternative to natural mating may
allow an affected patient to remain an active stud dog. The client should be counseled to consider if
they may be perpetuating a heritable disease.
Disorders of sperm production, classification, diagnostics
and treatment
(Appendix D-6) (Table 10-1)
Infertility evaluation and treatment
Stud dog infertility can be classified as dogs with normal sperm with low to no libido, normal
to low libido with low sperm counts (oligospermia), normal to low libido with abnormal sperm
(teratospermia), normal to low libido with no sperm (azoospermia), normal to low libido with blood
in the ejaculate (hematospermia), normal to low libido with abnormal sperm motility (astheno-
Zoospermia) and normal to low libido with abnormal ejaculate components including red blood cells
white blood cells, and tumor cells;
Treatment protocols
These conditions may appear individually, overlap and occur simultaneously, cr noted singly in the
316 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
same patient over the course of time. In the dog, 62 days are necessary to prcduce and release a
spermatocyte, with another 15 required for transport through the epididymis. The process cannot
        s       -   p 
been successful. Infertility is defined as lowered fertility. Sterility is defined as permanent loss of
reproductive capacity.
Normal sperm from a stud dog with low to no libido
If the stud dog has no libido, a semen analysis may be very difficult. A urine sample to see if the dog
has sperm in his urine is the easiest way to begin the work up. A catheterized sample or sample
collected by cystocentesis may have less sperm than a voided sample. If sperm Is present, he Is not
azoospermic.
Low libido may have many causes. A complete history including medication the dog is on or has
been on in the recent past should be taken. These medications include hormonal agents that
decrease testosterone levels.
available, the humane society or local dog club may be able to assist in locating one. lf a teaser
bitch was used, and he still has little interest, there are several possible causes. The teaser bitch
to ejaculate if the timing is not perfect. The stud dog may not like that particular female - some
dogs have breed, size, color, or behavior preferences. If that individual bitch was too aggressive
previcusly, he is likely to be timid. Different people have different approaches to handling dogs
person accompanying the dog has instructed the dog to avoid sexual behavior in the past, the
dog may continue to have low libido (observer or handler preference). Some dogs have location
experience and prefer different footing, a different room, or to be cutdoors rather than indoors
(location preference). Ireatment requires determining the underlying problem and attempting to offer
the dog an alternative.
Pain
If the dog appears to favor the teaser bitch and surroundings but is still reluctant to ejaculate, pain
associated with collection should be considered. This pain could be in his back, limbs, prostate, or
His testes should be palpated for pain or other irregularities. His penis should be exteriorized with
the prepuce reflected to look for foreign bodies, hair rings, and other abnormalities. Radiographs
may be necessary to evaluate the size of the prostate and his back and limbs for arthritis or other
causes of pain. The source of pain should be identified and the underlying cause treated. Dogs with
orthopedic or back pain should be pretreated with an appropriate antinflammatory before future
treated appropriately to reduce the size and inflammation of the prostate.
Some dogs who have previously been successful at breeding but are now reluctant to breed
naturally will be found to have developed a preference for manual collection over natural breeding
addition to palpation, ultrasound of the testes can help assess if there are testicular abnormalities. In
if the condition is bilateral.
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 31 7
If the dog has no libido and has no history of ever having normal libido, a karyotype should be
considered. Intersex dogs that have male genitals have been reported in the Kerry blue terrier, pug,
English Cocker, beagle, Weimaraner, and German Shorthair Pointer. There is no treatment for this
condition.
Stud dog with low to normal libido but a low sperm count (Oligospermia)
A normal sperm count for a healthy mature stud dog in good health should be 10 million per pound
of body weight. This calculates to be approximately 1 billion for the stud dog of 100 pounds, and
500 million for the stud dog of 50 pounds. Too frequent or too recent collection(s) may make a dog
u   o   s s u  e t u m
frequently the dog was collected. Some clients will ejaculate the dog just prior to the veterinary visit
m ou Aeui an ne uooalo e oi speal uao sn - op ps aun no ueao, oi idae ue u!
an abnormally low sperm count.
If a teaser bitch was not used, another attempt with an estrous bitch is the next step. Many of the
above conditions apply including stage of estrous; bitch, collector, handler, and location preference.
Pain during collection or the hormonal alterations caused by testicular tumors may also cause a
neoplastic drugs may result in an improved semen quality.
A complete physical examination should be performed after ejaculation. Evaluate for testicular
tumors, prostatic disease, and orchitis/epididymitis.
Hypothyroidism may cause low sperm counts, however, the thyroid levels must be profoundly low for
an extended time period. Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushings disease) may also cause low sperm counts.
causes of hypothyroidism may be heritable which should be considered prior to using this stud dog.
Immune-mediated testicular disease can initially cause the sperm count to drop, and later cause an
absence of sperm in the ejaculate. Young dogs with small soft testes are suspected of having this
useful early in treating the condition but can be a double-edged sword because it may also interfere
with spermatogenesis.
Concurrent or resolving orchitis is another cause of low sperm counts. The causes of orchitis can
include infection, including Brucella canis, trauma, thermal damage, and torsion. Ireatment of the
cause may improve the sperm count. Bacterial culture of the ejaculate may reveal a pure culture;
appropriate antibiotic therapy may resolve the bacterial component of the disease. A mixed culture of
commonly found bacteria suggests normal flora. Mycoplasma is frequently incriminated as a cause ot
Dogs with brucellosis should be euthanized or castrated and treated with an extensive course of an
appropriate antibiotic.
If trauma or thermal damage is suspected, sexual rest and recollection in 90 or more days may
the testes should be palpated carefully. Ultrasound can be used fo assess testicular architecture,
looking for tumors, atrophy, spermatoceles or sperm granulomas. Unilateral castration to remove
the abnormal testicle may improve the sperm count if the opposite testicle is found to be normal on
palpation and/or ultrasound. If an offending drug is the cause, it should be withdrawn if medically
appropriate.
If no underlying cause can be determined for a low sperm count and the stud dog is scheduled to
318 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
without hCG at 1600 IU IM) or Lutalyse?, and restricting collections to times when the bitch is fertile
can improve the count and preserve the semen that can be collected. This protocol has not been
evaluated with controlled studies. It has been shown to anecdotally produce results within 1 hour and
can be used for long-term improved libido and sperm counts.
Additionally, careful timing of the breeding and intrauterine insemination of the bitch with either TCl or
surgical breeding can improve the chances of a pregnancy.
Stud dog with normal to low libido and abnormal sperm morphology
(Teratozoospermia)
congenital and acquired. It can be difficult to determine if the cause is congenital. Acquired causes
include: inflammation of the testes (tumor, trauma, fever or other thermal damage, and orchitis), and
help discover the underlying cause. Ultrasound can be used to assess testicular architecture, looking
for tumors, atrophy, spermatoceles or sperm granulomas.
Test for Brucella canis. Culture of the ejaculate may detect a bacterial cause of orchitis. Unilateral
or ultrasound. If an underlying cause is found, such as thermal damage exposure, overly hot or cold
surfaces or the use of a blow dryer should be avoided.
Stud dog with normal to low libido with no sperm (Azoospermia)
on one azoospermic sample. Ihere can be physical as well as psychological causes
The psychological cause should be evaluated trst. The stud dog should be collected at another visit,
he is comfortable with. Ireat any underlying medical causes. Like many other skills cur dogs have,
this too can be enhanced by training.
Examine the collection microscopically to determine sperm presence. Some collections are turbid
due to epithelial cells, tumor cells, and white blood cells that are present in the collection. If any
sperm are present, the sample should be classited as oligospermic rather than azospermic.
If no sperm are present in the ejaculate, an alkaline phosphatase level should be run on the ejaculate.
This level is most accurate if run only on the second fraction of the ejaculate. Collection of the entire
ejaculate containing largely prostate fluid may be less accurate because the prostatic fluid will dilute
the fraction in question and lead to an artifcially low reading. The same equipment that is used to
run alkaline phosphatase on serum and plasma samples can be used. Accurate measurement may
samples submitted to a reference laboratory, the sample source should be listed on the requisition
form; send enough sample for multiple samples to be run.
A complete ejaculate from a normal dog with normal testicles should have an alkaline phosphatase
level greater than 5,000 U/L; it can exceed 20,000 U/L. A sample with an alkaline phosphatase
level below 5,000 U/L (often below 2,000 U/L) indicates that the dog either failed to fully ejaculate,
ejaculated only prostatic fluid with no fluid from the testes (pain or psychological reasons) or has
a bilateral cutflow blockage of the ducts (a physical cutflow obstruction). If it is suspected the
dog failed to fully ejaculate, he can be collected additional times, addressing reasons for failure
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 319
to ejaculate by manipulating the environment. Lutalyse? or GnRH, may be used to maximize his
opportunity to collect fully.
Once the ejaculate is determined to be complete, history and physical exam findings become the
focus of the investigation (See Appendix D-6}.
If the dog has been on medications that impair fertility and it is medically appropriate to discontinue
 h paddois si uoa lae shp ao no ne pana ag pinos ay 'sinp supano a
improved fertility. If hernias are detected, surgical correction and reevaluation 90 or more days
and ultrasound, removal of the abnormal testicle (tumor, atrophy, spermatocele) may allow the
local inflammation, a rise in the intratesticular temperature of both testes, and/or an increase in
If the SAP is high (>5000 U/L), pre-testicular and testicular causes should be pursued first. If the
bilateral outflow cbstruction. This can be caused by bilateral spermatocele, sperm granuloma or
segmental aplasia of the epididymis
If there is an endocrine disturbance, fertility may return once the underlying problem is managed.
A dog with confirmed Brucella may need to be euthanized. A dog with a culture result with one
predominant bacteria may respond to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Mycoplasma is often isolated
from the ejaculate but may not be the primary cause of infertility; it may only be a marker indicating
another underlying cause. Testicular biopsy results may suggest an underlying treatable cause. If the
karyotype indicates an intersex dog, there is no treatment to initiate fertility.
Stud dog with normal to low libido with blood in the ejaculate
(Hematospermia)
Blood in the ejaculate commonly originates from the prostate or trauma to the penis or other
reproductive organs. Careful cbservation during collection can usually distinguish whether the source
is from the prostate (blood mixed with the ejaculate) or from the penis (fresh blood from the exterior
surface of the penis. Care during collection and avciding contact between the penis and any rigid
semen collection equipment will minimize the likelihood of trauma. Minor trauma during collection
does not appear to cause discomfort.
Unlike in some other species, blood in the ejaculate does not interfere with fertility unless present in
such large volumes that blood clots interfere with sperm motility. If large quantities are noted, fresh
Benign prostatic hypertrophy is a common cause of hematospermia in the middle-aged to older
dog. A presumptive diagnosis is made based on clinical signs and rectal palpation. It can only
sonographer or the CPSE blood test. This condition frequently responds well to medical therapy
(See section on Disorders of the Prostate earlier in this chapter.)
Stud dog with normal to low libido with abnormal sperm motility
(Asthenozoospermia)
zoospermic dogs can still successfully impregnate a bitch, but the semen does not ship or freeze
320 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
as well as normal semen. The causes are similar to those of teratozoospermia (abnormal sperm
morphology) and include testicular tumors, infection cf the reproductive tract, collection equipment
contaminated with disinfectants or glove powder, and immotile cilia syndrome.
should include when the condition was noted, the reproductive history of the stud dog, and
information regarding the type of equipment used to collect and inseminate. The stud dog should be
collected at the clinic where the evaluation is being done. If the client has been handling breedings
brought to the appointment for evaluation. What seems to be of little signihcance to the breeder
If sperm motility is low, centrifuge the semen to remove any possible urine or prostatic contamination.
An appropriate semen extender should be added, the sample carefully warmed, and re-evaluated
If motility remains poor, test the dog for Brucella canis and culture the ejaculate. If the dog is
brucellosis positive, euthanasia may be an option. Appropriate antibiotic therapy may be indicated
based on culture results.
Electron microscopy can be done at some reference laboratories to evaluate the sperm tail in
dogs, there are no motile cilia in the respiratory tract and sperm. The dog generally has a history of
respiratory disease. Some will also have situs inversus, where the crgans are reversed right-to-left
Stud dog with normal to low libido with abnormal ejaculate components
including red blood cells, white blood cells and tumor cells
Any semen sample collected at the clinic should be examined microscopically. Bacteria, exfoliated
epithelial and other cell types may be seen in addition to sperm. The semen containing this group
of cells may look normal or be grossly abnormal in appearance. The ejaculate should be evaluated
A normal stud dog can have up to 2000 white blood cells (wBCs) per ml and be normal. White
blood cells in the ejaculate do not always mean there is an infection; this may be an inflammatory
process or they may be from the prepuce and not reflect any infection. It is possible to see WBCs
and be unable to culture any bacteria. It is also possible to culture bacteria without finding WBCs
in the ejaculate. If the culture produces more than 10,0o0 CFU per ml of semen, it is considered
significant. Normal bacterial flora is found in parts of the urogenital tract.
Blood commonly results from trauma to the penis during collection or from the prostate. If from
the penis, it is seldom of any significance in that it will not interfere with successful breeding of the
bitch and it will not usually reflect any pathology in the male. It is usually bright red and the source
of the trauma on the penis is often noticed at the collection. If blood is from the prostate, it is often
longevity. The affected stud dog should be evaluated to determine the cause of the prostatic disorder
Although rare, cells exfoliated from a tumor anywhere in the urogenital tract may be seen in the
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 321
If confirmed, a complete evaluation of the urogenital tract is required to locate the source of the
abnormal cells.
Blastomyces organisms can be shed into the ejaculate from the prostate. Blastomyces is potentially
Treatment protocols for the infertile stud dog
Ireat the underlying cause of infertility if it can be determined. Spermatogenesis takes approximately
Less than Io% of stud dogs who no longer produce sperm will be returned fo fertility.
nu e 'punoi aq u ano ou j no 'asn aapun a uean no suoan oi up ul
And at the least, you are doing something during the long 90 day waif-and-see period.
their use.
Commonly used supplements
Glycosaminoglycans
found in many formulations by many manufacturers. Many, like International Canine Semen Bank's
CF- Plus?, contain perna (green-lipped) mussels as the primary active ingredient. Anecdotal reports
Ihere is no documentation to support the use of this product in the dog. The dosage for this
application has not been determined; there are dosage regimens for the use of these products for
that this product will cause any harmtul side effects.
Anti-oxidants
These typically include Vitamins C, E, beta carotene, and selenium among others. They are available
from many manufacturers over-the-counter. They appear to act by removing tree radicals, thus
semen concentrations are improved, that there are fewer head and acrosomal abnormalities when
Some components can be harmtul if used in excess, so care should be taken when this is prescribed.
Fatty acid supplements
These are available from many manufacturers over-the-counter. Anecdotal reports indicate that there
 panddns si l peui ansua oi passasse ag pnous spioe Aet g ol g eaao po oe pue suauodo
an anti-inflammatory ratio.
L-Carnitine
This nutritional supplement alters fat metabolism. lt is available from several manufacturers and is
322Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
found in some senior dog diets. Anecdotally, it is reported to improve sperm motility. The mechanism
of action has not been determined. lt is included in some commercially available dog foods to aid in
weight loss and should be used with care to avoid excessive weight loss in the patient.
No commercially available dog food has been documented to improve semen quality, morphology.
motility, or quantity.
Technical advances in canine reproduction
Business and technical advances during the last forty years have allowed us to provide breeders
services not previously possible. These advances include:
The successful use of frozen canine semen;
The successful use of fresh chilled shipped canine semen;
International shipment of fresh and frozen semen;
Rapid results from blood tests, and the ability to use very small blood samples for neonates
 including in - house CBC's, Chemistry profiles and progesterone levels;
Ultrasound;
Improved anesthetic protocols and pain management;
New drugs - prostaglandins, prolactin inhibitors, GnRH agonists and antagonists;
Overnight courier service;
 Fax and email communication;
Internet websites;
Mapping of the canine genome;
DNA health screening;
DNA parentage testing;
Endoscopic procedures;
Telemedicine;
Vaccine advances.
Chapter 10: Infertility and Reproductive Disorders in the Valuable Stud Dog 323
This page intentionally left blank
CHAPTER
11
Special Breedings-
Working with Fresh Chilled
and Frozen Semen
Introduction
Semen freezing is a unique service available at a limited number of veterinary hospitals and
non-veterinary facilities throughout the U.S. and the world. Many veterinarians are less familiar with
 s '   ui     na s   a 
canine semen. Veterinarians interested in learning this are encouraged to seek hands-on training
from one of the semen freezing franchises or at a theriogenology conference (Figure 11-1).
Figure 11-1.
A litter of 4 puppies produced from semen that was over 25 years old
Who and why?
Who are the clients and dogs that semen freezing would be useful for? First, the clients, because
opportunities cutside of their chronclogical or geographical area without traveling a long distance.
Line breedings are no longer limited by the lifespan of the dog. Outcrosses are no longer limited
by the part of the world the bitch lives in. Any breeder who is willing to go to the additional time,
trouble and expense is a candidate for semen freezing. Collecting semen for freezing and using it
for breeding is more costly than using fresh semen, but provides options not otherwise available.
Frozen semen can be collected from and used to inseminate any healthy sexually mature dog who
superior specimen of the breed or shows promise of longevity.
Terminology
what techniques are planned.
Fresh semen
Semen collected at the time to be used and inserted immediately. Both dog and bitch on premises
Fresh chilled extended semen
Semen: collected 24 to 48 hours prior to insemination, transported from the location of the male
to the location of the bitch. The stud dog must be alive and available.The advantage is the stud dog
and bitch may be at very remote locations from one another but can still be bred without shipping
the dogs or traveling.
326 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Frozen semen
Semen collected at any time in advance of use frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen until used, thawed
and immediately inseminated using specialized insemination techniques. The stud dog does NO
have to be available.
Surgical breeding
A routine invasive surgical procedure useful when the bitch has a history of infertility or the semen is
compromised by freezing, chilling or infertility.
Transcervical Insemination (Tcl)
An invasive but non-surgical endoscopic procedure requiring specialized skills and equipment to
place semen directly in the uterus.
When to collect
dogs who have not completed their performance titles should be considered candidates for freezing
if the owner predicts they will accomplish great things. It is preferable to have some or all of their
health screening completed.
Any age male that is still able to produce viable sperm can be collected, but in some cases, older
dogs tend to have semen that does not tolerate freezing as well.
Under some circumstances, semen can also be frozen from a dog's testicles removed at neutering
or from any intact male within 24 hours of death if kept cool. If the patient dies acutely or is
neutered, the spermatic cords should be ligated using sterile technique, the testes placed in a
harvest and freeze the semen within 24 hours of castration or death.
We recommend that you freeze early and freeze often.
When to inseminate
 u a snsa eou e unp pasn si uaas ao uam nsa saono issans sso al
young to middle-aged healthy bitch. Precise timing is required for success.
Where to freeze
 Semen freezing requires specialized training, supplies and equipment. Using frozen semen for
a breeding is a skill many veterinarians can master with some assistance from the shipping
veterinarian and their staff (Figure 11-2)
How to freeze
Semen thawing and surgical technique is described in Chapter 4 (Appendix B-3).
The AKC registration or other registry papers, DNA profile (can be collected at the appointment
if not previously done), current Brucella test results and a consent form, including information for
who controls the use of the semen if the owner becomes unavailable, should be available at the
 appointment to freeze.
The oldest frozen canine semen is approximately 40 years old. Bovine semen pre-dates canine
semen uses minimal energy, it is expected to last for many more years.
Chapter 1l: Special Breedings - Working with Fresh Chilled and Frozen Semen 327
The semen must remain frozen until ready to use. Semen is stored and shipped in liquid nitrogen or
nitrogen vapor, at a temperature of -322° F or -70° C. Even brief exposure to room air will cause
 addus si uawas uazoy aul uazoan ag pouun i! 'pamu aun uawas au oi aeep suauead
specialized tanks known as dewars. These dewars are expensive to purchase, maintain and ship. They
have a limited lifespan. They work by absorbing liquid nitrogen into the liner; the nitrogen then creates
14 days. No commercial shipper in the U.S. will allow free liquid nitrogen to be transported due to its
Auadoid ag isnw laddiys yodea ayl laddiys lodea e ui ag isnw paddys uawas e os 'aumeu snopezey
charged and drained to avoid excess liquid nitrogen from being spilled in transit (Figure 1l-2D).
TCSB-WT
Tank1
R
/个
ICD8SF18
HCS
Figure 11-2.
A. and B. Storeroom with liquid nitrogen tanks storing frozen canine semen. C and D. Reusable nitrogen vapor shipper for
shipping frozen semen overnight.
328 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
each frozen using different techniques. Veterinarians who freeze semen have preferences, but both
have been used for 40 years with success. In either form, the number of viable sperm after thawing
thawing. Shipping dewars can maintain the semen in a frozen form for up to 7 days without adding
more nitrogen, so even veterinary clinics that do not have storage tanks can provide this service.
There is usually a small additional charge to keep the shipping tank - because many veterinary
clinics need their shippers returned for another shipment, this should be arranged in advance.
Figure 11-3.
A. Pellets of extended frozen semen in a cryo vial. B. Semen frozen in straws.
Liability
Every facility that freezes and/or stores frozen semen should carry insurance and have a contract
with the semen owner to limit their liability in case of semen loss or damage.
Breeding a bitch with frozen semen
Breeding with frozen semen is less forgiving, more complicated, and more expensive than other
breedings. It can also be very rewarding utilizing the genetics of stud dogs of a by-gone era or in a
remote location (Appendix B-5).
REMEMBERTHESEIMPORTANT POINTS
You are using semen that is expensive and is likely limited in availability. Use this finite resource
wisely.
Timing the bitch's cycle must be precise, and the insemination window is approximately 12 to 24
hours. This requires the veterinary staff to breed on the bitch's schedule, not theirs. This means
that breeding is often added to the schedule on short notice and/or is cutside of regular offce
hours.
Anesthesia and surgery are used for most frozen inseminations. Consider the benefits versus the
nisks before embarking on this
Chapter 1l1: Special Breedings - Working with Fresh Chilled and Frozen Semen 329
As with any breeding, encourage the client to assure that the bitch has current vaccinations, has her
pre-breeding screening, and is in good health. You may wish to do this type of breeding only with a
and have decreased fertility. A breeding history should be taken and vaginal exams and cultures
done if indicated. A Brucella test should have been run with a negative result within 3 months.
The owner of the semen, usually the stud dog owner, must sign a release form. Shipping costs from
owner of the bitch will usually pay the release fee, overnight shipping to the inseminating veterinary
clinic, portable semen shipping tank rental, and return shipping of the tank to the storage facility.
Instruct your client to contact the inseminating veterinary clinic at the EIRST SIGN that their bitch
Is in heat. lt is best to schedule her first appointment in the first 6 days of her estrus for a vaginal
Progesterone tests should be run approximately every 24 to 72 hours as ovulation nears. An LH
level can also be run if requested in advance. LH levels can be helpful in timing the bitch but must be
run every 24 hours and can be costly.
If required by the hospital protocol, pre-surgical blood work should be drawn at one of these visits in
preparation for anesthesia.
Once the date of ovulation is confirmed, it is time to schedule the bitch for anesthesia and surgical
insemination or TCl. If using surgical insemination, advise the client that their bitch will receive
and examined, semen is placed in the lumen, the uterus repositioned into the abdomen, and the
abdominal wall and skin closed. She will be recovered from anesthesia and discharged the same
day. The entire visit typically takes about 2 fo 3 hours from admisslon fo discharge. She should rest
Perform an ultrasound at day 24 to 28 after breeding, for early diagnosis of pregnancy and provide
the client with a pre-natal care handout.
puppy survival rates.
a p ss  sn ai s u d ' sa  aa os
to a high, but usually realistic standard. The clients understand a great deal about the business and
practice of veterinary medicine. They seek ongoing education. The patients are usually wellbred,
well-trained, and exceptional examples of their breeds. Providing a unique service to allow dog
BEST WSHES FOR GREAT FERTILITY.
330 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
References
Adams, Ana. “lncreasing Conception Rates and Litter Sizes." Western Veterinary Conference, Las
Vegas, 2004.
Battaglia, Carman: Breading Better Dogs.
Bell J S, Cavanagh K E, Tilley L P, Smith F W K, eds.: Veterinary Medical Guide to Dog and Cat
Breeds; Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia, 2012.
Bouchard G, Plata-Madrid H, Youngquist RS, Buening GM, Ganjam VK, Krause GF, Allen GK, Paine
AL: Absorption of an alternate source of immunoglobulin in pups. Am J Vet Res. February 1992;
53(2):230-233
Theriogenology 2009; Vol. 1, Number 2: 297-307.
Drost Project
Feldman EC, Nelson Rw. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Philadelphia: Saunders;
2001, pg 494.
Fontbonne, Alain. “Infertility in the Bitch." World Small Animal Veterinary Association World Congress,
Prague, 11 0ct. 2006.
Fontbonne, Alain. “Pathology of the ovaries and of the uterus in the bitch." ESAVS, Zurich, 12 Sept.
2007.
Fontbonne, Alain. “Infertility in the Bitch and in the Dog." World Small Animal Veterinary Association
World Congress, Sydney, 21 Aug. 2007.
Vegas, 2005.
Freshman, Joni L. "Wake the Baby! The Latest on Neonatal Resuscitation For The Dog And Cat." VIN
Online. 9 Nov. 2008
Hess, Milan. “Documented and anecdotal effects of certain pharmaceutical agents used to enhance
19-e19 ' anssl ' 9g aun ' 5olouaouau1  op ay un Anb uaes
Hoskins, Johnny D. "Small Animal Pediatric Medicine." Tufts Animal Expo. North Grafton MA. 2002.
Conference. Atlantic City, 2005.
Hutchison, Robert: "Canine Reprcduction, Whelping and Neonatal Care." Lakeshore Pembroke Welsh
Corgi Club. Crystal Lake, IL. 25 March 2005
International Canine Semen Bank
332 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Saunders; 2001;.
Jones, Bretaigne. "Variables That Influence Litter Size." Lomira Wl, 20 June 2009.
Kazacos, KR: "Treatment and Control of Gastrointestinal Helminths." Western Veterinary Conference.
Las Vegas. 2002.
Kampschmidt Kit: "Drug Use in the Neonatal Pediatric Small Animal Patient." Western Veterinary
Conference. Las Vegas. 2006.
Kampschmidt Kit. VIN online posting. 24 May 2005
Lopate, Cheryl. SF I list, 15 April 2007.
Mauldin, G. Neal. “Mammary Gland Tumors." Atlantic Coast Veterinary Conference Atlantic City, 2006.
OFA website, www.offa.org
Philibert JC, Snyder PW, Glickman N, Glickman LT, Knapp DW, Waters DJ. “lnfluence of host
   s    p   m sop u ns o s
Jan-Feb;1 /(1):102-6.
Animal Veterinary Association, Granda Spain, 2002.
(CHV-1): clinical, serological and virclogical patterns in breeding colonies; Theriogenology, Volume
64, Issue 1, Pages 61-74.
Root Kustritz, Margaret V. "Canine Brucellosis." Western Veterinary Conference, Las Vegas, 2007.
Verstegen J, Dhaliwal G, Verstegen-Onclin K. Mucometra, cystic endometrial hyperplasia, and
pyometra in the bitch: Advances in treatment and assessment of future reproductive success.
Theriogenology. Volume /0, Issue 3, Pages 364-3/4.
 e n np sl d at e a  u ' ea ' 
non-infectious causes: a review. Theriogenology: 2008; 70: 304-319.
References 333
This page intentionally left blank
Appendices
Appendix A: For Technical Staff
Appendix B: For Telephone Staff
Appendix C: Client Information
Appendix D: For Veterinarians
Appendix A: For technical staff
A-1. APGAR scores for newborns
Proposed APGAR index for neonatal dogs and cats
 Parameter
0 pts
1pt
2 pts
 Activicy, muscle tone
 Flaccid
Some tone in extremities
Active movements
Pulse, heart rate
 Absent- < than 110 bpm
110 - 220 bpm
> 220 bpm
 Reflexes when stressed
Absenc
Some movement
Crying out
 Mucous membrane color
Pale or cyanocic
 Slightly cyanocic
Pink
Respiratory rate
Absent
Weak, irregular
> 15/min, rhythmic
lnterpretation:
Total points
Vitality
0-3
4-6
Moderate
7-10
Normal 
The views and opinions expressed in this page are strictly those of the page author. (Root-Kustritz)
The contents of this page have not been reviewed or approved by the University of Minnesota.
336 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A-2. Fresh chilled semen checklist/how to pack the box
CHECKLIST FOR FRESH CHILLED SEMEN SHIPMENT
Name of stud dog owner
Date_
Address to ship kit to (owner or veterinarian)
Name of recipient bitch owner
Call name of bitch
Credit card number of recipient bitch's owner:
dxa
MC/MISA
Route to be shipped: UPS/FedEx/Midwest Express/Other
Special Shipping Instructions or Destination
TO INCLUDE WITH SHIPMENT:
 Extender 1 tube per shipment 2 cc each tube-have at room temp or thawed - use in a 1:2 to 1:4
ratio semen to extender
 Plastic conical tube -1 per shipment with blue cap, labeled with name of stud dog & owner and
bitch & owner (to package semen)
 2 whirlpacks per shipment, (to double bag semen)
 1 large piece of Paraflm per tube (to seal top of blue tube - prevent leakage)
dus pue naaoi aden uen - pau woos lauia uosu ym juads lad xog suiddus I 
as l package
 2 Gel packs per shipment - 1 frozen and 1 refrigerated
 Newspaper to put under tubes and to fll box
 Semen Evaluation form
 2 Artificial vaginas (clear sleeve) with clear centrifuge tube to collect dog in to
 Shipping label addressed to our hospital
 3M Freeze indicator if outdoor temp is below 32° or has had trouble with semen arriving in poor
condition
 Instruction form (how to pack box) and how to handle semen
 AKC Registry Litter Registration form for Fresh Extended Al (to register litter)
FEES:
 Puppy Pack (package to ship in)
 Shipping cost
 Charges applied to credit card at time of shipment.
(Staff initials)
 Additional charges applied to credit card.
(Staff initials)
 Tech handling shipment
(Staff signature)
Crumpled newspaper
Semen/media in screw-cap tube in Whirl-pak
1/2 inch folded newspaper
 Refrigerated cold pack*
- Frozen cold pack*
Cut away view of
* DO NOT SUBSTITUTE OTHER COLD PACKS FOR
prepared shipping kit
THE ICSB PACKS THAT COME WITH THIS KIT.
Appendices 337
A-3.Intraosseousfuid administration set up
Intraosseous catheter placement - Set-up
1. Needle - 20 gauge. Spinal needle with scylet is preferred if available.
2. Stylet - from IV catheter or smaller needle to clear lumen of needle if plugged.
3. Gauze squares
4. 1 inch whice tape
5. Saline flush
6. Sterile gloves - depends on doccors size
7. Nolvasan surgical scrub
8. Antibiotic or betadine ointment
 9. Injection port
 338Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A-4.Laboratory services, vendors and other services
Laboratory services, vendors, and other services
 Pre-Breeding Health
PennHIP
www.pennhip.org
Hip x-ray evaluarion
215-573-3176
Screening/Registry
OFA
www.offa.org
Hip, Elbow, Shoulder x-ray
573-442-0418
evaluarion, thyroid, cardiac and
parellar registry
CERF
www.vmdb.org
Eye cerificarion
217-693-4800
Laborarories
Marshfield Laboratory
www.marshfieldlabs.org
Laboratory, wide range of
1-800-222-
services
5835
Cornell
www.diaglab.ver.cornell.
Laborarory, wide range of
607-253-3900
edu
services including AGID Brucella
testing,Coagularion testing and
histology with specialty in repro-
ductive and neonaral pathology
Michigan Srare
www.anirmalhealrh.msu.
Endocrinology specialty labora-
517-353-0621
edu
 tory services
MM1
www.mmigenomics.com
 Parenrage evaluation
800-311-
8808
Exr. 3021
Breed Registries
AKC
www.akc.org
Parenrage registry
919-233-9767
UKC
www.ukcdogs.com
Parenrage registry
269-343-9020
Health Registry
CHIC
www.caninehealthinfo.org
 Bundles of resring recommend-
573-442-0418
ed by breed clubs
Suddus
UPS
www.ups.com
Overnight package shipping
800-742-5877
services
FedEx
www.fedex.com
Overnight package shipping
800-463-3339
services
 Breeding Supplies 
MOFA
www.minirube.com
vendor - semen exenders and
800-6464882
semen evaluation equipment
Bood Products
HemoPer
www.hemoper.org
Blood producrs including fresh
714-891-2022
frozen plasma for neonares
Whelping Services
WhelpWise TM
www.whelpwise.com
Tocodynometry (uterine con-
888-2814867
traction moniroring)
 Breeding Supplies
 Inrernarional Canine
www.ik9sb.com
 Semen freezing and exrenders
503-663-7031
Semen Bank
 Synbiotics
www.synbiorics.com
Semen freezing and exrenders
800-228-4305
CLONE
www.innovarivecaninere-
Semen freezing and extenders
215489-2620
producrion.com
Camelor Farms
www.camelorfarms.com
Semen freezing and extenders
800-254-8837
DNA Testing
VerGen
www.verger.com
DNA Testing
800-483-8436
Oprigen
www.oprigen.com
DNA Testing
607-257-0301
University of Pennsyl-
www.med.upenn.edu/
Genetic Testing
814-865-7696
vania
generics
PennGen
www.upend.edu/penngen 
Genetic Testing
215-898-8894
Washingron Srate
www.vermed.wsu.edu
 MDR and other genetic resting
509-335-2988
University
Laboratory
Michigan Stare
www.animalhealth.msu.edu
Iohexol clearance resting
517-355-0281
Appendices 339
A-5. List of supplies for C-section
C-section SET-UP
Paperwork:
 Patient Record must be available
 Surgery consent form - owner needs to sign
 Anesthesia form
 C-section surgical report
 C-section discharge sheet
Induction/IV setup:
 Mouth gag
 Endotracheal tube
 Bland eye cintment
 IV catheter
 IV injection port
 Endotracheal tube gauze or other tie
 1" white tape for IV catheter
 *Lidocaine and cotton swab for cat only *
 Saline flush for IV flush
Laryngoscope
Butorphanol or Buprinex injectable
 Propofol injectable
Surgery Room Set-up:
 Heating pad - wrap around warmed Lactated Ringers for abdominal flush to keep warm
 Lactated Ringer or Normal Saline 1 liter heating in microwave for 90 sec., then on heating pad for
abdominal flush
 Colloids - hetastarch if necessary
 Surgery table
V-tray
 Heating source for bitch (turned on) - be careful to avoid anything that could cause thermal burns
 Have towels ready to support rear of bitch if needed
 Suture for closing the uterus, abdominal wall, subcutaneous tissue and skin
 Scalpel blade (15)
 Lap towels - 2 large and 4 small
 Set of 4 towel clamps
 Surgery gown - 1 per person scrubbing in
 Surgery caps and masks for all in the surgical suite
 Surgery pack
 Serrated straight Mayo scissors for episiotomy
 Surgery gloves - 2 pair for each person scrubbing in
as uoisioui aun wo reme neu paeoo auoi daay oi aden iona 
 Oxytocin from refrigerator
 Preferred post-op pain medication injectable
 Atropine injectable
 Metoclopramide injectable (Reglan)
 Butorphanol or Buprinex injectable
340 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Puppy Set-up:
 Non-sterilized set of colored towels matching sterilized set
Heating pads
 Puppy scale (weight in kilograms preferred)
 Stethoscope
Laryngoscope
 Otoscope with large tip
 Sterile umbilical pack (needle holder and hemostat)
 Suture for umbilical cords
 Laundry baskets
Bulb syringes
 DeLee mucous traps
 Dopram - 0.1 cc per pup - label 
 Epinephrine
Atropine
 Dexamethasone
 Lasix injectable
 Vitamin K injectable
 Endotracheal tubes suitable for puppies - Cole tube, tom cat catheters, red rubber feeding tubes
 Stylet for endotracheal tube
 End to adapt endotracheal tube to fit oxygen hoses or Ambu bag
 O, with regulator turned on
 Fish tank or O, chamber
 Lasix injectable
Additional Set up to keep work area clean and safe:
 Place non-slip mat where Dr.'s feet will be
 Place towels in work area and around surgery table
 Place waste basket and steel surgery pail where doctor can drop , gauze, and used linen
 Place incubator or warmed box or basket in an area to move pups when stable
 O, on in treatment area
 Anesthetic machine in surgery for bitch with O, on
Sequence:
 Arrival of the bitch with possible or confirmed dystocia
 Exam room
Heated basket for pups
Towels
 Blanket for bitch to nest on during evaluation
 Supplies and drugs as listed for neonatal resuscitation
 Preparation for possible radiograph
 Examination glove and lubricant (KY, Nolvalube, J-lube, etc)
 Technician to take history and assist with examination
 Assess the bitch
 Palpation/vaginal digital exam
 PE/TPR/Blood pressure
 Radiograph and or ultrasound as indicated
 Pre-Surgical blood panel with protime if available/Progesterone if available
 Doppler to assess pups heart rates if available
 Owner sign consent form to allow anesthesia and surgical procedure after discussing options and
risks
Appendices 341
 Dose bitch with atropine injectable (1 cc per 20 pounds) and Reglan injectable at 0.3 cc per 10
pounds
 Administer antibiotics only if indicated by condition of bitch and pups
 Shave abdomen before anesthesia
Move bitch to surgery room
 Start oxygen by face mask pre-oxygenate 5 mins
 STOP! LOOK AROUND TO BE SURE ALL SUPPLIES AND STAFF ARE IN PLACE AND READY TO
MOVE QUICKLY
(papaau se ai pue 2/z ot 71 um peis) spunod g/o I re poodoid ym eisausaue anpul 
 Mouth gag
 Bland eye cintment apply to protect
 Intubate and inflate cuff/secure tube with gauze
 GO!
 Place bitch on surgery table with left side slightly rolled down
 Attach anesthetic machine and monitors
 Start IV fluids at rate on chart per hour
 Scrub the site with Nolvasan and alcohol alternating preps cr routine surgical prep per your
hospital protocol
 Roll her onto back and secure in final position as doctor prefers - be sure she is in a comfortable
cause irreparable damage to esophagus
 Prep again in case final positioning contaminated surgical field
Addnd/slamoi del/aunns/adep/sdwelo lamot/apelg/yoed Aaauns/sanoja/umoa - saddns uado 
towels
Bitch
Pups
 Increase anesthetic gas if light or titrace wich Propofol
 Suction wich bulb syringe or DeLee
 Metacam after last pup is out at 0.18 ml/10#sq
 Monitor/assist wich respirations
 Oxytocin p r n
 Stechoscope to check for heart beat if not obvious
 Suture uterus
 Oxygen as needed - face mask or chamber
 Belly flush and eliminate soiled lap towels
 Dopram and/or caffeine to stimulate respirations
 Re-glove
 Acupuncture if needed
 Closure
 Intubate trachea if needed
 Discharge instructions
 Check for cleft palaces and ocher defecs/treat
 Make up meds for owner to take home - Metacam/Reglan/
 Ligate umbilical cord/treat witch tincture of iodine
Nemex/Tinccure of Iodine
 Remove IV catheter IF OK
 Identify pups corresponding co map ofucerine locacion
 weigh pups and record
 Place in oxygen/incubacor or warmed basket
 Photographs
342 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A-6. Canine semen report for owner and receiving veterinarian
Clinic name, address and contact information
CANINE SEMEN REPORT for Owner and Receiving Veterinarian
From:
Client Name:
Client Phone:
Dog's call name:
Age:
Dog's Registered Name:
Proven: Yes/No
Registration Number:
AKC/UKC/OTHER
Breed:
For:
Client Name:
Client Phone:
Dog's call name:
Age:
Dog's Registered Name:
Proven: Yes/No
Registration Number:
AKC/UKC/OTHER
Breed:
88888888
Semen Analysis: Date,
Volume collected:
 Concentration per ml
Total sperm count:
X106
(MULTIPLY VOLUME IN ML x CONCENTRATION PER ML = TOTAL SPERM COUNT)
Centrifuged? Yes/No Color_
Volume extender added:
Total volume shipped:
Extender used: ICSB/Synbiotics/ Minitube
/Uppsala/Other:
Percent motility.
%
Speed of Progression: 0 1 2  3  4 5
Immature__% Bent__% Coiled 
% Detached
_% Droplets
%Other
Other: White Blood Cells
per 400x
Red Blood Cells
per 400 x
Abnormal morphology
%
Normal Morphology
(MULTIPLY SPERM COUNT /ML X % NORMAL = TOTAL NORMAL SPERM COUNT)
TOTAL NORMAL SPERM CELLS
x 106
Comments
Processed by:
Appendices 343
A-7. Whelping calendar
Whelping Calendar (from date of ovulation to due date +/- 24 hours)
May
Jun
Feb
Apr
Mar
Jd
[uly
 Jun
Aug
Sep
Aug
Oct
Sep
Nov
Oct
Dec
No
A
口
0
一
W
口
总
口
5
3
1
3
3
2
3
3
3
1
6
2
4
4-５
4
2
3
4
2
#
3
了
5
５
5
5
B
6—？
6—？
4
6？
6了
5
4
6
4
6
4
5
5
5
5
了
５
了
5
了
10
10
6
8-9
6
8
6
８—0
168
6
8
6
6
6
11
了
了
了
了
了
了
了
12
12
8
0
10
8
1
10
B
10
8
10
8
10
8
13
9
13
9
9
9
11
6
10
14
10
一如
23-
2 134 151617 819 20 2 234156218
nl
12B4151678172022
12134 1516 7 819202
10
2—3—4—5—
12
100
12
10
11
15
11
15
12
13
13
11
12
16
456７
123—415167-8120
12一
234151678-190
12
4—5—6—７
16
12-3—
4一5—
2一
13
13
17
13
17
13
13一
3
13
14
18 
4一15-
45-6—7-819-0
如
415678920
6了
16
4一15
15
15
1g
19
15
16
0
16
6—8—
18—1720—22
8
16
16
16一
了
17
21
U—2—3—4
190——2
80
17
22
18
19
23
19
20 
20
2
21
5
2
5 67812 20
2284156
3456138
22B4156
222341516
345678
2284156
22
21354151617
3415678
22
34156178
0—2—34—156
3544562718
224156
3541561718
U23—24156
2
一咒
2
34562
28230
咒一纪一一一
34156
3—4156
咒一纪一妮一
27
31
29
5
29
82
27
29
27
29
27
28
28
2
28
30
28
28
30
30
28
29
28
.30
3
30
&
30
8
Ded
6
2
29
31
1
29
3
3
29
OE
29
3
29
29
2
Aug
5ep
Oct
Nov
Jan
Jun
OE.
3
30
30
2
0
30
OE.
1
2
30
OE.
3
31
31
2
31
2
31
2
31
2
31
31
O = Ovulation date
W = whelping date
344 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
A-8. Equipment and vendor list
Equiprment
endor
Microscope slides arnd cover slips
MW/Butler/Midwvest
DifFQuick Stairl
MWI/Butler/Midwest
Dip Quick Stain (Jorvet)
MWI/Butler/Midwest
Guarded culurettes
Reproductive Resources 1-800-331-0195
Norm Ject 10cc syringes (Latex Free)
MWI/Butler/Midwest
Cooled semeri shippirig kits arnd exte rider
ik9sb.com Irteatiomal Carnine Semer Barnk, MOFA
Cottor swabs, 6 irnch 
MW/Butler/Midwvest
Nor-latex exam gloves
MWI/Butler/Midvest
Surgery gloves
MWI/Butler/Midvest
Normal salirne, sterile, rew package
MWI/Butler/Midvest
20 g IV catheters 
MWI/Butler/Midvest
Tom cat catheters
MWI/Butler/Midwest
Paraflm@
VWR Irteratiomal 1-800-932-5000
Whirl-Palks@
Nasco/MWI
Paste ur pipettes
MW/Butler/Midwest
Ceritrifuge tubes 
MWI/Butler/Midwest
D-Tec CB Brucella Test (Syrnlbiotics)
Zoetis
Porta-Cul tubes for Brucella cultures
www.bd.com 201-847-6800
Aimes culturettes
Your prefered referece lab
DNA kits from AKC
akc.org
Witress LH kits (Synbiotics)
syrbiotics.com
 Status Pro Progesterore test kits
syribiotics.com
Camelot Farms Progesterore
Ovucheck Premate (Syrbiotics)
syribiotics.org
Relaxirt test kits - ReproCHEK or Witrless?
syribiotics.org
SriuggleSafe
 srluglesafe.ca
Delee mucustraps ( Whelp Wise)
whelpwise.com
 Equidore
equitoxpharma.com
 Canipro Thaw and Irsemiratior Media
MOFA 1-800-646-4882
Caipro Frozen Semer Exterder
MOFA 1-800-646-4882
Caripro chilled Semer Exterder
MOFA 1-800-646-4882
 Sperm courter (Spermacue)
MOFA 1-800-646-4882
Al Collectior Sleeves (ICSB)
ICSB 1-503-663-7031
CF Plus Fertility (ICSB)
ICSB 1-503-663-7031
Freeze Vials(ICSB)
ICSB 1-503-663-7031
Thaw Media (ICSB)
ICSB 1-503-663-7031
Freezing Media (ICSB)
ICSB 1-503-663-7031
Fresh Chilled Media (IC SB)
ICSB 1-503-663-7031
Cryo Media (ICSB)
ICSB 1-503-663-7031
Fresh rozen plasma
Hemopet.org
MWI - mwivet.com
1-888-722-2242
Butler-accessbuler.com
1-888-329-3861
Midwest Veterirary - www.midwestvet.ret
1-800-449-0208
ICSB-ik9sb.com
1-503-663-7031
RICA Surgical Products -Incubator
www.ricasurgical.com 80-89-3218
TE Scoltt
www.scotsdog/thewhrie.html 
Appendices 345
A-9.Information about plans to breedyour male dog
Your clinic information here
Information about your plans to breed your male:
Your name:
Your pet's name:
Co-owners names:
Your pet's registered name:
Registration #
DNA completed Y/N
Do you have an appointment scheduled? Yes/No
 Do you want an appointment? Yes/No
What are your preferred appointment dates? Monday/Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday/Friday/Saturday
What are your preferred appointment times? Early AM/Late AM/ Noon hour/ Early PM/ Late PM
Best way to reach you? Phone (list times available and numbers)
(home)
(cell)
(work) E mail
Have we seen you as a client before? Yes/No Have we seen this pet before? Yes/ No When?
Pet Information: Age:
weeks/months/years or Date of Birth
Dog/Cat Breed:
Sex: Male/ Neutered Female/ Spayed
Breeding Plan:
Date this cycle began:
Is Al being done at our clinic? Y/N
Type of insemination planned: Natural /Naginal #
/TCI #
/Surgical
Type of semen planning to use: Fresh/Fresh Chilled/Frozen
Date of last Brucella test
Test run - RSAT/Culture Vaginal culture?
Name of Owner/Stud dog/Bitch to be bred to
Location of bitch's Veterinarian
Phone.
SHIPPINGADDRESS
BILLING ADDRESS
Shipping plan: FedEx/UPS/Post office/other
SHIPPING BOX PROVIDED BY: Shipping Veterinarian/Recipient
History:
MALE: First breeding/Date previously bred on
 Natural/ Al/ TCl/ Surgical
Outcome
Timing: None/ Male/Vaginal cytology/Progesterone
Evaluated on palpation/ultrasound/x-ray Semen analysis results:
Has your pet been thyroid tested: Yes/ No Results?
Date
Other previous diagnostics or treatments?
Lifestyle: Indoor/ Outdoor Companion dog/ Performance dog/ Breeding dog/ Service dog
Describe hishousing and lifestyle:
Does your pet have any allergies to food, vaccines, or medications? No/Yes
If yes, please describe:
Does your pet travel? In state? Out of state? Board? Dog events? Location:
Describe your pet's normal diet including treats and table food
List of supplements given:
346 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
What medications have you given your pet in the past month? Please include over-the-counter
medications as well as heartworm preventive and flea/tick control products.
WORMING HISTORY: Y/N product and dates:
VACCINATION HISTORY: Current/ None/ due for DHLPP on
/RABIES due on
Has he had his health screenings done: OFA/ CERF/ Other
Is there testing or x-rays from a previous illness or injury? Yes/No
Is your pet current on vaccinations and worming/fecal examinations? Yes/No
Do you have pet health insurance? No/Yes Name of provider?
Does your pet need any testing done or medications reflled?
May we request records from your previous veterinarian? Yes/No
Name of your previous veterinarian?
Phone:
Do you want a referral letter sent to your local veterinarian? Yes/No Name:
Symptoms:
Describe your pet's overall health:
When was your pet last normal?
What symptoms have you noticed?
What symptoms did you notice first? And how long ago?
Are the symptoms getting better/ worse/ staying the same?
Has your pet been treated for this condition in the past? Describe medications and responses:
Is your pet acting normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:.
Is your pet drinking normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Is your pet eating normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Is your pet urinating normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Is your pet vomiting? Yes/No If yes, please describe:
Is your pet having normal stools? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Has your pet's weight increased/ decreased/ stayed the same?
Is your pet's breathing normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Are the eyes normal? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Are the ears normal? Yes/No If no, please describe:
What medications have you used?
Is the skin normal? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Are there any lumps? Yes/No Where are the sores, hair loss, or lumps?
Do you have any behavior concerns? Yes/No Please describe
Are the reproductive organs normal? Yes/No
Plans to breed:
Are there observations or concerns we did not include in the questions above?
Client ID:
Date:
Staff initials:
Dr.
Appendices 347
A-10.Information about plans tobreed your female dog
Your clinic information here
Information about your plans to breed your female:
Your name:
Your pet's name:
Co-owners names:
Your pet's registered name:
Registration #
DNA completed Y/N
Do you have an appointment scheduled? Yes/No
 Do you want an appcintment? Yes/No
What are your preferred appointment dates? Monday/Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday/Friday/Saturday
What are your preferred appointment times? Early AM/ Late AM/ Noon hour/ Early PM/ Late PM
Best way to reach you? Phone (list times available and numbers).
(home)
(cell)
(work) E mail
Have we seen you as a client before? Yes/No Have we seen this pet before? Yes/No When?
Pet Information: Age:
weeks/ months/years or Date of Birth
Dog/Cat Breed
Sex: Male/Neutered Female/ Spayed
Breeding Plan:
Is she is season now? Yes/No Date this cycle began:
Is Al being done at our clinic? Y/N
Type of insemination planned: Natural/ Vaginal #
/ TCI #
/ Surgical
Type of semen planning to use: Fresh/ Fresh Chilled/ Frozen
Date of last Brucella test
Test run - RSAT/Culture Vaginal culture?
Name of Owner/Stud dog/Bitch to be bred to
Location of stud dog's Veterinarian
Phone
SHIPPING ADDRESS
BILLING ADDRESS
Shipping plan: UPS/ FedEx/ Post office/ other SHIPPING BOX PROVIDED BY: Shipping vet/ client
History:
FEMALE: Date of last cycle
First breeding? Yes/No
Date previously bred on
Natural/ Al/ TCl/ Surgical Outcome
Timing: None/Male/Vaginal cytology /Progesterone,
Evaluated on palpation/ ultrasound/ x-ray Stud dog proven? Yes/No/ Evaluated?
Has your pet been thyroid tested: Yes/No Results?
Date
Other previous diagnostics or treatments?
Lifestyle: Indoor/ Outdoor Companion dog/ Performance dog/ Breeding dog/ Service dog
Describe her housing and lifestyle:
Has she had her health screenings done: OFA/ CERF / Other
Does your pet have any allergies to food, vaccines, or medications? No/Yes
If yes, please describe:
Does your pet travel? In state? Out of state? Board? Dog events? Location:
Describe your pet's normal diet including treats and table food
List of supplements given:
348 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
WORMING HISTORY: Y/N product and dates:
VACCINATION HISTORY: Current/ None/ due for DHLPP on
/ RABIES due on
medications as well as heartworm preventive and flea/tick control products
Is your pet current on vaccinations and worming/ fecal examinations? Yes/No
Do you have pet health insurance? No/Yes Name of provider?
Does your pet need any testing done or medications reflled?
May we request records from your previous veterinarian? Yes/No
Name of your previcus veterinarian?
Phone:
Do you want a referral letter sent to your local veterinarian? Yes/No Name:
Symptoms:
Do you have any concerns about your pet's health? No/Yes IF yes, please review below:
Describe your pet's overall health:
When was your pet last normal?
What symptoms have you noticed?
What symptoms did you notice first? And how long ago?
Are the symptoms geting better/ worse/ staying the same?
Has your pet been treated for this condition in the past? Describe medications and responses:
Is your pet acting normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Is your pet drinking normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Is your pet eating normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Is your pet urinating normally? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Is your pet vomiting? Yes/No If yes, please describe:
Is your pet having normal stools? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Has your pet's weight increased/ decreased/ stayed the same?
Is your pet's breathing normally? Yes/ No If no, please describe:
Are the eyes normal? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Are the ears normal? Yes/No If no, please describe:
What medications have you used?
Is the skin normal? Yes/No If no, please describe:
Are there any lumps? Yes/No where are the sores, hair loss, or lumps?
Are there any abnormalities with the legs, neck or back? Yes/No If yes, please describe:
Do you have any behavior concerns? Yes/No Please describe
Are the reproductive organs normal? Yes/No
When was her last heat?
Plans to breed:
Are there observations or concerns we did not include in the questions above?
Client ID:
Date:
Staff initials:
Dr
Appendices 349
Appendix B: For telephone staff
B-1. Appointment scheduling for breeding problem
Breeding consultation appointment scheduling
Reason for appointment
 Unsuccessful attempts to breed male and female
Ask client and pet name
Name of both male and female owners - often have both dogs in 1 file
from a previous appointment
How Soon tco Schedule appt/ urgency
Often need to schedule for same day, at least to test female's progesterone
level so we don't miss the breeding
Length ofappointment
If no progesterone level has been done, the test cakes about
hours/
days from blood draw to results
Time to schedule
Ifa progesterone level is needed, do NOT schedule at che end of che shift
if running in house
 Dr to schedule with
Request client to bring with them to appt
THEY MUST BRING BOTH THE MALE AND FEMALE WITH THEM.
Recent Progesterone and Brucella test resulcs.
History of past breedings for both male and female
To ask client before apptc
Special instructions client should know about
If we are unable to collect the scud dog's semen, the scud dog owner must
their appt
 give us consent to administer medication to aid him.
Ifche scud dog proves to be unsuitable, do they have a"back-up" scud dog
they can access or bring along?
New client
 10 minutes in advance to complece paper work.
Finalizing - Urgency
 Repeat Doctor, Time, Date, Phone number, Client & Doctor sense of
 Urgency and Reason - Emphasize this is ALL they are scheduled for
350 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
B-2.Appointment scheculing for sick newborn
Sick newborn appointment scheduling
 Reason for appointment
Puppies chat are sick, crying inconsolably, having vomiting,
diarrhea or coughing, losing weight, dehydrated or dying.
Ask client and pet name
Find out the name of the mother of the puppies and pul the fle
How Soon to Schedule appt/ urgency
 Sick babies are always urgent enough to see the day the client
calls.
 Length ofappointment
 30 minutes for 1st patient, 40 minutes for a licter
 Time to schedule
 Earliest available emergency slot
 Dr to schedule with
 Request client co bring wich cherm to appt
1. The entire litter,
2. A way to keep them warm and safe in transit,
 3. Records on puppies or kiens weighcs, cemps, vaccinations,
worming, meds, diet fed etc.
HAVE FOR EXAMINATION AND POSSIBLE TESTING
5. The mother of the licter
 6. Fresh fecal sample
To ask client before appt
1. Weighcs of pups
 2. Urine color of pups
3. Rectal temperatures of pups
Special instructions client should know about their appt
Keep the live pups or kittens warm in transic by using a heating
 pad, an ice chesc ined and covered wich a cowel co prop che
lid open,
New client
 10 minutes in advance to complete paper work.
Finalizing - Urge ncy
 Repeat doctor, time, date, phone number, client & doctor
sense of urgency and reason - emphasize this is all chey are
scheduled for
Appendices 351
B-3. Fee schedule and list of services
Fee schedule for canine reproductive services
Male Services
Fees
 Ire-breeding exam
Semen collection and evaluation (not to be frozen or stored)
Brucella testing
Teaser bicch fee
Semen collction, storage, and freezing Ist visit 
1. File preparation - for each scud dog — first visic only
 2. Semen collection and freezing - frst 4 breeding unics
3. Semen collection and freezing for each unit over first 4 at 1 visit
(uazoy youow uo paseq panei-oud) siun suipaaig sz on dnioy jeah iad aoeions uawas 
5. DNA swab (only done if not previously tested)
6. Brucella testing (must be done in past 6 months)
7. Microchipping including registry (may be done in advance)
Total fees for frst visit for semen freezing
Semen collection, storage and freezing subsequent visits
1. Semen colleccion and freezing - first 4 breeding unics at visic
 2. Sermen collection and freezing for each unic over frst 4 at 1 visit
3. Teaser bitch fee
Fresh chilled semen shipment
1. Semen collection for fresh chilled
2. Semen shipping pack for semen including extender
3. Semen shipping overnight (estimated)
4. Semen shipping add'l for Sal/Sun delivery (escimated)
Total fees for fresh chilled semen shipment (range)
Frozen semen shipment
1. Semen shipping prep < 5 unics
2. Stat fee same day
3. Stat fee 24 hour prep
4. Stat fee 48 hour prep
 5. Nitrogen tank rental
6. Tank shipping 2 way (estimate - dependent on destination)
7. Nitrogen tank deposit - for out of country destinations
Total fees for frozen semen shipment
 Overseas shipments -- Requires research
352 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Female Services
Fees
re-breeding exam
Frogesterone cesting
Vaginal cytology
Vaginal culcure
Brucella testcing
Artificial insemination
Vaginal artificial insemination
First AI/TCI
Subsequent
Weekend fees - doctor
Technician assistant fee - for after hours or weekends
Surgical Insemination
1. Pre-surgical blood panel
2. Semen Handling if frozen
3. Semen Handling for incoming fresh chilled
4. Semen Handling to collect and evaluate fresh semen ac breeding
5. Weekend fee - Doctor
6. Technician assiscant fee - for after hours or weekend
 7. Surgical breeding including anesthesia, post-op pain meds
Total for surgical insemination - varies wich cype ofsemen, lab work done prior to surgery,
add'l fee for weekends and holidays
Ovuplant (need progesterone level w/in 24 hours pre-insertion)
1. Insertion of ovuplant
2. Removal of ovuplant at offce visit (after nacural or vag Al)
3. Removal of ovuplant at surgical breeding
Transcervical Insemination First/Additional
 Prenatal Care
 punosenn
 Radiograph for puppy count
oeinsan peeuoau spa ued dosod ianaie al yuom qe do-aid sapnpu -suoas
reglan, calcium, wormer
 Post-natal care
Taildocks and dewclaws - office visic and surgery pack $
Dewclaws - Offce visit and surgery pack $
Sick puppies - exam fee, then add'l for diagnostics and meds
Pre-sale puppy care
Exams wichout vaccinations litcer rate
Exams with vaccinations litter rate
Intestinal parasice screening
Wormings
Appendices 353
B-4. Questions for staff regarding possible dystocia
Questions for evaluation of the bitch at home or at the hospital indicating the
probable need for an Emergency C-section
subsequent pups?
2. Did the bitch initially show good abdominal contractions and stop without producing a puppy?
3. Is there is green vaginal discharge PRlOR to the delivery of the first puppy?
4. Does the bitch seem distressed? Frantic? Sick? Weak or unable to stand? Tremoring? Repeated
vomiting?
5. Is this labor pattern different than her previous ones?
6. Has the bitch been unwilling or unable to eat and/or drink for over 12 hours?
 7. Has WhelpWise? indicated there is a problem with fetal heart rates (<160 BPM) or uterine
contraction patterns?
 8. Have any pups been born dead?
9. Did a previous radiograph or ultrasound suggest there could be a problem? (low heart rates on
the birth canal?
11. Did her temperature drop to 98 degrees and rise to normal (over 101.0) and stay there more
than 4 hours?
12. Has her pregnancy exceeded 63 days?
13. Does she appear to have a very large or very small litter?
14. Does she have a previous history of dystocia?
15. Is she a breed at risk for maternal or fetal causes of dystocia?
16. Does she have unexplained or unusual discharge from her eyes?
17. Is she having weak or non-productive contractions with muliple puppies left?
18. If oxytocin has been used (more later), has there been a minimal or no response?
19. Does the breeder or veterinary staff member have a feeling that something is going wrong?
Irust their intuition.
If the answer to any of these questions is yes, you very likely need to assess the bitch as soon as
immediately correct any cause for dystocia.
354 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
B-5. Telephone referral form
Your clinic information here
FEMALE
(Initials):
Reproduction Telephone Referral
Date/Time of call:
am/pm
Client Information:
Have we seen your Pet before? Y or N?
If Established client - Please verify address,
phone numbers and email address
File #
Client's Name:
Client's phone # (
(h w c) Alternate # (
(h w c)
Available from.
am/pm to_
am/pm
Available from_
am/pm to_
am/pm
Mail address:
StreetorPOBox
City
State
Zip
E-Mail Address:
Info E-Mailed Y or N?
Referring DVM_
DVM Phone # (
Pet info:
Pet's name:
Breed:
D.O.B:
FEMALE INFORMATION: Is your Female in season Y or N?
Date Estrus Started?
Dates of last Estrus?
to
Maiden ?# of Litters?
Type of Repro to be scheduled: Pre-Breeding, Prog/Lab, Natural, A/l, Fresh Chilled, Frozen, TCl,
Surgical A/l, Ovuplant, Consult, Other
Where is the semen?
Date
Time
Result
ng/dlLaboratory
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab used
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab used 
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab used
AM/PM
IP/u
Lab used
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab used 
AM/PM
IP/u
Lab used
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab used
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab used 
 Owner notifed of date/time of breeding appc.
Ovulation Date Estimated
 Breeding Planned
Whelping Date Estimated
Appendices 355
Your clinic information here
MALE
(Initials):
Reproduction Telephone Referral
Date/Time of call:
am/pm
Client Information:
Have we seen your Pet before? Y or N?
If Established client-Please verify address, phone
numbers and email address 
File #
 Client's Name:
Client's phone # (
1
(h w c)
 Alternate # (
(h w c)
Available from,
am/pm to
 am/pm
Available from_
 am/pm to_
am/pm 
Mail address:
StreetorPOBox
City
State
Zip
E-Mail Address:
Info E-Mailed Y or N?
Referring DVM
DVM Phone #(
Pet info:
Pet's name:
Breed:
D.O.B:
Type of Repro to be scheduled: Pre-Breeding Exam, Collect/Analysis, Freeze, Storage.
Other.
Remind to bring registry, DNA and Brucella test results to appointment
When are you planning to have this done?
Shipping Information: Incoming/ Outgoing/ Storage@
/ N/A (circle one)
Ship from/ to Client/ Veterinarian/ Other
Phone:
Name of Facility/ Client
Address:
Street or PO Box
City
State
diz
Method of Shipment: U.P.S., FedEx, Airline Name, Tracking #
Brief History:
Recommendations/Plan:
356 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
B-6.Telephone triage
Your Veterinary Hospital Name here: Telephone Triage
 Client Name:
Date of call:
 Client ID:
New? Y/N
Time of call:
 Pet's Name:
Age/Sex:
M/Y/M/N/F/S
 Primary Phone Number:
H/W/C
Available times:
Alternate Phone Number:
(name} H/w/C
Available times:
Email preferred? Y/N
Urgency of call:
High Medium Low
Reason for Call/ Symptoms
Last normal on
Temp?
Duration of Symptoms
Arcticude
Down/Lethargic/Weak /Not Eating/Not Drinking/ Wt Loss /Pain (1 2 3 4 5) (5=severe)/Normal
Describe:
Urinary
 Not urinating/PU/PD/Change in Urination: Inc/Dec/0/Blood/
Describe:
Cardiovascular
Distressed/Not breaching normal/Coughing/Sneezing/Discharge/Panting/Fainting
Abnormal Noise
Describe:
GI
Bloat/omiting/Diarrhea/Eating Less/Not Eating/Ate FB, Toxin, other/Constipated
Describe:
Eye
FB/Squinting/Red/Rubbing/3rd eyelid/Eyelid/Discharge/Eye protruding/Pain/Blind/
R/L/Both
Color change
Describe:
Ear
Discharge /Red/Swollen/Pain(1 2 3 4 5)(5=severe) /Odor/L/R/Deaf/
R/L/Both
Describe:
Skin
Describe:
Leg/Back
Down/Paralyzed/3 legged Lame/Limping/Hunched/Pain (1 2 3 4 5)(5=severe)/Chiro
RF/LF/RR/LR
Describe:
Reproduction
In Labor: Y/N/ Pup scuck2/Pups born #
/No pups born yet/Discharge Green/Red/
In labor since
/Tirme last pup born/Number of pups lost
Due to whelp:
Based on US/Rads/Progescerone?
Currently trying to breed:
Natural/Fresh AI/Shipped/Frozen
Timing done this cycle? Vag Cy/Progesterone/Stud Date
Resulcs
Planning to breed this cycle & now in heat:
Need to ship semen:
Planning to breed or freeze in the future:
Accidental breeding:
Male reproductive problem:
Female reproductive problem:
Other:
Litters: Born
Symptoms:
Sick since?
on:
Number in litter?
Any pups/kictens lost?
Treatment?
Temperature?
Urine color?
Stool Character
Weights taken
Water?
Feeding since/ what?
Worming history.
Vaccination History.
Client's Request
Euthanasia/Refill w Appt/Reill wo Appt/Diet change/Billing/Estimate/Complaint/Other
 Phone Call from Doctor/Tech/Repro Department/Receptionist/ Practice Manger/ Individual
Requested to recurn call:
 Appointment: ASAPSpecific Date & Time Range Preferred
 Client will call us back?
 Appoincment Scheduled for Dace
Time
 Declined
Appendices 357
Appendix C: Client information
C-1. Al using fresh and frozen semen
Veterinary Clinic Name Here
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION USING FRESH CHILLED AND FROZEN STORED CANINE SEMEN
For approximately 40 years, veterinarians have had the technclogy to freeze or chill semen for
these breedings into pregnancies has been limited by cur ability to pinpoint the exact moment in
time that the insemination should cccur. Recently, more accurate and more accessible progesterone
testing has increased our success in producing pregnancies with distant inseminations.
FRESHCHILLEDSEMENCOLLECTIONTOBESHIPPEDTOAREMOTESITE:
1. Contact the veterinarians ofhice as early in the bitch's estrus as possible to assure staff and
shipping methods are available when needed. Be sure the recipient's address (typically a
veterinary clinic) is available.
2. Confirm the dog and bitch are both in good health, have had health screening, such as OFA and
immunizations and preventive worming. Consider having a semen analysis done on the male to be
used to assure he is currently fertile
 3. Upon confirmation of the date(s) the semen is to be shipped, call to schedule an appointment.
collected, is viable for 24 to 36 hours; delayed insemination reduces the chance of a breeding
insemination.
4. Inform the veterinary clinic if additional semen shipments are requested. Typically, using fresh
chilled semen, two collections are made and shipped.
profile number, will be mailed directly to you.
6. Complete the AKC paperwork for insemination with fresh chilled semen at the first shipment. You
will need your dog's registered name and AKC number and, if previcusly DNA profiled, his DNA
profile number. You should provide the AKC registered name and number of the bitch as well.
7. The owner of the bitch usually pays fees for the service of collecting and shipping the semen.
 ae sae aas  ds o od pid a isn pe p ann  p q si ss
follows:
B. Fee for specialized packaging and shipping media: Fee $_
C.Fee for shipping: Usually ship by FedEx or UPS overnight. If the owner of the bitch requests
and ice packs (not dry ice), as not all alrlines will accept these contents.
 D. Fee for teaser bitch if the stud dog owner does not provide one: Fee if available.
Remember, at times, delays in receiving the semen can occur due to problems with inclement
weather, lost or misdirected shipments, etc. Keep in mind, this is an inconvenience and may interfere
with a successful pregnancy as the outcome, but at least it was only a lost box and not your prized
dog, which was lost or delayed. You can always arrange for an additional shipment if notihed of this
358 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
minor catastrophe and if you ship the replacement counter-to-counter, you can typically make up for
the lost time of the original next day air shipment. It is the responsibility of the stud dog or brood
you with the tracking number
FRESH CHILLEDSEMENCOLLECTIONTOBESHIPPEDTOYOU:
and a complete physical examination. A breeding history will be taken, and vaginal exams and
time estrus begins, it is not possible to initiate testing and receive results in time for a breeding.
The same should hold true for the stud dog - Brucella testing, OFA, CERF, etc. It is also preferred
that he should have recently sired a litter or has had a semen analysis performed.
2. Contact the veterinarian's office at the first sign your bitch is in estrus. lt is best to see her in the
cytology and her reproductive history.
3. At this time, you can contact the collecting veterinarian to ascertain how the semen will be stored
and shipped and provide them with the hospital address and phone number for shipping. In some
cases, they will have supplies in stock at their hospital. In other cases, you may prefer having
the veterinary clinic send out a semen shipment kit to the stud dog owner's veterinarian. These
charges will be put on your credit card
detailed information on semen collecticon and handing. Be sure your stud dog owner's collecting
veterinarian labels the TUBE with their name, the dog's name, AKC number, and date and time
        a         s
is being used on your bitch. Ask the stud dog owner to see the sample prior to packaging if
necessary to be sure this is done.
aun '(/au g ot t jo jaal aoaisaod e uo pasegi nooo oi snoge si uoeo aw aun n 'g
veterinarian will advise you to contact the owner of the stud dog to arrange for collection and
shipment. On weekdays, an overnight courier service such as FedEx or UPS can be used. On
holidays and weekends, airline counter-to-counter or the US Postal Service needs to be used.
At shipment, you should request the air bill or tracking numbers should a shipment need to be
tracked.
done vaginally and is best repeated in 24 to 48 hours to improve the chances of conception. She
insemination.
7. The collecting veterinarian may have a regular courier service established for overnight delivery. If
so, it is probably easiest to use their normal system. If they do not routinely use one courier, you
may wish to contact several to determine fees, pick up and delivery times, etc. Some to consider
are FedEx, UPS, or the US Postal Service
On holidays or weekends, counter-to-counter at the airlines must be used. You will need to
arrange to have the shipment at the airport at least 2 hours prior to departure to get the shipment
any airline you use. You and the owner of the stud dog are responsible for travel to and from the
airport.
shipper on ice packs (no dry ice is used - this is a hazardous material). In some situations, the
USPS will do weekend and holiday pickups and deliveries, but this is not available at all locations,
so you need to call ahead to assess service avallablity
Appendices 359
8. Twenty four to 28 days post-insemination, we recommend your bitch be palpated and/or
ultrasounded to establish is she has become pregnant. This is an important piece of medical
diet to a high quality performance diet, line up supplies for whelping, arrange for someone to be
available for whelping assistance.
9. Fees for this service are as follows:
B. Fee for inseminations(s) of the bitch: Fee for the first, Fee subsequent $-
C. Fee for transcervical insemination: Fee per insemination. $_
D. Fee for palpation/ultrasound/x-rays to confirm pregnancy: Fee $.
shipment: varies so ask for a quote.
F.  Brucella test: Fee to draw and run the sample. $_-
COLLECTING SEMEN FOR FREEZING:
 tio pue i se suoeneaa yons supnoui sop pns no noy sauuaanos yeau le aiaido s1
a recent Brucella test (within the past 3 months or since the prior breeding) and semen evaluation.
se (ae jo shea / ot z ie) uae ssop aun oi loud si uaas azaay ot a leai aui yneay leauas
successfully
2. Bring a COPY of the dog's AKC certificate. We will also need a side and front photograph - if you
do not have these, take digital photos at the appointment for collection
3. Complete DNA testing for AKC (required) if not previously done. This test is a simple cheek swab
Your signature and a check for are required for submission to the AKC. A color DNA certificate,
which includes your dog's DNA profile number, will be mailed directly to you.
4. Contact the office to confirm staff and teaser bitch availability. Schedule an appointment.
5. Fees are itemized as follows:
A. Complete physical examination if not completed at our office in the past 3 months: Fee $.
B. Fee to set up the file: Fee to collect the stud dog Fee to handle, evaluate, freeze and store for
1 year Fee for up to 4 vials of semen (total Fee): $-
C.Fee for each vial above 4:Fee $
D. Fee for additional collections: Fee $_-
E. Brucella test: Fee $_
F.Fee for the teaser bitch if you do not provide your own: Fee if available. $_
G. Fee for storage of up to 30 vials per dog after the first year: Fee $.
prior to the requested shipping date. Only then can the semen be released to the owner of the
bitch. In addition, your account must show a zero balance in order for frozen semen to be released
for shipment. Notify the veterinarian early in the bitch's estrous cycle to minimize costs.
7. You will also need to contact the veterinarian with the name, address and telephone number of
the shipment destination - typicaly a veterinary clinic. Specify how many vials or straws of semen
you want shipped. You will need credit card number from the owner of the bitch to cover the
associated costs. Without this, the clinic will either need to bill your account or delay shipping of
the semen until fees are paid in full.
8. Fees to release and ship the semen are itemized as follows:
A. Fee for semen release: Fee for up to 5 vials, Fee per vial above 5. $_
C. Tank rental: Fee for first 7 days. $
D. Overnight shipment or counter-to-counter shipment of semen in the portable semen tank: Fee S.
E. Second day return shipment of portable semen shipping tank: Fee. Include a return shipping label
so return shipping is simplified. $_
360 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
F. Insurance on semen tank valued at Fee $__
G. Deposit on semen tank: Fee $_
H. Additional rental for failure to return tank within 7 days: Fee per day. S-
SERVICE. The bitch owner usually pays shipping costs, and that can best be handled by credit card.
However, the semen owner is ultimately responsible for all costs in the event that the bitch owner
fails to reimburse us for the shipping or fails to return the tank.
should remain viable for many years - make arrangements accordingly in your will.
BREEDINGYOURBITCHWITHFROZENSEMEN:
Breeding with frozen semen is less forgiving, more complicated and more expensive than other
breedings. It can also be very rewarding utiliing the genetics of stud dogs of a by-gone era.
REMEMBER THESE HIGH POINTS:
●You are using semen that is expensive and is likely limited in availability. Use this fnite resource
wisely.
● Timing the bitch's cycle must be precise, and the insemination window is approximately 12 to 24
hours.
● Anesthesia and surgery are used for most frozen inseminations. Consider the benefits vs. the
risks before embarking on this.
1. As with any breeding, be sure your bitch has current vaccinations, has her pre-breeding
Sun e ym Auo supaag jo ad sun op oh ysm Aeu nos eau pooa u s! pue 'uuaais
bitch who has successfuly completed a pregnancy. Aged bitches tend to release fewer eggs and
have decreased fertility. A breeding history will be taken and vaginal exams and cultures done if
indicated. A Brucella test should be done in the past 3 months.
2. Arrange for the frozen semen to be released prior to your bitch's heat or early in her cycle. The
owner of the semen, usually the stud dog owner, must sign a release form. Shipping costs from
the storage facility must be paid prior to shipping and can usually be paid with a credit card.
The owner of the bitch usually will pay the release fee, overnight shipping to us, portable semen
shipping tank rental, and return shipping of the tank to the storage facility.
3. Contact the veterinarian's office at the FIRST SlGN that your bitch is in heat. Her first appointment
should be in the first 6 days of her estrus for a vaginal cytology to confirm that she is early in her
estrus. Plan sequential vaginal cytologies and progesterone testing based on this cytology and
her reproductive history.
4. Progesterone tests should be run approximately every 48 hours as ovulation nears. An LH level
can also be run if requested in advance. LH levels can be helpful in timing the bitch but must be
run every 24 hours s0 can be costly.
5. Pre-surgical blood work should be drawn at one of these visits in preparation for anesthesia.
6. Schedule your bitch for anesthesia and surgical insemination or TCl. For surgical insemination
she will receive general anesthesia. A midline incision is made similar to that for a spay, the
paosodan snan au 'uauni au ui paeid uaas pausxa pe 'paoaxa an lm snan
into the abdomen, and the abdominal wall and skin closed. She will be recovered from anesthesia
and discharged the same day. The entire visit typically takes about 2 hours from admission to
discharge. You are welcome to wait in the lobby or return later for her. She should be kept quiet
and crated for a minimum of 4 hours post-op. She should rest for several days post-op.
7. At day 24 to 28, ultrasound her for early diagnosis of pregnancy (see earlier section on
ultrasound)
Appendices 361
C-2. Homemade kitten and puppy milk replacer
Emergency milk replacers for puppies and kittens:
The formulas below are specific for either puppies or kittens and one should not be substituted for
the other because of differences in nutritional needs. In general, these formulas should only be used
       e n s    s s
formulas below lack adequate nutritional support for long-term feeding.
Homemade Puppy Milk Replacer Formula
120 ml (4 oz) of cow's or goat's milk, pasteurized
120 (4 oz) ml of water
2 to 4 raw egg yolks, pasteurized if available
1 to 2 teaspoonful vegetable cil
1000 mg calcium carbonate (3-4 tums)
Homemade Kitten formula
90 ml (3 oz) of condensed milk (canned, not evaporated)
90 ml (3 oz) of water
120 ml (4 oz) of plain yogurt (not the low-fat)
3 large or 4 small egg yolks, pasteurized if available
362 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C-3. List of items to take for a C-section
List of items to take for a C-section
· The pregnant dog in need of the C-section
· Cell phone
● Tarp, shower curtain, or vinyl tablecloth to cover the seats or floor of the car
● Crate large enough for the pregnant bitch to travel in
· Large Vari-Kennel crate with top 1/2 removed, which easily gives you access to the bitch or
preterred a baby pool
       e             
crate, allowing room for easy access if needed
Adapter to plug into
● Hot water bottle - take one just in case something happens and the heating pads don't work
● Towels - plenty of them! Hand towels and full size bath size towels
· Small garbage bag
●Paper towels
● Kleenex - especially good for wiping puppies
● Cotton balls, Q-Tips, and cotton gauze squares
● Nolvasan (properly diluted and ready to use)
the clinic. If bringing a premixed can, remember a container to heat the formula in, and a lid for
the remaining unused portion in the can.
● Feeding tube and syringe (sterilized and ready to use)
● Bulb syringe and DeLee mucus trap - for suctioning puppies if needed
·Hemostat
● Dental floss - incase you need to re-tie an umbilical
●Water
● Water dish for bitch, and or a squirt bottle of water
●Cooler
of the above
●First aid kit
Appendices 363
C-4. Ovuplant and cabergoline client information sheet
Client Handout for ovulation timing
Deslorelin (Ovuplant?) = NEW Way to Control the Timing of Your Bitch's Heat Cycle
estrous (heat) cycles in bitches with more ease and accuracy than ever before.
 uo asn o, paagel si ll allad e ui pauuo auooy e si (au I') luedno
horses. This pellet is inserted under the mucosa of the vulva. For this product to
be effective in inducing estrous, the bitch MUST have a progesterone level of less
than 1.0 ng/dl immediately prior to insertion of the drug pellet or it may block, not
induce estrous.
Typically, the patient will come into heat within 3 to 7 days, and be ready to
  s    s  s s  s h   
The implanted drug pellet MUST be removed to maintain pregnancy. This
Approximately 90% of the time, the use of this product allows you to have control
  i    aa   si  n   
travel, specialties, to avoid scheduling conflicts in your personal life, or to produce
pupples when you need them, such as for futurities.
Cabergoline (Dostinex) is a similar product, given orally. Approximately 70%
of bitches taking the product will start estrous within 10 to 30 days of starting
the drug. This is dosed at 5 mcg/kg once daily for 10 days. In small bitches,
compounding may be necessary to scale the dose down.
口
Contact us for more information on how this new therapy permits you to time your bitch's breedings
and whelping to fit your needs!
· Please return for removal of the Ovuplant after breeding is completed.
Veterinary Clinic Contact information
364 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C-5. Mibolerone client information sheet
Your Hospital information here
● PREVENTloN OF ESTRUS with Mibolerone (formerly marketed as Cheque?) Drops
bitcheswho tend tohave abnormally short periods between heatcycles orwho are competing in
dog events and should be kept out of heat to maximize their performance. It can also be used to
allow you to time her litters. By preventing estrous cycles, we can preserve the uterine lining of
bitches, in many cases allowing them to remain fertile longer than if they were cycling frequently
and aging their uterine lining. Mibolerone drops are a testosterone derivative, NOT progesterone.
asn ano sot papunodwoo aq isnu jeui anup uonduosaid e si sul ●
Mibolerone Dosages
Weight in pounds
Mcg/day
1-25
30
25-50
60
50-100
120
>100
180
German Shepherds
180
● The average bitch after going off Mibolerone drops comes into heat after 70 days. The hormone
must be administered daily or break-through will occur.
● She should have a liver panel blood test run prior to starting Mibolerone and every 3 to 6 months
Frequently, there is an increase in liver enzymes from the hormone
● Side effects from Mibolerone drops:
●One percent tear from the eyes;
·They tend to muscle up and grow more coat, because it's a male hormone derivative.
mistaken as pyometra. However, a bitch on Mibolerone cannot hormonally develop pyometra. If
your bitch is on Mibolerone, be sure your vet knows! (dogs with family members and handlers!)
● It is safe for a bitch to be bred on the first cycle she has after completing mibolerone therapy.
● Mibolerone should not be used prior to a bitch's first estrous cycle or for more than 3 to 24
months.
● Please return for a liver panel in ——-
_ when on Mibolerone drops.
● The prescribing veterinarian should do Due diligence on the compounding pharmacy compounding
this product
Appendices 365
C-6. Puppy weights
Canine
Newborn Puppy Data Sheet for
(Date)
Repr
Dam:
Sire:
Born on:,
roduction
Puppy ID
AM Weight
PM Weight
% Change
AM Temp
PM Temp
AM Urine
PM Urine
Stool char-
Feedings?
ENS
Noces
Color
Color
acter
pue
C-7. Tail dock and dewclaw surgery report
Taildock and dewclaw surgery report
Date
Clinician
Staff
Client Name
Client ID
Name of Dam
 Puppy ID
Temp
Weight
Heart Rate
Resp Rate
MM Color /
 Urine Color/
Stool
Owner
Feedings/
PE Findings
Dewclaws
Tail lengch
CRT
SG
Character
concerns
Therapy
Front/Rear
Given
3
5
6
8
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Surgical procedure: Sterile pack/ sterile gloves
Lengch measured:
Scissors vertical/horizontal
Sucured wich
/ Pattern
Dewclaws - Sterile pack/ sterile gloves/ closed wich nexaband/vetbond/
Technician/Assistant
Signature of doctor
DVM
C-8. Individual puppy data sheet
Individual puppy data sheet
 Puppy ID:
 Date of Birth:
Time:
am/pm
Sire:
Dam:
 Registration Number:
Sex:
 Registered Name:
Microchip Number:
Breed:
Color:
Day
Date
Weight
ENS
Deworm
Day
Date
Weight
Deworm
Vaccinate
1
17
2
18
3
19
4
20
5
21
6
22
7
23
8
24
9
25
10
26
11
27
12
28
13
35
14
42
15
49
16
56
Photos:
Head View
 Right Side View
Left Side View
Top View
Buyers Information:
Buyer's Names:
Buyer's Address:
 Buyer's Phone Numbers:
 Buyer's E mail
Contract? Yes/No
 Summary of contract cerms:
Notes:
368 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C-9. Whelping supplies needed in advance of whelping
ITEMS TO HAVE AVAILABLE PRIOR TO WHELPING
1. Whelping box or Whelping Nest Lovett's Heated Whelping Neste
2. Towels and sheets
3. Newspapers
4. Bulb syringe - to suction mouths of newborns - available at most stores with a pharmacy
department.
 5. DeLee@ Mucus Trap - to suction newborn's airways - available on line from suppliers of midwives
or from Whelpwise.
 6. Exam gloves, latex or vinyl - to protect breeders from vaginal discharges and placental fluids -
available OTC many places.
 7. K-Y jelly- to lubricate gloves if vaginal examination is indicated - available OTC many places.
 8. Hemostat to clamp off umbilical cords - available from your veterinary suppliers
many places.
10. Scissors
11. Tincture of lodine, - to treat the umbilicus at birth, 2 and 8 hours post partum.
12. Chlorhexidine disinfectant solution - to disinfect surfaces in the whelping and nursery areas -
available through your veterinary suppliers or local farm stores.
13. Heat source such as heating pads or hot water bottles
 ss s  o s  - s   s day  -  
are difficult to keep warm. Rice bags are stockinette or socks flled with long-grain white cooking
rice microwaved to warm pups. Snuggle Safe? - a microwaveable disc made to warm puppies,
available on line.
13. Goat's milk, pasteurized or Puppy formula and
14. Feeding tube and syringe to fit or baby bottle with preemie nipple
15. Cotton balls
16. Thermometer, rectal
17. Thermometer, to check room temperature
18.Gauze
19. Scale in oz or grams
20. Plastic sheets or vinyl tablecloths with flannel backing to cover the floor
21. Ice cream, vanilla for her, your choice of other flavors for humans
22. 25 gauge needle for acupuncture - for stimulation to breath
23. Spray bottle for cleaning
24. Paper toweling
oeuaouoo uasrxo no aqeuo uaxo se aas oi xog snseld pue suisoy lotenan 'yuei uakxo cz
losing a pup) - to administer to pups that cannot be resuscitated by clearing airways and with
mechanical stimulation - available through your veterinary suppliers.
recommended by CAPC - available through your veterinary suppliers.
or on line.
29. Fetal Doppler - to monitor fetal heart rates during late pregnancy and whelping - available on line
at whelpwise or some clients have their own.
Appendices 369
C-10. Progesterone testing information
Your hospital intormation here:
Thank you for contacting us to assist you in breeding your dog.
Prior to breeding, we recommend your bitch be in good physical condition, be current on
vaccinations, parasite free, and have her health screenings completed.
completion, or bitches who will be bred using fresh chilled (shipped) or frozen semen. Progesterone
testing is also useful in determining when a bitch should be receptive for a natural breeding in cases
where either the female or male is reluctant to breed. Additionally, knowing her progesterone levels
at the time of breeding allows us to predict within 24 hours when she should whelp. This intormation
can save money, time, and pupples.
As soon as you notice your bitch is in season, please contact us. If you are planning to use frozen
or fresh chilled semen, it is helpful if you have notified us in advance. We can assist you in arranging
supplies and manage the details of shipping fresh semen.
cycles, the first progesterone should be drawn at the first sign of estrus. We then recommend you
repeat the progesterone testing every 2 to 3 days until her progesterone rises to 3 ng/dl; it should
Ovulation occurs when the progesterone is 5 ng/dl. We like to have at least one more progesterone
ovulation. We typically breed 2 days after 5 ng/dl if using fresh or fresh chilled semen. We typically
breed 3 days after 5 ng/dl if using frozen semen IF the progesterone reaches or exceeds 20 ng/
dl. Many bitches will have a progesterone level of 15 to 40 ng/dl at the time of the breeding: this is
normal. We breed 7 days a week, including holidays, based on your bitch's ideal time for breeding.
We can usually run progesterone levels in our hospital with results available within the hour. If you
live a distance away, it is often more convenient to have these drawn and submitted to the lab by
your local veterinarian. As we will assist in interpreting the results and timing the breeding, your local
and providing us with a lab tracking number.
The following are guidelines to assist your veterinarian in submitting blood samples for progesterone
levels:
1. Submit the sample to
possible. Include the date and TlME the sample was drawn on the requisition form. The sample
should be placed in a non-barrier tube (not an SST tube), spun down, and the serum transferred
into a transport tube. In-office semi-quantitative tests (such as ICG or Camelot Farms) are not
accurate enough to use for this situation. You may contact your local human hospital and have
 as they have proven to be reliable and repeatable.
370 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
 p g p uo ad a ma ai s an po g p uo ads iy an nns pue ma 
cycle if she has been brought into heat with medication or has a short proestrus. If the first date
     n    e n 'y u s
3. Subsequent tests are run approximately every 2 to 3 days but this will vary based on the results
and the day of the week upon which this falls. Call us if you have any questions about when to
re-sample the patient.
4. Please mark the Laboratory form to fax (or call) the results to us and your clinic as soon as you
receive them. Our fax number is .
--. Baseline levels, less than 2 ng/dl, can wait until the
next working day (use—-
_fax). ANY RESULT OVER 2.5 SHOULD BE
CALLED TO US AS SOON AS POSSIBLE {.
L) AS THIS REPRESENTS A RISE IN
THE PROGESTERONE LEVEL AND SIGNIFIES ACTION WILL BE TAKING PLACE SOON. We
breed 2 to 3 days after the progesterone level begins to rise above 5ng/dl. In many bitches, this
rise can be very rapid. As we will need at least 24 hours notice for shipping semen, timely receipt
 of the results is important. Great communication between our office, your office, and your client is
who knows their dog handle the blood testing.
 5. The laboratory runs/does not run the tests and reports results even on evenings, weekends and
holidays.
6. If the results will be received by your office on a holiday or weekend, PLEASE CALL
WITH THE NAME & PHONE NUMBER OF YOUR CLIENT AND THE Tab
requisition number SO WE CAN RETREIVE THE RESULTS OUTSIDE OF REGULAR OFFICE
HOuRs. This will keep us from having to interrupt your weekend plans.
and CBC be drawn in advance of the procedure. If not previously run, we willrun this test in house
on the day of breeding. We recommend that a Brucellosis test be run prior to breeding ANY dog or
bitch.
It is cur goal to make your breeding as simple and successful as possible. Please contact us if you
have any questions.
Sincerely,
_DVM
your hospital information here:
Appendices 371
C-11. Vaccine recommendations
Age/Date Next
Examination
Vaccinations
Heartworm Test
Medications
Other
Visit
and Other Lab
Tests
 2 and 4 Weeks
 As needed
 Pyrantel Pamoate
6 to 8 weeks
Veterinary Puppy
DAPP(No Lepto)
Fecal
Heartworm
Visit #1
No Heartworm
 preventive with
test due
pyrantel q 4 weeks,
with pyrantel 2
weeks later Flea/
Tick Control*
9 to 11 weeks Due
Veterinary Puppy
DAPP(No Lepto)
Fecal
Heartworm
Obedience Class
Visit #2
Bordetella
No Heartworm
preventive witch
test due
pyrante q4 weeks,
wich pyrantel 2
weeks later Flea/
Tick Control*
12 to 16 weeks due
VeterinaryPuppy
DAPI/Lepto 4 way*
 Fecal
Heartworm pre-
Vaccinations may
Visic #3
Lyme*
 No Heartworm
ventive wormer
be divided so fewer
Rabies
test due
Flea/Tick Control*
are administered at 
 Canine influenza
Pyrantel pamoate
each visit
vaccination*
fenbendazole
Large Breed: X-ray
hips for laxicy
16 to 20 weeks due
 Comprehensive
DAPI/Lepto 4 way*
Fecal
Heartworm pre-
Lyme*
 No Heartworm
ventive Flea/Tick
 Canine influenza
test due
Control*
vaccination*
2 weeks after last
Distemper/Parvo
Ticer for Distemper
 Recommended to
Repeat boosters if
vaccination
Titer Blood test
and Parvovirus
assess response to
low or no response
vaccination
to previous vac-
cinations
6 Months or older
Presurgical
Complete series if
 Presurgical blood
Heartworm pre-
 Spay/Neuter - if
not yet done
test, Heartworm
ventiveFlea/Tick
appropriated medi-
 test if not on
Control*
cally or dependent
 preventive
on owner's plans.
Microchip
15 Months due
Comprehensive
DAPI/Lepto*
Heartworm test
Heartworm pre-
Rabies
ventive Flea/Tick
Bordetella
Control*
Lyme*
Canine Influenza*
* Varies with region of the country
372 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C-12.C-section discharge instructions for client
Your clinic information here
C-section Discharge
Date.
Instructions
Client
Patient
Restraint
 Please protect your pet when leaving che hospical by using eicher a leash and collar or a pet carrier
Excessive activity may result in injury, or a slower recovery than we would expect from a pet that is kept
quiet during che healing process.
 Please remove the bandage covering the IV site on your pet's front leg upon arrival home.
Food and Water
Wich che excitement of returning home, your pet may be inclined to drink and eat excessively, which
will most likely result in vomiting. To avoid this, we ask that you remove your pet's food and water
dishes for an hour until your pet has settled down. Then, only allow small amounts of food and
water for the first day home.
 Offer only half your pet's normal fod and water tonight. Normal feeding may resume tomorrow.
 Do not offer food/water until
 Feed
times a day.
Offer
to drink
times a day.
 Tube feed your puppies
cc/ml
times a day wich
See handout. Keep chem in a warm location. Their rectal temperacure should be 96 to 98° F prior to
feeding.
Eliminations
 Your pet may need co be reminded to go outside co urinate during che frst evening home. Many
patients may not have a bowel movement for 24 to 36 hours after surgery. This is normal.
 The puppies may need to be stimulaced to urinate and defecate until mom is ready to care for chem.
The pup's urine should be very pale yellow in color and che scools should be soft, yellow and seedy
looking.
Exercise and Activity
 Patients recovering from surgery or illness need limited activity to heal properly. Due to the effeccs
of aneschesia, your pet may be groggy for the next 12 hours. Avoid access to stairs or sicuations chat
may lead to injury during chis time.
 Your pet may resume normal acivicy in
days.
 NO swimming, baching or grooming for 10 to 14 days.
Your pet should be conined indoors, and taken oucside on a short leash only for eliminations for
days.
 We recommend that you DO NOT leave your bitch unattended wich che puppies until you are
certain chat she will not harm them.
same time every day.
 Early Neurologic Stimulation should be performed from day 3 to day 16 once daily on the pups.
Medications
 If dispensed, it is important co carefull follow the directions chat are printed on che label.
 No medications dispensed.
 Medicacions dispensed for post op discomfort
Next
dose due
 Medicacions dispensed for increasing milk production Reglan@ or Domperidone.
Next dose
 CC /tabs
times a day due at
 Additional meds:
Next
dose due
Worm the puppies & bicch once every ocher week wich Strongid@ for mom & Nemex for pups
starting at 2 weeks of age.
 DO NOT ADMINISTER ASPIRIN WITHIN 2 WEEKS OF THE ABOVE PRESCRIBED MEDICATION
Appendices 373
 Sutures and
In order for incisions to heal, your pet must not lick at the sutures, or the incision site. If your pet is
Bandages
licking, please notify us immediacely. Please check the incision cwice daily for any redness, swelling, or
discharge. Ific appears irritated or infected, please notify us immediately. Rechecks of post-op patiencs
will be at no charge during regular offce hours.
Sucures/staples need to be removed 10 to 14 days after surgery. A short appointment is needed.
 Sutures are underneath che skin/gums, and will absorb over che next several weeks. They do noc
need to be removed.
 Apply warm compress to the surgical sice 3 times daily for 10 minuces each time.
Apply Tincure of lodine to the umbilicus of each puppy 2 hours, 8 hours and 24 hours afe bith.
 Clean che incision wich hydrogen peroxide if necessary.
Appointments
 Please make an appointment for the following:
Suture removal in 10 to 14 days.
 Dewclaw removal and/or tail docks in
days. Appointment Time
 Vaccinations and health exams in
weeks. Appointment Time
Monitor
 A decrease in activity and/or appetite for che first 24 to 36 hours may be observed. However if your pet 
exhibics any of the following symptoms, please notify che clinic immediately:
 Loss of appetite for over 36 hours
 weakness or depression
 Refusal to drink for over 24 hours
Vomiting and/or diarrhea
 The vaginal discharge should be smallamounts of thick blood, changing co gray. Ifit is excessve or
has a foul odor, call us.
 Special Instructions
AS ALWAYS, PLEASE CALL IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS OR CONCERNS
Phone.
IHAVE READ AND UNDERSTAND THE ABOVE DISCHARGE INSTRUCTIONS. THE DOCTORS AND
STAFF HAVE ANSWERED MY QUESTIONS TO MY SATISFACTION
(Signature of owner or authorized agent)
DISCHARGE BY:
Doctor
 Staff
 Medication
374 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C-13. Instructions for thawing and using frozen plasma
Fresh Frozen Plasma Use for Neonatal Puppies
1. Keep all plasma frozen until use.
 2. To thaw, carefully warm the plasma to body temperature. Only warm the tubes you will be using
     i si   i s  a   e a 
body temperature by placing tube against your body for heating, in a pocket, etc. Do NoT heat
in warm water or microwave as this will denature/damage the proteins and render the product
ineffective. Gently rock the tube during thawing: do not shake
 3. The dose is 5 cc per puppy 3 times over a 24 hour period. If this can be administered in the frst
24 hours after birth, it can be given orally with a feeding tube. After the pups are 24 hours old, it
must be given by subq or lO injection to be effective.
4. Draw 5 cc of warmed plasma into a syringe. Using a feeding tube (less than 24 hours old) or a 20
or 22 gauge needle (for pups over 24 hours old), inject the warmed plasma. lf given subq, hold
the skin pinched to prevent outflow from the injection site. If given by feeding tube, carefully follow
instructions for feeding tube administration
5. Repeat 2 more times in the next 24 hours. Change to subq injection if the pups have exceeded
24 hours of age before the doses are administered
6. Please call if you have questions prior to administration of the plasma.
Appendices375
C-14. Prenatal care schedule for client
Clinic name here
Pre-Natal Care for
Congratulations on completing your planned breeding. Her ovulation date was_
._and she was
bred on_
Please feed
a high quality commercially prepared pregnancy or puppy food.
Monitor her intake carefully for the first 5 weeks of her pregnancy to avcid excessive weight gain.
It is common for many pregnant dogs to have a decrease in their appetite for a meal or two at the
3rd to 5th week of pregnancy. Please contact us if she refuses more than 3 meals. After the 5th
week, she can have her meals increased to meet the demands of her pregnancy. We do not endorse
variety of health concerns. Please do not administer vaccines or any medications to your pet unless
pregnancyiftheycontainasteroid
 Suture removal in 10 to 14 days
 Ultrasound in 26 to 30 days
 uoeirel jo tt Aep yanou oueuand jo zt Aep wo Aip aouo pasn ag pinous noued 
reduce the parasite load in the pups.
 X-rays in 55 to 60 days for puppy size, count and position
 Surgery appointment for a scheduled C-section on .
 Her predicted date to whelp is
. A rectal temperature of less than 99 degrees
indicates she could whelp at any time.
 Please call for assistance if you see green, red, or black discharge prior to the delivery of the first
pup, hard straining for over 1 hour with no pup delivered, more than 3 hours between pups, or
any other concern that her labor is not progressing normally.
vaccinations should be done at 8 weeks of age, prior to placing in new homes
As always, please callif you have any questions. Phone number
Please feel free to contact
on our staff for assistance.
376 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C-15.Surgical insemination discharge for client
Veterinary Clinic Name Here
Phone and website/email here
DISCHARGE CANINE SURGICAL INSEMINATION
DATE:
PATIENT'S NAME:
OWNER'S NAME:
Restraint
 Please protect your pet when leaving the hospital by using eichera leash and collar ora pet
Carrier Excessive activicy may result in injury, ora slower recovery chan we would expec from
a pet that is kept quiet during the healing process.
 Do not lift your bitch with pressure under her abdomen as this is painful and may lead
to semen escaping from her uterus.
 Please remove che bandage covering che IV site on your pet's front leg upon arrival home.
Food and water
Wich the excicement ofrecurning home, your pet may be inclined to drink and eat excessively,
which will most likely result in vomiting. To avoid this, we ask that you remove your pet's
food and water dishes for an hour until your pet has settled down. Then, only allow small
amounts of food and water for the first day home.
 Offer only half your pet's normal food and water conight. Normal feeding may resume
tomorrow.
 Often, chere is a decrease in appetice 3 to 5 weeks after breeding.Ifyour bicch refuses more
than 3 meals, contact us.
 Feed your pe her normal diec. We recommend puppy or pregnancy. Upon confrmation
ofpregnancy, increase meal size by 20% but do not allow your dog to gain excessive weight
during her pregnancy.
Eliminations
sy awoy suuaaa jsny aun suunp aeuun oi apisino o on papuimau aq on paau keu jad jnon
she received Iv fluids today, she may need to urinate more than usual tonighc. Many patients
may not have a bowel movement for 24 to 36 hours after surgery. This is normal.
Exercise and Activity
Patients recovering from surgery or illness need limited activicy to heal properly. Due to the
effects ofaneschesia your pet may be groggy for che next 12 hours. Avoid access to stairs or
situations that may lead to injury during this time.
 Your pet may resume normal ativicy in 5 days.
 NO swimming, bathing or grooming for 10 to 14 days.
 Your pet should be confined indoors, and caken outside on a short leash only for elimina-
tions for 3 days.
 Licking damages surgical sites and slows wound healing. Contact us if your pet is licking the
surgical incision or IV site.
Medications
Ifdispensed, it is important co carefull follow che directions chat are princed on che label.
 No medications dispensed.
 Please use the Betadine? on the enclosed gauze pads cwice a day to cleanse the incision
until healed.
 Medications dispensed for_
Next dose due
 Over-che-counter meds:
Next dose due
 Over-che-counter meds: Aspirin Adulc/Baby
cabs
 times per day.
Next dose due
 DO NOT USE ASPIRIN WITHIN 2 WEEKS OF THIS USING THIS MEDICATION
Sutures and Bandages
no jI asuosu auno sns auneyou 5u ad noA jeauo sosiuo apo u
pet is licking, please notify us immediately. Please check the incision twice daily for any rednes5,
swelling, or discharge. If it appears irritated or infected, please notify us immediately. Rechecks of
post-op patients will be at no charge during regular office hours.
 Sutures/staples need to be removed 10 to 14 days after surgery. A short appointment is
needed.
 Sutures are underneath the skin, and will absorb over the next several weeks. They do not
need to be removed.
 Apply warm compress to the surgical site 3 times daily for 10 minutes each time. Mild rednes
 and swelling around the incision site is common post-op in surgical insemination patients,
ppendices 377
Appointments
Please make an appointment for che following:
 Suture removal in 10 to 14 days.
 Ultrasound exam in 26-30 days.
X-rays in 5-60 days for puppy size & count 
 Progesterone level on
to aid in scheduling your bitch's planned C-section
 Plan for a C-section if you expect 1-2 pups, over 10 pups, have a breed at risk or she
has needed a previous C-section on
 PREDICTED DATE TO WHELP (63 days from Ovulation)
 A decrease in acivicy and/or appetite for the first 24 to 36 hours may be observed. However, if
your pet exhibics any of the following symptoms, please notify che clinic immediacely:
 Loss of appetice for over 36 hours
 Refusal to drink for over 24 hours
 Vomiting and/or diarrhea
 Weakness or depression
 Special lnstructions
378 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
C-16. Tube feeding
TUBE FEEDING DIRECTIONS:
MATERIALS:
1. Goat's milk, pasteurized, or commercial milk replacer
2. Feeding tube, silicon or red rubber feeding tube 8 to 14 French
 3. Permanent magic marker
4. Syringe of appropriate size with catheter tip (10 or 60 cc)
5. Puppy scale - feed at a rate of 20 cc per 16 oz of body weight. Repeat every 3 to 6 hours,
based on pups condition.
6. Retal thermometer.
STEPS:
1. Establish a wellit warm location where you can hold the pup comfortably and all materials are
within reach. Be attentive and do not rush
paa, aoaq dnd aun wm '4 9h mog si amadwai sAddnd auh t 1 h pue 
 3. On a safe surface, hold the pup with the neck extended. Hold the tapered end of the feeding tube
even with the last rib of the largest pup to be fed. Lay the tube along the side of the pup, mark the
tube even with the tip of the pup's nose.
4. Fill the syringe with the calculated amount of formula or milk (20 cc/l16 oz body weight or
water bath - avoid microwaving.
5. Attach the syringe to the feeding tube.
6. With the pup fully awake, warm (over 96° F rectal temp) lying horizontally on the chest, gently
pass the tube over the pups tongue, left of center, applying gentle pressure to slide the tube up
to the mark. Keep the pup's chin below his or her ears to prevent from passing the tube into the
trachea. If resistance is met, remove tube and start over.
7. With your left hand if you are right handed, cup your left hand around the back of the pups head
and hold the tube between your index and middle finger to prevent it from moving out of the correct
position while feeding.
Appendices 379
is correct and you can proceed with feeding. If the tube is mistakenly in the trachea, the pup will
struggle but will not be able to make any sound - STOP IMMEDIATELY, REMOVE THE TUBE AND
START THE PROCESS OVER.
9. With your right hand, depress the plunger on the syringe, NOT too quickly, delivering the
calculated amount, stopping sooner should milk reflux cut of the pup's mouth or nose.
10. As you remove the tube, flex the tube cn itself to prevent milk from being aspirated in to the
of the mouth as if nursing when the tube is in the esophagus positioned correctly.
11. Wash syringe and tube with hot soapy water and allow to air dry until next feeding.
12. Stimulate the external anal and urinary orifices to effect defecation and urination with a warm
moistened cotton ball or washcloth.
380 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Appendix D: For veterinarians
D-1. Insemination procedure for fresh cooled semen
Clinic Name
INSEMINATION PROCEDURE FOR FRESH COOLED SEIMEN
THE ENCLOSED SEMEN IN VIALS SHOULD BE PLACED IN THE REFRIGERATOR UPON
ARRIVAL ... DO NOT WARM OR FREEZE
PLEASE CONFIRIM THE NAIME OF THE OWNER AND STUD DOG CORRESPOND TO THAT
YOU HAVE REQUESTED SEMEN FROM.
Enclosed please find fresh semen extended from
(registered and/or call name
of dog
(breed) owned by
His sperm count prior to the addition of extender is 
_ x 106 with
%
motility and _
 % normal.
The litter registration papers are:
 enclosed will be sent under separate cover by the stud dog owner.
1. Examine one drop of the shipped semen on a warmed microscope slide. Leave the rest of the
slow, sideward movement to rapid forward motility.
2. Attach the enclosed Al rod to the syringe and draw up the entire contents of the vial, without
warming the semen. Let the bitch's body warm the semen.
3. When ready to proceed with the insemination, stand the bitch comfortably with an assistant or
owner holding the head and supporting the hindquarters on their lap, with no pressure under the
abdomen, or on a stairs or ramp. Gently, insert the rod dorsally, then cranially into the vagina and
slowly push on the syringe plunger. Use only 1/2 cc of air to empty the Al rod. AVOID THE USE OF
TOO MUCH AIR!
latex in any contact with the semen. Keep her elevated, feather her for 5 to 6 minutes.
  h     e u  e   s      
insemination. Do not let her jump up for several hours.
6. If you have any questions, please call us.
Appendices 381
D-2. Instructions for ovuplant insertion
Ovuplant Instructions
 Setup for insertion:
1. Ovuplant
 2. Ovuplant label for patient fle
 3. Sodium Bicarbonate injectable
4. TB syringe
5. Lidocaine
 6. Nolvasan Surgical scrub, diluted
7. Cotton Balls
8. Sterile gloves
9. Hair clips
10. Towel for bitch to lay on
11. Non Sterile gauze squares
Instructions:
 1. Open sterile supplies including Ovuplant on to open glove wrapper
2. Place the bitch in lateral recumbency with her right side down
 3. Place hair clips on loose hair on tail and thighs if necessary
4. Prep vulva with Nolvasan
 5. Inject lidocaine mixed 9:1 with sodium biocarbonate injectable along rim of tissue in right vulva lip
adjacent to skin-mucosal margin midway between tip of vulva and dorsal commissure.
 6. Partially depress plunger of Ovuplant to seat Ovuplant drug pellet into insertion needle, taking
care not to push pellet out of tip of needle.
7. Part the lips of the vulva. Insert the Ovuplant with the needle directed ventrally. Start near dorsal
commissure, directing the needle toward to the tip of the vulva (to reduce the chances of loss).
insert deeply- do this so the drug pellet can be seen through the mucosal surface at insertion.)
The ovuplant should end up halfway between the dorsal and ventral commissures of the vulva.
This will aid in retrieval after the breeding.
8. Place a portion of a cotton ball in the vulva to minimize vaginal discharge after placement. The
bitch will pass this when she urinates.
9. Record the location of the ovuplant for retrieval
10. Remind the client the ovuplant must be removed after the breeding.
382 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
D-3. Instructions for ovuplant removal
Setup for removal:
1. Sterile gloves
2. 15 scalpel blade
 3. Lidocaine and Sodium Bicarbonate injectable
4. TB syringe
 5. Sterile saline flush in 3 ml syringe
6. Cotton balls
7. Nolvasan surgical scrub, diluted
 8. Mini surgical pack
9. Gauze squares
Instructions to remove ovuplant:
 1. Place the bitch in lateral recumbency with her right side down
 2. Place hair clips on loose hair on tail and thighs if necessary
3. Prep vulva with Nolvasan
adjacent to skin-mucosal margin midway between tip of vulva and dorsal commissure. In some
cases, the Ovuplant has migrated.
 5. Inject lidocaine near the area, taking care to avoid visually obliterating the ovuplant or physically
disrupting it. Repeat Nolvasan prep.
6. Holding the right side of the vulva with support under it, make a superfcial incision over the
ovuplant, parallel to its plane.
7. Gently lift out the pellet or if it has broken down, curette out the white pasty material that
represents the remaining drug pellet. Flush the area with saline.
urinates.
9. Schedule ultrasound for 4 weeks.
Appendices 383
D-4. Puppy examination
Canine F
Veterinary Hospital Name here
Repr
roduction
Puppy Examination
Date_
Clinician
Staff
pue
Client Name
Client ID
Name of Dam
 Puppy ID
Temp
Weight
Heart Rate
Resp Rate
MM Color
CRT
Urine
Stool
Reflexes
Owner
Feedings/
PE Findings
Color/SG
Character
Present/
concerns
Therapy
Absent
Given
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
D-5. SOAP neonatal visit
Neonate/Pediatric Sick Puppy SOAP:
Pet name.
Pet ID
Age:
d/w/m/y
Client name.
Client #
Date
SUBJECTIVE:
Owner's concerns:
Last normal on
First symptom noted:
Other pets in litter/household affected/normal?
Human family members?:
How is your puppy's ... ?
Attitude & Behavior: Normal/ Lethargic/ Depressed/ Overactive/Weak
days
Appetite: Normal/ Nursing/ Nursing a little/ Not nursing/ Eating a little/ Eating only table food/ Refusing
all food_
hours/days
Drinking: Normal/ Increased/ Decreased/ None
hours/days
Vomiting: Y/N Acute/ Chronic(<7d/>7d)
hours/days Regurgitation: Y/N
hours/days
Appearance of Vomitus: Phlegm/ Blood/ Bile/ Parasites/ Food/Shape
/ Hair/ Feces/ Odor
Duration_
Frequency.
Time/hrs after eating: Varies/On empty stomach/Morning/
Evening/
hrs after meal
Stoois: Normal/None/Diarrhea/Constipated
days
Diarrhea: Y/N Appearance of Stool: pasty/seedy/Blood Color: green-black-brown-yellow-white
Parasites
/Hair/Mucus/Contents.
Normal/Hard/Soft/Pudding/Runny/Watery/None/Other
Frequency.
/day
Size: Normal/small amounts/large Straining
Weight:Normal/Increased/Decreased
oz/kg/lbs
Cardiovascular: Normal/Panting/Coughing/Sneezing/Nasal discharge/Ocular Discharge .
Other:
hours/days
Bloated/ Pain/ Haircoat changes
PREVIOUS RELATED ILLNESS:Y/N
DETAILS
PREVIOUSBLOODWORK/FECAL:Y/N
DETAILS
CURRENT or RECENT MEDICATIONS: Y/N Response?:
DETAILS
WORMING HISTORY: Y/N
DETAILS
VACCINATION HISTORY: Current/None/Overdue
TRAVEL HISTORY:
DETAILS
BEHAVIOR CHANGES:
Chemicals/foreign objects/Dead animal/Clothing/Missing toy etc
Unsupervised indoors or outdoors/changes in household
OBJECTIVE: T
(96°-102.5°}HR_
(100-250) RR_ CRT
HYDRATION EST
MM: Normal Moist/Dry/ tacky/ Pigmented/ Pink/Pale/Very pale/ Cyanotic/ Jaundice /Drooling
Status:Normal weight/Thin/ Overweight/ Obese/Painful/ Depressed/Dehydrated/ Lateral recumbency/
Nonresponsive
Mouth/Throat: Normal/ Cleft palate/ Brachygnatic? Y/N (normall/ Glossitis/ Ulcers/Pharyngitis/Tonsillitis/
Foreign body
Under tongue: Normal/ Foreign body/ Can't examine 
Skull: Open fontanelle Y/N
x
cm
Nares: Normal/Discharge.
Stenotic R/L  Cleft nares R/L
Dental exam: Normal Retained Primary Teeth Malocclusion Gingivitis Y/N grade,
Teething
Heart sounds: Normal/ Murmur Grade,
/ Gallop/ Muffled/ Arrhythmia
Lung sounds: Normal/Clear Crackles R/L Rales R/L Edema Congested R/L Other
Tracheal cough/ Dyspnea/ Labored/ Open mouth breathing/ Distress
Lymph nodes: Normal Enlarged Submandibular/Generalized Peripheral
Appendices 385
AbdominalPalpation:Normal/OverweightEnlarged organ
Hernia: Umbilical/R inguinal/L inguinal 
Tense/ Painful No/ cranial/ caudal/ throughout/ Fluid/Other
Umbilicus: Cord Present/ Absent Inflamed/ Discharge/ Herniated/ Intestines exposed
Bowel: Rectum patent Y/N Gl sounds:
Nbrmal/None/Decreased/Increased
Urinary: Normal/ Anuric/ Dysuric/ Empty/ Full/ Hematuria/ Pollakiuria/ Pu-pd/ Stranguria/ Obstructed
External Genitals: Female Normal Y/N/ Inverted vulva/ Clitoris/ Vaginal Discharge
Male: Testes present R/L Retained R/L Penis
Prepuce
Bladder: Full/ empty/ blocked/ stones
Kidneys: R Normal/abnormal/not palp L Normal/abnormal/not palp
Neuro: Open Fontanell/Anisocoria/Head tilt/ Horner's/Nystagmus/Ataxia/Paresis/Paralysis/Seizures
Proprioception: RF LF RR LR Normal/Decreased
Other:
Eye exam: Normal Visual? Y/N Conjuctivitis OD OS Chemosis OD OS
Corneal Ulcer OD OS Distichia OD OS
Discharge OD OS
Entropion/Ectropion OD
OS FB OD OS PPMs OD
OS
Schirmer OD_
IOPOD
OS_
Nictitans Everted
Follicular Conjunctivis OD
OS Neonatal ophthalmia OD_
OS
Ears: Normal Auditory? Y/N Discharge R/L
Mites Y/N
Musculoskeletal: Gait:
Lame/ Patellar Palpation RR/LR Ortolani R/L
ASSESSMENT/PRIMARY RULEOUTS: Other
PROGNOSIS:
Excellent
Good
Guarded
Fair
Poor
Grave
PLAN:
CBC/CS
UA
FECAL
Giardia
Culture
Parvo
Other_
Rads:
VD/LATERAL
THORAX/ABD
Ultrasound
OTHER
TREATMENT OPTIONS:
Outpatient
Recommended by Dr./Owner declined hospitalization(AMA)
Inpatient
Recommended by Dr./Medically appropriate/Owner request 
Referral.
TEST RESULTS:
SURGERY:
 See anesthesia/surgery report
HOSPITALIZE:
Fluids: IV
cc/hr Total Dose
SQ.
CC/DOSE
X/DAY Total dose_
Injections:
CC
route,
x/day
CC
route
x/day
CC
route_
x/day
CC
route,
x/day
Oral Meds:
 cc/tab/capsule PO
x/day
cc/tab/capsule PO
x/day
cc/tab/capsule PO
x/day
cc/tab/capsule PO
x/day
Feeding: NPO/BABY FOOD/ID/AD/LOW RESIDUE/MAX CAL/OTHER
Can/cups/cc
X/DAY
Feeding tube/force feeding/hand feeding
Drinking:
Water/lce/Electrolytes
amount
x/day
DISCHARGE/FOLLOW UP:
HANDOUTS:
DISPENSED: Meds.
Diet_
Other.
DOCTOR
Technician,
386 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
D-6. Breeding soundness SOAP
Breeding Soundness SOAP
Pet name.
Client name.
Client #
Pet ID #
Date.
Pet's Registered name.
Reg. Number
Microchip#
DNA completed Y/N Date of last Brucella test
Test run - RSAT/Culture/AGID/PCR
Name of Owner/Stud dog/Bitch to be bred to.
Day this heat cycle began
Is Al being done at our clinic? Y/N
Plan to use: Natural/ Fresh Al/ Fresh chilled Al/ Vaginal/ TCl/ Surgical
SUBJECTIVE:
Reason for Visit:
Describe your pet's overall health
Appetite: Normal/Eating a litle/Eating only treats/Eating cnly table food/Refusing all food.
days
Drinking & Urination: Normal/Increased/Decreased/None.
days
Vomiting: None/Describe.
days
Attitude: Normal/Lethargic/Depressed/Overactive/Weak
days
Weight: Normal/ncreased/Decreased
Stocls: Normal/None/Diarrhea/Constipated
days
Cardiovascular: Normal/ Panting/ Coughing/ Sneezing/ Nasal discharge/ Ocular discharge.
days
Other:
days
PREVIOUS ILLNESS: Y/N
DETAILS
MEDS
PREVIOUS BLOODWORK/FECAL: Y/N
DETAILS
Brucella
/Progesterone,
/ Thyroid
Culture,
/Other
CURRENT MEDICATIONS: Y/N
DETAILS
WORMING HISTORY: Y/N
DETAILS
VACCiNATION HiSTORY: Current/None/due for DHLPP on
/ RABIES due on
TRAVEL HISTORY:
DETAILS
BEHAVIOR CHANGES:
Other pets in household? Y/N/SEX
Health status of others in
household
PREVIOUSBREEDING HISTORY
FEMALE: First breeding/Previcusly bred on
/route,
Outcome.
Timing: None/Male/Vag cyt/Progesterone
Evaluated on palpation/ultrasound/x-ray
MALE: First/Last breeding dates/
/ route
Outcome.
Semen Analysis date/results
OBJECTIVE: T
HR
RR
CRT
HYDRATION EST
          s
Status: Normal weight/Thin/Overwt/Obese Painful/Depressed/Dehydrated/Lateral rec/Nonresponsive
Mouth/Throat: Can't examine Normal Other
Dental exam: Normal Tartar Y/N grade,
Gingivitis Y/N grade.
Teething Fractured teeth
Eye Exam: Normal Other:
Ear exam: Normal/NE/Otitis/
Heart sounds: Normal/Murmur Grade.
/ Gallop/ Muffled/ Arrhythmia
Lung sounds: Normal/Other
Lymph nodes: Normal Enlarged/Generalized Peripheral
Appendices 387
Abdominal Palpation: Normal Overweight Tense Enlarged organ
Painful Fluid Other
Urinary: Normal/Anuric/Dysuric/Empty/Full/Hematuria/Pollakiuria/Pu-pd/Stranguria/Obstructed
Neuro: WNL/ Proprioception: RF LF RR LR Normal/decreased Other
Othopedic:
Rectal: Prostate Normal/Enlarged/Symmetrical/Asymmetrical/NE/
Testes: R Normal/_x X__cm diam/Enlarged/Small/Texture_
/Epididymis/Spermatic Cord
L Normal/_x_
X
_cm diam/Enlarged/Small/Texture
/Epididymis/Spermatic Cord
Prepuce: Normal/NE/
/Penis: Normal/NE/
Vaginal Exam:
Mammary glands:
OFA/PENN HIP HISTORY
Eye Registry HISTORY
OTHER SCREENING
Breeding Counseling.
PLAN: CBC/CSUA
FECAL T4/THYROID
CULTURE - source
ULTRASOUND
BIOPSY/Needle Aspirate
SEMEN ANALYSIS
VAG CYT
Vaginoscopy.
Brucellosis serology/culture
PROGESTERONE QUANTITAVE/SEMIQUANTITATIVE
ESTROGEN
TESTOSTERONE
CHROMOSOME ANALYSIS OTHER
Rads: VD/LATERAL
THORAX/ABD
OTHER
Ultrasound
 Referral_
BREEDING PLAN:
Natural Fresh Al Fresh Chilled Al Frozen semen Surgical insemination/TCl Location: Here/Recipient_
Semen/stud dog located at
/Semen to be received
SHIPPING ADDRESS
BILLING ADDRESS
FedEx/
UPS/Post office/other
SHIPPING BOX PROVIDED BY Shipping Veterinarian/RECIPIENT
PLAN:
Date:
Progesterone,
Vag Cyt.
Date:
Progesterone_
VagCyt
Date:
Progesterone_
VagCyt
Date:
Progesterone_
VagCyt
BREEDING DATES:
ULTRASOUND DATE:
X-RAY DATE:
SURGERY:
 See anesthesia/surgery report
WHELP DATE:
CESAREANY/NNUMBEROFPUPS
M
DISCHARGE/FOLLOW UP:
HANDOUTS:
Meds
,Diet_.
Other_
OWNER'S NAME
CREDIT CARD NUMBER
EXP DATE
SIGNATURE
DOCTOR
ESTIMATE:
BILLING COMPLETED
(DATE)
(STAFF INITIALS)
BOX CONTENTS CHECKLIST:
 SEMEN
AI PIPETTE
 SYRINGE
 INSEMINATION DIRECTIONS
 ICE PACKS
 RETURN SHIPPING LABEL AND LETTER
 AKC LITTER REGISTRATION
388 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Semen Analysis: Date.
PERCENT MOTILITY_
_% Speed 0f Progression: 0 1 2 3 4 5 C0LOR
VISC0SITY 1 2 3 4
VOLUME of Sperm Rich Fraction: (1)
ML X SPERM COUNT/ML (2)
X106/9=
TOTAL SPERM COUNT (3)
_X 106/9
ABNORMAL MORPHOLOGY
%NORMAL
% (4)
(MULTIPLY SPERM COUNT /ML (1) x VOLUME IN ML (2) = TOTAL SPERM COUNT = (3)
TOTAL NORMAL SPERM CELLS x 106/9
(5)
(MULTIPLY TOTAL SPERM COUNT (3) x % NORMAL + Immature MORPHOLOGY (4) = TOTAL NORMAL SPERM CELLS) (5)
Morphology
Head Defects:
% Midpiece Defects:
% Tail Defects:
% Total
Normal:
%
Other: White Blood Cells
.per 400x Red Blood Cells
. per 400 x Cellular Debris light
moderate heavy
 Extender Used/Volume.
Comments.
Clinician
Technician_
Appendices 389
D-7.Table of normal puppy development from birth to six weeks
Table of normal puppy development from birth to 6 weeks of age
What is normal?
Week 1
Week 2
Weeks 3-4
Weeks 5-6
Temperature, rectal
96-98° F
96-99° F
100° F
100 -101°F
Ambient temperature
75 to 80℃R
70 to 80° F
70 to 75° F
65 to 75F
Heart rate & blood
200 to 240 bears per
200 to 240 bears per
160 to 200 bears per
Varies with breed
Pressure
min; Blood pressure 61
min, sirus rhythm
min, sinus rhythm;
blood pressure 139
Respiratory rate
15 to 35 per min
15 to 35 per min
15 to 25 per min
15 to 25 per min
Mucus membranes
Pink to hyperemic if
 Pink/l second
 Pink/l second
Pink/l second 
Color/ CRT
recently nursed
Urine color
Very pale yellow, <1.020
Very pale yellow, <1.020
Pale yellow
Pale to moderare yellow
Weight
May lose up to 10% in
Gaining S to 10%
Calculare weight gain of
Calculare weight gain
the first 3 days.
daily, many double birth
 2 -4 gm/day/kg antici-
of 1 4 gm/day/kg
weight by day 10. Calcu-
pated adult weight.
anticipated adult weight.
Birth weight: Toys 100-
lare weight gain of 2-4
Giant and large breeds
200 gms; Large 400-500
gm/day/kg anticipated
gain ar faster rate than
gms; Giant 700 gms
adul weighr.
small breeds.
Activity
Sleeps & ears 90%
Sleeps & eats 90%
Beginning to crawl, then
Walking,climbing, play-
of time, rwitch while
of time, rwitch while
Aep Aq x pue pue15
ing, may bark, begin to
sleeping
sleeping
21. Start to play when
explore environment,
eyes open. Can sit.
mouthing. Normal
postural reflexes.
Artitude
Quiet, cry infrequently.
Quiet
Quiet, more active
-uosad, dolaap o ues
alities",
Body rone and reflexes
Fexor dominance for 1st
Extensor dominance,
Approaching normal for
pe |EUoN
4 days, then extensor.
righting, rooting.
adult Suckling refex &
Righting, rooting, weak
crossed extensor With-
crossed extensor disap-
drawal developing.
pears.
Vision and hearing
No vision but blink with
 None to limited vision
Vision blurry, Pupillary
Approaching full vision
 bright light. Limited
and hearing, menace
light reflex present
and hearing
hearing.
present but slow initially.
wvithin 24 hours of eye-
Limited hearing, waxy
lids opening, respond 
discharge.
to sound. Startle reflex
develops.
Teeth
None
None
 Deciduous incisors &
 Deciduous premolars 
canine erupt 
Breeder's interaction
Assure pups are nursing.
Assure pups are rurs-
Continue to assure pups
Continue to assure pups
supplement if necessary.
ing, supplement if
are thriving, begin to
are thriving, continue
Daily temp, weight,
necessary. Daily temp.
enrich environment
to enrich environment.
urine & stool character.
weight, urine & stool
by variarion of toys,
Lots of human interac-
Start Early Neurologic
character. Continue Early
 surfaces.
tion for socialization
Stimulation day 3-16
Neurologic Stimulation
day 3-16
Veterinary care
Assess & treat if not 
Assess & treat if not
Assess & treat if not
Vererinary wellness visit
 thriving, taildocks and
thriving. Dispense pyran-
thriving. Dispense pyran-
-assess pups for any ab-
dewclaws prior to Sth
tel pamoare to use on 
tel pamoare to use on
normalities for breeder
kep
day 14 after birth.
day 28 after birth.
to sell pup with full
disclosure. First vaccina-
tions (DAPPv). Dispense 
pyrantel pamoare to use
on day 42 after birth.
Food and warer
Nursing only.
Nursing only.
Offer water,then
Teething. Many pups
 If supplementing, 60 ml/
If supplementing, 70 ml/
gruel to start weaning. If
weaned, on full food and
Ib/24 hours divided by
Ib/24 hours divided by 8,
supplementing, 90 ml/
water, some still nurse
12, fed every 2 hours.
fed every 3 hours.
Ib/24 hours divided by 6,
for social interaction.
fed every 4 hours.
Small Animal Pediatric Medicine Tufts Animal Expo 2002
Johnny D. Hoskins, DVM, Ph.D. DocuTech Services, Inc. Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA
390 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
D-8. Anesthesia record
Your hospital name here
CLIENT NAME
 Anesthesia Record
CLIENT NUMBER
PET'S NAME
TEMP F
PULSE/ MIN
RESP/ MIN
BP
WEIGHT
DATE
Hydration
LB
AGE
KG
(PATIENT LABEL)
 PREMED
DOSE
ROUTE
TIME
RESPONSE
ET TUBE
SIZE
FR/MM
IV Cath size: G
Site:
 PRE-OP
 PRE-OP
 PRE-OP LAB
 PRE-OP EKG
 READY TO DISCHARGE
PAPERWORK
PHYSICAL
date
WNL/ABN
DR DISCHG Y/N TIME
 PHOTO
WNL/ABN
WNL/ABN
DATE
POST OP
 CHARGES
 POST OP MEDS
 TREATMENT SHEET
OWNER CALLED
PAPERWORK
ENTERED
RX/OTC/NONE
TT
/LM/NA/BZ
DATE
PROCEDURE
ADDITIONAL PROCEDURES
Microchip/Tattoo
 Nail trim Y/N
 Dental/Extractions Y/N
DVM/TECH
TESTES? Y/N
vaccs to be administered/ None
Heartworm/Fecal
(Admit)
 HERNIA? Y/N
口
 Lump removal/Histopach Y/N
(Procedure)
 RETAINED TEETH? Y/N
Dewclaws
(Surgeon)
 IN HEAT Y/N
口
口
FLUIDS
FLUID START TIME
FLUIDS STOP TIME
 Thermal Support:
ANESTHESIA
ANESTHESIA START TIME
 ANESTHESIA STOP TIME
 Shorline/RICA board/BAER hugger
Water circulating blanket/Rice/Other
TIME
SpO,
CO,
PULSE
RR
TEMP F
BP
FLUID
ISO/
NOTES
Systolic/
RATE/
SEVO
(INCLUDES
Diastolic
VOLUME
% RUN
SURGERY START/
STOP TIME)
CANINE
EXTUBATION TIME
 POST OP MEDS/ROUTE
POST-OP RECTAL TEMP
RECOVERY
°F/C
 FELINE
Appendices 391
D-8. Anesthesia record
Anesthesia Record Page 2
PATIENT LABEL
TIME
SpO2
CO
PULSE
RR
TEMP F
 BP Systolic/
FLUID RATE/
ISO/ SEVO %
NOTES INCLUDES
Diastolic
VOLUME
RUN
SURGERY START/
STOP TIME)
392 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
D-9. C - section surgery report
CANINE CESAREAN SECTION SURGERY REPORT
Your Hospital Name here:
Date_
PATIENT LABEL
 Clients name.
 Pet's name_
 Client number_
Vital Signs:
TEMP F
RESP/
BP
Weight today:
PULSE/ MIN
MIN
Hydration
Lb/kg
MM/Refill
AGE
Weight at breeding:
Lb/kg
ET TUBE
SIZE
FR/MM
IV Cach size: g
Sice:
Drugs:
 DOSE mg or ml 
Dosage calcula-
ROUTE
TIME
RESPONSE
administered:
tion:
Solu-Medrol
1 cc/62 pounds 
 IV slow
BW of 125 mg/2 ml
per vial
Atropine
1 cc/ 20 pounds
SQ
BW of 1/120 gr/ml
Metoclopramide
1 cc37 pounds BW
SQ
of 5 mg/ml
Calcium
1 cc/10 pounds Bw SQ in 2 sites
(must be labeled
of0.9 mEq/10 ml)
for SQ use)
Other
Pre-surgical blood work was completed on
at
Lab and was within
normal limits/_
The EKG was WNL/
The first day of estrus was
Bred on
Ovulation Date Estimated
Predicted to whelp on:
Bred by Natural/Vaginal Al/TCl/Surgical using Fresh/Fresh chilled/ Frozen semen
Ultrasound revealed:
Radiographs revealed:
(See Table 6-2 and Appendix A-5 for sequence of events.)
Description of surgical procedure:
The dog was assessed for overall condition and labor and found to be.
with
 and placed in dorsal recumbency. A sterile prep with Nolvasan@ and sterile
drape was applied. A ventral midline abdominal skin incision was made halfway between the pubis
and umbilicus approximately.
cm long with a #15 scalpel blade. The subcutaneous fat was
sharply dissected off the underlying abdominal wall to clearly expose the fascia for the entire length
of the skin incision to facilitate good apposition of the linea at closure. The linea was lifted up with
thumb forceps, a stab incision was made thru the abdominal wall and the incision was completed
with Metzenbaum scissors.
The R/L uterine horn was identified and exteriorized. An incision was made lengthwise on the
antimesenteric border of the uterus.
(#) pups were delivered including placentas. This was
repeated for the R/L horn and.
(#) pups were delivered thru the same/new incision.
The incision(s) were located at:
Appendices 393
The placentas were detached/easily removed/not removed/
Resorption sites were/were not noted in R/L horn
Placentas/uterine samples were retained for pathology/culture/
The uterus was examined from vagina/cervix proximally to both ovaries to assure all pups
and placentas were removed and to assess integrity. The uterine incision(s) were sutured with
in a continuous inverting baseball pattern. The uterine condition was
The abdomen was irrigated with 1 L
The abdominal wall was closed using.
in a simple interrupted pattern in the linea.
The subcutaneous layer was closed using.
in a simple continuous pattern. The
subcuticular layer was closed using
 in a simple continuous pattern. The skin was
closed using.
in a
pattern.
#
ID
 Suction
 Spontaneous 
Intubated
Calffeirne
Dopram
APGAR
APGAR
Weight
Exam
Other
resps
1 min
Smin
Oz/gm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Post-op recovery.
Post-op pain meds by injection,
Post-op pain meds dispensed for oral
use_
Discharged on
Condition at discharge:
Comments.
(Surgeon's Signature)
394 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
D-10.Surgical insemination surgeryreport
Date_
PLACE PATIENT
LABEL HERE
Clients name.
Pet's name_
Client number
CANINE SURGICAL INSEMINATION SURGERY REPORT
Description of surgical procedure:
Presurgical blood work was completed on
at
Lab and was within
normal limits. The EKG was WNL
The first day of estrus was
Ovulation Date Estimated
AM/PM
Progesterone Levels were:
Date
Time
Result
IP/8u
Laboratory
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab
AM/PM
IP/u
Lab
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab
AM/PM
ng/dl
Lab
Ovulation Date Estimated
Breeding Planned
Whelping Date Estimated
At
(time) on
(date), the dog was anesthetized with
and placed in dorsal recumbency with her caudal end elevated slightly
sterile drape was applied. A ventral midline abdominal skin incision was made between the 3rd and
4th/ 4th and 5th nipples_
 cm long with a #15 scalpel blade/laser using a scalpel handle as
a shield. The subcutaneous fat was sharply dissected off the underlying abdominal wall to clearly
expose the fascia for the entire length of the skin incision to facilitate good apposition of the linea at
closure. The linea was lifted up with thumb forceps, a stab incision was made thru the abdominal wall
and the incision was completed with Metzenbaum scissors.
The uterine body was identified and exteriorized, and both uterine horns were partially exteriorized
So as to visualize them. Ovaries were/were not visualized/palpated. The uterus was/was not normal
Diagnostics
Fresh/Fresh chilled shipped semen/Frozen was used from stud dog.
owned_
Sperm count
% motility OR
Appendices 395
The frozen semen vial number used was
from ICSB/ICG-Synbiotics/Camelot/Canine Cryobank/
from.
Veterinary Hospital in
The semen was thawed according to the freezing centers enclosed guidelines
using_
 as thaw media.
The semen had an estimated 
% motility with
speed of progression and
 estimated % dead or immotile. (read by
Initals)
The uterine body was held off with digital pressure distal to the puncture site. A syringe with a 20
gauge catheter was used to introduce the semen into the uterine body/uterine horn just distal to the
 ovary directing the semen into both horns. Pressure was maintained for 1 minute. The uterus was then
The abdominal wall was closed using.
in a simple interrupted pattern in the linea.
The subcutaneous layer was closed using.
in a simple continuous pattern. The
subcuticular layer was closed using
in a simple continuous pattern. The skin was
closed using.
Post-op recovery.
Pre-op pain meds
Post-op pain meds dispensed for home use.
Discharged on
Ambulatory/Carried/ln carrier/ Discharged to:
 Date calculated to whelp on (63 days from ovulation)
Comments,
 Staple Remover sent
(Surgeon's Signature)
396 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
D-11.Uterine biopsy report
CANINE UTERINE BIOPSY/CULTURE/FLUSH REPORT
Date.
PLACE PATIENT
Clients name.
LABEL HERE
Pet's name,
Client number.
Dr.
Tech
See anesthesia report
Presurgical blood work was completed on
and was/was not within normal limits.
EKG was completed on
and was/was not within normal limits.
Date first noticed estrus:
Progesterone levels were:
Date
Time
Result
ng/dl|Laboratory
IP/3u
IP/8u
Ip/8u
Ip/au
Significant Reproductive History:
Number of previous estrous cycles.
Number of previous breedings.
Timed?
Number of previcus pregnancies?
Number of puppies?
The dog was anesthetized with
and placed in dorsal recumbency. The
hair was clipped with a 40 Oster clipper. A sterile prep with Nolvasan and sterile drape was applied.
A ventral midline abdominal skin incision was made halfway between the pubis and umbilicus
approximately
cm long with a #15 scalpel blade. The subcutaneous fat was sharply
dissected off the underlying abdominal wall to clearly expose the fascia for the entire length of the
forceps, a stab incision was made thru the abdominal wall and the incision was completed with
Metzenbaum scissors.
The uterine body was identified and exteriorized, and both uterine horns were partially exteriorized
so as to visualize them.
 Ovaries were/were not visualized/palpated/normal/abnormal
The uterus was/was not normal
Cysts
Adhesions,
# of biopsies done.
Location of biopsies
Biopsy done as a wedge/with a 2/4/6 mm biopsy punch.
Biopsies submitted to Cornell/
Lab for culture/ in formalin/in Bouins *
Cultures taked for aerobic/anaerobic/mycoplasma culture sent to Cornell/.
Lab
Fluid collected and submitted to Cornell/
Lab
The uterus was flushed through the biopsy site with a
 Fr Red rubber feeding tube with
cc of LRS/Normal saline/.
 to distend the uterine horns.
The uterine biopsy sites were closed with 5-0 PDS suture/
 in a Uttrech/.
Pattern without penetration into the lumen of the uterus.
The abdomen was flushed with
cc LRS/Normal Saline/
Appendices 397
The abdominal wall was closed using.
in a simple interrupted pattern in the linea.
The subcutaneous layer was closed using.
in a simple continuous pattern. The
subcuticular layer was closed using
in a simple continuous pattern. The skin was
closed using.
ina
. pattern.
Post-op recovery.
 Post-op pain meds by injection
Post-op pain meds dispensed for oral use_
Other meds.
 Discharged on
Comments.
 Staple Remover sent
(surgeon's signature)
Sequence of Events:
1. Presurgical blood work with/without progesterone level/Brucella/Pre-op exam
2. Premed with
3. Place IV catheter
4. Anesthetize with
/ETT/ intubate/clip/prep/ move to surgery table
5. Place IV Catheter
6. Clip abdomen
7. Move to surgery table
8. Position on v-tray
9. Hook up to monitors and anesthetic machine
10. Prep for incision
11. Gown/gloves
12. warm LRS in microwave
13. Make incision into abdominal wall
14. Evaluate uterus and ovaries
15. Make wedge or biopsy punch incisions - 3 or more if possible
16. Place 1 biopsy in sterile red top tube to grind up for culture
17. Place 1 biopsy in formalin for histopathology
18. Place 1 biopsy in sterile red top tube with Bouins * * (2 cc) solution for histopathology
19. Culture inside of uterus with 3 culturettes - hand to Dr. without breaking sterile field
·Aerobic - Aimes
•Anaerobic - Porta-cul
·Mycoplasma - Aimes without Charcoal
20. Flush uterine horns to distend.
21. Flush abdominal cavity.
22. Close uterus and abdomen
Equipment Checklist
1. Biopsy punches
2. 2 Aimes culturettes without charcoal
3. 1 Porta-cul with sterile swab
4. 3 sterile red top tubes for culture, fluid and bouins solution
5. Assorted red rubber feeding tubes
6. Surgery setup: Pack, trach tube, IV cath, Propofol, tape, gauze, eye ointment, flush, patient monitor,
v-tray, towel, gloves (6.5), G0wN, 15 blade, 2-0 or 3-0 cutting suture, stapler and remover
7. 35 and 60 cc catheter tip syringe - keep in case to hand to Dr. without breaking sterile field
8. Sterile Stainless steel bowl
9. 1 L warmed LRS
10. 5-0 PDS suture
398 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
11. Sterile needles to handle biopsy tissue
12. Scissors to open sterile LRS
13. Plastic cassettes for tissues in solution
14. Small container of formalin
15. Bouin's solution, 3 cc syringe to transfer to red top tube
 Small Styrofoam sleeve to keep anaerobic culture tube away from ice pack.
17. Cornell Laboratory requisition form
18. Fine tip Sharpie permanent marker to label sample vials
**Note - Bouin's must be carefully stored to prevent the solution from drying out into powder as in
powder form, it has explosive properties.
Appendices 399
D-12.Algorithm for dystocia
Pregnant Female in
Labor
Complete physical 
exam and vital signs 
of bitch 
Vaginal digital
examin ation to
Discharge patient(s)
triage upon arrival at
Deliver with vaginal
to finish delivering at
hos pital
and/or
Deliver pup(s)
home if bitch not too
rectal manipulation
 tired and breeder is
Fetus palpable in
competent
birth canal?
 Episiotomy if fetus is
Discharge bitch
X-Ray/Ultrasound to
Complete delivery
Suture Episiotomy
caught in vulva
and pups
1. confirm pregnancy
2. determine if fetuses
 Fetal or maternal 
 are still present or 
distress Bitch
3.to assess size/
exhausted Fetal HR
position/viability
<180 bpm
Green vaginal
number/maturity
 of fetuses present
discharge prior to
birth of 1st puppy
 Bitch at full term 
Confirm progesterone
based on ovulation 
Fetuses
levels and breeding 
date/progesterone
 malpres ented 
C-section
dates
level/breeding date/
fetal m atu rity
 oversized or dead
(gut'skeleton)
Progesterone level
 Fetal size relative to
if pre-term labor is 
 pelvic size/position.
suspected
and vaginal canal OK
Number of fetuses
Whelpwise if possible
Antibiotics
1-2 or over 9
3-9 fetuses
toc olytics +/-
progesterone
 C-section 
Oxytocin/Calcium/5%
No success/Bitch
supplement if bitch
Dextrose IV
tiring
 is in pre-term labor
 Delivery of 1 or more 
pups
J0
 Home if doing well 
Continue monitoring
and breeder is
 and fluids till all
competent
pups delivered
400 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
This page intentionally left blank
402
D-13. Drug formulary
Canine F
Drug formulary
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Freque ncy and Route
roduction
Pediatric
lndication
Acyclovir
Zovirax
10 mg per kg as suspen-
Neonate
Antiviral. Canine Herpes-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Kampschmidt and others.
sion PO every 6 hours
virus in che neonate.
Unpublished observation.
pue
until 3 weeks of age.
Humb 7ch Edition.
Aglepristone
Alizine@
10 mg per kg (or 0.33 ml 
Female
 Injectable progescerone
 Noc a US FDA Approved
Canine Pyometra:
per kg per day at 30 mg/
blocker. To augment
 Drug+ Contraindicated
Pathogenesis, Therapy
ml administered on day
pyometra treatment by al-
during desired preg-
and Clinical Cases WSAVA
1, 2, 8, 15, and 29. This
lowing che cervical os to
nancy.
 2002 Congress Prof. Sce-
 treatment can be com-
open. 90% treatment suc-
fano Romagnoli Plumb 
bined wich cloprostenol
cess when used through
7th Edition.
(at 1 mcg (micrograms)
day 29 of this protocol.
 per kg SC once a day
from day 3 to day 7) t0
increase uterine evacu-
ation. Follow injection
with massage of injection
site. Maximum of 5 ml at
 any single injection site.
Aglepristone
Alizine@
10 mg per kg SC (or 0.33
Female
Injectable progesterone
Not a US FDA Approved
 Recent Advances in Small
ml per kg per day at 30
blocker.
Drug+ Contraindicated 
Animal Reproduction, P.
mg/ml) repeated once 24 
Pregnancy termination.
 during desired pregnan-
W. Concannon, G. Eng-
hours later.
cy. Can be administered
land and J. Verstegen.
Administer 2 doses at
any day from confrma-
Intermational Veterinary
 24 hour intervals SC,
tion of pregnancy up to
Information Service
followed by massage of
day 45 of pregnancy. In 
(www.ivis.org), Ichaca,
injection site. Maximum
mid pregnancy it can be
New York, USA.
of 5 ml at any one injec-
used in bitches in which
Clinical Use of Anti-Pro-
tion site.
an unwanted pregnancy
gestins in the Bicch (23-
has been confirmed by
Feb-2001) Fieni, Bruyas,
ultrasound becween days
Battut and Tainturier.
22 and 30. 94% effective.
May resorb feruses or see
vaginal discharge. The
preparation is an oily
alcohol solution.
Altrenogest
Regu-Mate@
0.088 mg per kg admin-
Female
Oral progestin. To man-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Root Kustritz MV. Small
istered orally once daily,
age luteal insuffciency 
 Considered safe during
 Animal Theriogenology.
no later than 61 days post
that may lead to pre-cerm
pregnancy.
ovulation.
labor Document luteal
Client Information
Package insert; Regu-
Available as Altrenogest
insuffciency and mule
●The manufacturer liscs
Mate?, Matrix? - Intervet.
0.22% (2.2 mg/ml) in oil.
out infectious causes
the following people as 
of pregnancy loss. Best
chose who should not
Plumb 7th Edition.
Give equine product
to avoid during frst
handle the product:
Purswell 1999.
(Regu-Mate?) at 2 ml per
trimester. Give equine
● Women who are or
100 lbs of body weight
(ae-nay npod
 suspect chat chey are
PO once daily for dogs.
2 ml per 100 Ibs of body
 pregnant.
weight PO once daily.
● Anyone wich cthrombo-
Monitor pregnancy with
phlebitis or thromboem-
ultrasound. Exogenous
bolic disorders or wich a
 progesterone use is the
history of these events.
 experimental model for
* Anyone having cere-
 pyometra in che bitch, 50
brovascular or coronary
monitor carefully.
artery disease
●Women wich known or
suspected carcinoma of
the breast.
▪ People wich known or
suspected estrogen-
dependent neoplasias.
●Women with undiag-
nosed vaginal bleeding.
* People wich benign
 or malignant tumor that
 developed during the use
 of oral contraceptives or
 ocher estrogen concain-
ing productcs.
+ Altrenogest can be ab-
sorbed after skin contact
and absorption can be
enhanced if the drug is
covered by occlusive ma-
ndices
terials (e.g., under latex
gloves, etc.). If exposed
403
to the skin, wash
404
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine R
 Freque ncy and Route
Pediatric
lndication
offimmediacely wich soap
Repr
and water If the eyes are
roduction
exposed, flush wich water
for 15 minutes and get
pue I
medical attention. If the
product is swallowed, do
not induce vomiting and
contact a physician or
 poison control center
 Amoxicillin 
Amoxi-Tabs@
10 to 22 mg per kg PO, IV
All
Aminopenicillin. To treac
 Considered safe during
Various.
 every 12 hours.
susceptible infections in 
 pregnancy.
Humb 7ch Edition.
the neonate.
Amoxicillin
Amoxi-Tabs@
For susceptible UTI's: 10
AlIl
Aminopenicillin. To treat
 Considered safe during
Various.
Amoxi-Drops@
to 20 mg per kg PO every
 suscepcible infections in 
 pregnancy.
Greene and wacson 1998
12 hours (up to every 6
the adult.
Humb 7ch Edition.
hours) for 5 to 7 days.
For susceptible systemic
infections: 22 to 50 mg
 per kg PO every 8 hours
for 7 days.
For susceptible orthope-
dic infections: 22 to 30
mg per kg IV, IM, SC, or
PO every 6 to 8 hours for
7 to 10 days.
NOTE: Duration of
 treacment are general
guidelines, generally treat
for at least 2 days after
 allsigns ofinfection are
gone.
Amoxicillin and
Clavamox
12.5 to 25 mg per kg PO
All
Potentiaced aminopenicil-
 Considered safe during
Lee.
 Clavulanic acid 
every 12 hours.
lin. To treat susceptible
pregnancy.
Humb 7th Edition.
 infections in neonates.
Amoxicillin and Clavu-
Clavamox
For susceptible UTI's:
Potentiaced aminopenicil-
Considered safe during
All
Plumb 7ch Edition.
lanic acid 
12.5 mg per kg PO every
lin. To treat susceptible
pregnancy.
8 to 12 hours for 5 to 7
infections in adulcs.
days.
For susceptible skin, soft
tissue infections: 12.5 mg
per kg PO every 12 hours
for 5 to7 days (may need
to extend to 21 days; do
not exceed past 30 days);
For susceptible deep
 pyodermas: 12.5 mg per
kg PO every 12 hours for
14 to 120 days;
For systemic bacteremia:
 22 mg per kg PO every 8
to 12 hours for 7 days.
Amoxicillin + sulbactam
Unasyn@
Neonates: 50 mg per
All
Injectable potentiated
Can be administered
Plumb 7ch Edition.
kg (Amoxicillin and 
aminopenicillin.
IO, SC or IM in neonate.
Aucoin 2000.
sulbactam combined) IV
To treat susceptible
 Considered safe during
Hawkins 2003.
every 4 to 6 hours as long
infections.
pregnancy.
as necessary.
Reconstitute with
0.9% Sodium Chloride
Adult dogs: For Gram
injection, 5% dextrose
(+) Positive Infections:
injection, sterile water
10 to 20 mg per kg PO
for injection, Lactated 
every 12 hours; 5 mg per
Ringer's injection.
kg IM, SC every 12 hours;
If reconsticuted with 10
5 mg per kg IV every 8
ml ofabove solutions,
hours.
makes 150 mg/ml.
For Gram (—) Negative
Once reconstituted at
infections: 20 to 30 mg
this concentration, is
per kg PO every 8 hours;
stable for 72 hours at
10 mg per kg IM or SC
refrigeration, 8 hours at
every 8 hours; 10 mg per
room temperacure.
点
kg IV every 6 hours.
Ac 150 mg/ml,che cypical
idices
For susceptible UTI's:
neonate dose is 0.15 to
12.5 mg per kg PO every
0.25 ml per dose based
12 hours for 3 to 7 days;
on weight of neonate.
406
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
Frequency and Route
 Pediatric
 lndication
6.6 mg per kg IM or SC
Repr
every 12 hours for 3 t0
roduction
7 days.
For susceptible soft cissue
infections: 10 to 20 mg
pue
 per kg PO, IM or SC every
8hours for 7 days.
 For pneurmonia, syscemic
infection: 22 mg per
kg PO, IV or SC every 8
hours for 7 to 14 days.
For susceptible sepsis,
bacteremia: 20 to 40 mg
 per kg IV, IM or SC every
6to 8 hours for as long as
necessary.
Atropine
0.04 mg per kg, SC
Male, Female, Pediatric
Injectable anticholinergic.
 Minimal or no response
Hellyer
as needed prior to
To prevent bradycardia
in neonates under 14
Veterinary Anesthesia &
induction of or during
during aneschesia.
days ofage. Bradycardia
 Analgesia Suppor Group
anesthesia.
 in the neonate should be
2012.
treated wich oxygen and
Using Atropine for small 
warming.
animal dose at 1/120 gr/
However atropine is che
ml or 0.54 mg/ml, chis
drug of choice if the bitch
calculates to be 1 cc per
becomes bradycardic
10 to 20 kg (20 to 40 Ib).
during C-section.
Azichromycin
Zithromax
5 to 10 mg per kg PO
All
 Macrolide antibiotic. To
Considered safe during
Plumb 7ch Edition.
once daily for 3 to 5 days.
 treat susceptible infec-
 pregnancy.
tions.
 Bethanechol
Urecholine@
5 t0 15 mg per dog PO
All
 Cholinergic. To manage
Use with caution.
Plumb 7th Edition.
every 8 hours or 0.5 to
swallowing defects or
 Principle contraindica-
1.0 mg per kg PO every
to increase bladder
tions are GI or urinary
8hours.
contractilicy.
tract obstructions or wall
 integrity in question
Bromocriptine
Parlodel?
For estrous induction: 20
Female
Dopamine agonist/pro-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
to 25 mcg (micrograms)
lactin inhibitor Used to
 Contraindicated during
per kg per day divided
induce estrus.
desired pregnancy.
PO every 8 to 12 hours
Cabergoline has same
for 30 to 90 days until the
effect with fewer side
 start of proestrus.
effects.
 Bromocriptine
Parlodel@
To reduce size of mam-
Female
 Dopamine agonist/pro-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
mary tumor pre-op: 10
lactin inhibitor.
Do not use in estrous
mcg (micrograms) per kg
 Used pre-op to reduce
bitch or during desired 
 PO every 8 hours for 5 to
size of mammary tumor.
pregnancy.
8 days pre-op.
Bromocriptine
Parlodel?
 To augment pyometra
Female
Dopamine agonist/pro-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
treatment:
lactin inhibitor.
 Contraindicated during
10 to 25 mcg (micro-
To augment medical
desired pregnancy.
grams) per kg every 8
treatment of pyometra.
Can use metoclopramide
to 12 hours PO for the
if necessary to manage
first 8 days of pyometra
nausea and vomiting.
 therapy. The tablecs are
2.5 mg (2500 mcg (micro-
grams)), so for smaller
bitcches, 1 cablet should 
be dissolved in 10 cc of
water (to make 250 mcg
(micrograms)/ml), and
stored in che refrigerator
in a dark amber bocle.
This should be shaken
 to resuspend before
administered.
Bromocriptine
Parlodel?
To manage false preg-
Female
 Dopamine agonist/pro-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
nancy:
lactin inhibitor.
Contraindicated during
10 to 30 mcg (micro-
To minimize sympcoms of
 desired pregnancy. Evalu-
 grams) per kg PO every 8
false pregnancy.
ate to be certain bitch 
to 12 hours for 16 days as
is not pregnant before
点
needed.
iniciating cherapy.
idices
Can use metoclopramide
if necessary to manage
nausea and vomiting.
408
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Sourc
Canine F
 Freque ncy and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
Bromocriptine
Parlodel@
To augment pregnancy
Female
 Dopamine agonist/pro-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
termination: 10 to 25 mcg
lactin inhibicor.
Contraindicated during
roduction
(micrograms) per kg PO
Used wich cloprostenol
 desired pregnancy.
every 8 hours to every 12
to augment termination
Bromocriptine may cause
hours for 8 days or until 
of pregnancy.
a plethora of adverse ef-
pue
progesterone level drops
fects that are usually dose
below 5 ng/dl.
related and minimized 
wich dosage reduc-
The tablets are 2.5 mg
tion. Some more likely
(2500 mcg (micro-
possibilities include:
grams)), so for smaller
gastrointestinal effeccs
bicches, l cablet should
be dissolved in 10 cc
(nausea, vomiting), ner-
of water (to make 250
vous system effects (seda-
mcg (micrograms) per
tion, fatigue, etc.), and
ml), and scored in the
hypotension (particularly
refrigerator in a dark
with che firsc dose, but it
 amber botcle. This should
may persist).
be shaken to resuspend
before administered.
Bupivacaine
Marcaine@
1 mg per kg up to a maxi-
Male Female adults only
Local anesthetic. To
Contraindicated in che
Neonatology
mum dose of 2 mg per kg
 NEVER in the neonate!
manage pain as a local an-
neonate due to risk of
 A P. Davidson
(1 mg/lb) as needed for
eschetic. Slower onset of
cardiotoxicicy.
2009 SFT Proceedings.
 pain management.
action (20 to 30 minutes)
 More potential for coxic-
 Intra-lesion injection.
buc longer duration of ef-
ity than lidocaine.
fect (3 to 5 hours) when
Calculate doses very
compared to lidocaine.
carefully.
 Never administer IV.
Buprenorphine
Buprenex
 10 to 30 mcg (micro-
AIl
Opiate partial agonist.
Controlled substcance
Humb 7ch Edition.
JO WI AI yJad (sweis
To improve post-op
(CII)
Mason DE. "Anesthesia
SC.
analgesia.
Rarely causes respiratory
for Cesarean Section."
(0.01 to 0.03 mg per kg)
Safe to use AT induction
depression: use wich
World Small Animal
to aid in analgesia for
 caution in patientcs wich
Veterinary Association
10 mcg (micrograms) per
C-section - takes effect
 CNS or cardiovascular
World Congress
kg post C-section.
after pups are delivered
dysfunction.
Proceedings, 2006.
IF surgeon is fast enough
to deliver pups before
the onset of action.
Buprenorphine
Buprenex
0.02 mg per kg up to 4
Puppy
Opiate partial agonist.
Controlled subscance
Plumb 7ch Edition.
times a day.
(CIII)
Rarely causes respiratory
Veterinary Anesthesia &
depression: use wich
Analgesia Support Group.
caution in patients wich
CNS or cardiovascular
dysfunction.
Butorphanol Tartrate
Torbugesic@
As an analgesic:
All
 Opiate partial agonist.
 Controlled substcance
Plumb 7ch Edition.
Torbutrol
SC,IM, IV, or PO up to 4
To manage pain, as a
(C-IV)
times a day.
cough suppressanc.
Hendrix and Hansen 
1. 0.1 to 1 mg perkg
 Causes more sedation
2000
 IM, IV or SC every 1 to
 than buprenorphine.
Mathews 1999
3 hours
Morgan 1988
2. 0.2 co 0.4 mg per kg
Considered safe during
Reidesel
SC, IM or IV (use lower
pregnancy.
Hardie 2000
dose if given IV); Eficacy
Veterinary Anesthesia &
is 1 to 2 hours for moder
Reduce dose in dogs wich
 Analgesia Support Group.
ate pain and 2 to 4 hours
MDR-1 mutation.
for mild pain. May give
orally at 0.4 mg per kg co
the nearest quarter tablet
 3 times a day.
3. 0.5 to 1 mg per kg PO
every 6 to 8 hours.
As a pre-anesthetic:
1. 0.05 mg per kg IV or
0.4 mg per kg SC or IM.
2. 0.2 to 0.4 mg per kg
IM (with acepromazine
0.02 co 0.04 mg per kg
IM).
点
idices
409
410
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
lndication
Cabergoline
Dostinex (Pfizer) (hu-
1. For estrus induction:
Female
Prolactin inhibitor/dopa-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Plumb 7th Edition.
man)
5 mcg (micrograms) per
mine (D2) agonist.
Contraindicated during
roduction
kg PO once daily for 10
1. For estrus induction 
desired pregnancy.
 Galastop in liquid form
days or until 2nd day of
(works --70% of time).
Cabergoline is contrain-
in Europe
proestrus. Induces fertile
2. To treat pseudopreg-
dicated in dogs and cacs
proestrus in 4 to 25 days.
nancy.
 that are pregnant, unless
2. For treatment of
3. To reduce lactation
abortion is desired (see
pseudopregnancy: 5 mcg
during mastitis.
indications). when using
(micrograms) per kg
4. To aid in luteolysis in
to induce estrus, it is
 once a day PO for 5 to
pyometra treatment.
recommended to wait at
10 days.
5. To aid in pharmacologi-
least 4 months after the
3. To reduce lactation
cally induced abortion.
prior cycle to allow the
while treating mastitis:
6. To reduce the size of
uterus to recover.
Administer for 2 to 3 days
mammary tumors pre-op.
at 5 mcg (micrograms)
Give this medication with
 per kg once daily) to
food.
 reduce lactation can also
Because of the dosage dif-
 speed recovery from
ferences in animals versu5
mastitis. Pups must be
 human patients, and the
weaned.
4. Pyometra ancillary
strength of the commer-
cially available
treatment: 5 mcg (mi-
tablet form of the
 crograms) per kg once a
day PO for 5 to 10 days.
product, a compounding
 Monitor response with
pharmacist must usually
ultrasound.
reformulate this medica-
5. To assist with medical
tion. Galastop liquid as an
 termination of pregnan-
alternative.
cy: 5 mcg (micrograms)
 per kg once a day PO
 for 5 to 10 days. Monitor
response with progester-
one testing.
6. To reduce the size of
mammary tumors pre-op:
5 mcg (micrograms) per
kg once daily for 5 to8
days pre-op.
Caffeine
NoDoz@
1 tablet dissolved in 1 
Neonate
Stimulant.
Extralabel Drug Use*
 Anecdotal. Used in hu-
cc water 1 drop on che
As a Respiratory and
 man neonates once daily
 tongue ofa neonate to
cardiac stimulant of
as a respiratory stimulant.
stimulate respiracions
neonates.
AFTER airways are clear.
Repeat PRN once daily.
Calcium
Cal-Pho-Sol@
Calcium glycerophos-
Female
Essential cation nutrient.
 Considered safe during
 Plumb 7ch Edicion.
 phate 50 mg and Calcium
To improve uterine
pregnancy.
Lactate 50 mg
contractions during labor
BE SURE THE PROD-
and at C-section.
UCT YOU ARE USING
Can be administered at a
 To improve maternal
IS LABELLED FOR SC
range ofup to 1 cc per 10
skills (anecdocal).
ADMINISTRATION. THE
pound of body weight SC
WRONG FORM CAN
up to 2 times a day.
CAUSE SERIOUS SKIN
SLOUGHS. IF ADMINIS-
TERING IV, GIVE VERY
SLOWLY AND MONI-
TOR EKG, STOP IF EKG
CHANGES OR BITCH
VOMITS.
Calcium gluconate
10% Calcium Gluconate
0.5 to 1.0 cc per 10
Female
Essential cation nutrient.
 Considered safe during
Plumb 7ch Edition.
or Calphosan SOLUTION
 pounds of body weight
To improve uterine
pregnancy.
ONLY (not Calphosan
(0.1 mg per pound body
contractions during labor
BE SURE THE PROD-
suspensiony
weight) every 4 to 6
and at C-section.
UCT YOU ARE USING
hours, SC divided into 2
To improve maternal
IS LABELLED FOR SC
locations, not to exceed 5
skills (anecdotal).
ADMINISTRATION. THE
CC per location.
WRONG FORM (calcium
chloride) CAN CAUSE SE-
ROUS SKIN SLOUGHS.
IF ADMINISTERING IV,
GIVE VERY SLOWLY AND
MONITOR EKG, STOP
IF EKG CHANGES OR
BITCH VOMITS.
Appe
411
412
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
Calcium
Calcium gluconate 10%,
Female
Essential cation nutrient.
Considered safe during
Plumb 7ch Edition.
warmed to body tem-
Used to treat postparcum
pregnancy. Ifthe 10%
roduction
perature, give IV at a rate
eclampsia
calcium ghuconate solu-
of50 co 150 mg per kg or
(hypocalcaemia).
tion is available, it can be
0.5 to 1.5 ml per kg over
diluted 50% with normal
20 to 30 minutes. An
 saline and administered
 alternative IV treatment is
SC every 8 hours until the
1% calcium glycerophos-
Oral calcium takes effect.
 phate plus calcium lactate
(Calphosan solution 1%)
Oral calcium treatment
administered at 2.5 to
7.5 mol per kg, again over
(500 mg EVERY 8 HOURS
per 20 Ibs) should be
20 to 30 minutes. Wich
continued throughout
either protocol, STOP
IF THE HEART RATE
lactation.
CHANGES.
 Best to use EKG to moni-
 tor administration.
 Calcium oral gel 
Calsorb gel 
1 to 3 ml PO depending
Female
Essential cation nutri-
170 mg/ml
Plumb 7ch Edition.
 on severity of condition
ent. To manage uterine
PO every 12 hours.
inertia, aggression toward
puppies.
Carnitine
Motility Plus TM
 250 to 500 mg PO cwice
Male
 Nutrient. To alter fat
Give with meals when
Plumb 7ch Edition.
Acetyl-L-Carnitine
daily.
metabolism. May help
possible to reduce likeli-
Quinican
wich sperm moctilicy.
hood of GI side effeccs.
Carprofen
Rimadyl@
4.4 mg per kg PO, IM or
Female, Male
 Non-steroidal anti-inflam-
 Non-steroidal anti-inflam-
Plumb 7ch Edition.
 SC; may be given once
matory.
macory.
Package Insert
daily or divided and given
For pain and inflamma-
 To manage pain and
Rimadyl--Pfizer.
as 2.2. mg per kg cwice
tion management.
inflammation.
daily; round dose to near-
The manufacturer states
est half caplet increment.
that the safe use of
For postoperative pain,
carprofen in dogs less
than 6 weeks ofage, in
 administer approxi-
mately 2 hours before
pregnant dogs, dogs used
 the procedure, excepc for
for breeding purposes,
or in lactating bitches has
C-sections.
not been escablished.
 May cause GI liver
Injectable is dosed ac the
and renal effects. In
oral products dose, but
cases with long-cerm use,
administered SC.
bood monitoring renal
and hepatic function is
recommended.
Cefazolin
AnceP
1. For systemic infections:
All
First generation cephalo-
Cephalosporins have
Humb 7th Edition.
Kefzol
5 to 25 mg per kg IM or
 sporin antibiotic.
been shown to cross the
Greene and watson 1998.
 IV every 6 to 8 hours as
To treat bacterial
placenta and safe use of
long as necessary.
infeccions susceptible to
them during pregnancy
2.For sepsis, bacteremia:
cephalosporins.
have not been frmly
15 to 25 mg per kg IV, IM 
established, but neither
or SC every 4 to 8 hours
have there been any
 for 7 days or less.
 documented teratogenic
problems associated wich
these drugs. However,
use only when the po-
 tential benefits oucweigh
the risks.
Cefazolin
Kefzol
10 to 30 mg per kg SC or
First generation cephalo-
 Considered safe during
All
Root Kustritz
Keflex@
IO every 6 to 8 hours.
 sporin antibiotic.
pregnancy.
To treat susceptible infec-
 tions in neonates.
Cephalexin
AnceP
10 to 30 mg per kg every
 First generation cephalo-
 Considered safe during
All
Humb 7ch Edition.
8 to 12 hours PO.
 sporin antibiotic.
pregnancy. Administer to
To treat bacterial
neonates via a stomach 
infections susceptible to
mube.
cephalosporins.
Ceftiofur
Naxcel
 2.5 mg per kg SC every
Neonate
Third generation cepha-
Drug of choice for
Davidson, Autumn. "Neo-
12 hours, 5 days maxi-
losporin.
neonates born with
natology." Theriogenol-
mum.
To treat susceptible infec-
meconium in che fecal
ogy. Albuquerque, 28
 tions in che neonate.
membranes.
Aug. 2009.
Causes minimal disrup-
tion of GI flora.
ApP
Chloramphenicol
Cleocin@
 22 mg per kg PO every
Puppies
 Broad spectrum antibac-
 Contraindicated during
Poffenberger
8 hours forup to 7 days
ndices
terial.
pregnancy.
tocal.
To treat susceptible infec-
413
tions - mycoplasma.
414
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
Clindamycin
Antirobe@
1. For neosporosis, toxo-
All
Lincosamide antibiotic.
Considered safe during
Plumb 7th Edition.
plasmosis: 5 to 20 mg per
T treat aerobes, anaer-
 pregnancy.
Greene and watson 1998.
roduction
kg IV, IM, SC, or PO every
 obes and Neosporum
12 hours for 15 days.
infection.
2. For neosporosis: 13.5
pue
mg per kg PO every 8
hours for 21 days. Used
concurrently wich Trim-
 echoprim/Sulfa at 15 mg
 per kg PO every 12 hours
for4 weeks.
Clindamycin
Antirobe@
1. For infected wounds,
All
Lincosamide antibiotic.
 Considered safe during
Plumb 7ch Edition.
 abscesses and dental in-
 To treat bacterial
pregnancy.
Package insert --
fections: 5.5 to 33 mg per
infections susceptible co
Because clindamycin is
Antirobe; Pfizer.
kg PO every 12 hours.
clindamycin.
distributed into milk,
2. For osteomyelitis: 11
nursing puppies or kit-
t0 33 mg per kg PO every
tens of mothers taking
12 hours. Treatment may
clindamycin may develop
continue for up to 28
diarrhea. However, in
days. Ifno response after
humans, the American
3 to 4 days, discontinue.
Academy of Pediatrics
considers clindamycin
compatible wich breast-
feeding.
Clindamycin
Antirobe?
 For chronic prostatitis: 5
All
Lincosamide antibiotic.
Considered safe during
Plumb 7th Edition.
to 10 mg per kg every 8
To treat bacterial
 pregnancy.
hours PO, IV or IM.
infections susceptible co
clindamycin.
Cloprostenol
Estrumate
 For adjunctive treatment
Female
Prostaglandin F analog.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Plumb 7th Edition.
ofopen cervix pyometra:
To medically manage
Cloprostenol is contra-
Romagnoli 2002a.
1 to 5 mcg (micrograms)
pyometra when Lutalyse@
indicated in pregnant
per kg (0.001 to 0.005
is not a viable option.
animals when abortion or
mg per kg) SC once per
induced parcurition is not
day. May require up to 2
desired.
to 3 weeks of treatment.
Combine with 4 weeks of
When starting treatment,
 antibiotics and support-
 start wich one-half che
ive hydration to manage
 normal dosage and 
pyometra medically.
gradually increase to
 achieve che full dose
within 2 to 3 days.
 Cloprostenol
Estrumate?
To pharmacologically
Female
Prostaglandin F analog.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Verstegen - Sociecy for
cause pregnancy termina-
To cause pregnancy
Contraindicated during
 Theriogenology Proceed-
tion at confirmation of
termination
desired pregnancy.
ings 2007.
pregnancy from days 24
Most patients have nau-
to 28:
sea, vomiting and diar-
1.0 to 2.5 mcg (micro-
rhea after administration.
grams) per kg IM on day
Walking for 15 minutes
1 and day 4 at confrma-
after injection of clopro-
tion of pregnancy wich
 stenol and adminiscering
ultrasound. A third dose
eicher metoclopramide
should be given on day
or atropine diminishes
8 of treatment IF the
sym ptoms.
progescerone level on
Do not administer IV.
day 4 is greater than 2
Other oxytocic agents'
ng/dl and the ultra-
activity may be enhanced
sound shows viable fetal
by cloproscenol.
 struccures. Larger breed
Cloprostenol should
dogs wich larger licters
be used by individuals
should be dosed on che
familiar wich ics use and
higher end of the dosage
 precautions. Pregnant
range. Can be combined
women, asthmatics
wich bromocripcine co
or ocher persons with
improve effcacy.
bronchial diseases should 
See chapter 9 and
handle this product with
 bromocriptine for dosage
extreme caution. Any
information.
accidental exposure to
skin should be washed
off immediately.
Cosyntropin
Cortrosyn@
 For testing (screening)
 Male and female
Hormonal injectable
Check with the diagnos-
Plumb 7th Edition.
for adrenal function:
diagnostic agent. For ad-
tic lab prior to use to
Watson, Church et al.
 For ACTH stimulation:
renal gland testing when
 assure you are following
1998.
1. 5 mcg (micrograms)
the patient has infertil-
their protocol for cesting.
点
Behrend 2003.
per kg IV; measure serum
ity or other suspected 
Laboratories vary in cheir
idices
cortisol boch prior co
metabolic disease.
protocols.
administered and 1 hour
415
post-administration.
416
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
Frequency and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
2. 5 mcg (micrograms)
Repr
 per kg with a maximum
roduction
of 250 mcg (micrograms)
IV.
 Once reconsticuted, che
I and
 solution may be frozen
for up to six monchs for
later use.
DAP
AdapilTM
Collar is most useful ap-
Female
Pheromone behavior
 Considered safe during
Plumb 7th Edition.
 plication wich most rapid
modifer To improve ma-
pregnancy.
onset.
ternal skills, calm pups.
 Dog appeasing phero-
Topical by collar.
mone (DAP) is a synthetic
Lasts 4 weeks.
derivative of bitch inter-
mammary pheromone.
Put collar on bicch 3 days
prior to whelping.
Deslorelin
Ovuplant 2.1 mg
 Equine formulation -
Female
Synthetic GnRH analog.
 Not a US FDA Approved
IVIS.
Pellet placed in sub-
 To induce estrous in the
Drug+ Contraindicated
mucosa of vulvar lip,
intact female dog.
during pregnancy.
removed after breeding
 Deslorelin increases the
 to maintain pregnancy.
levels of endogenous
 See directions in chapter
luteinizing hormone 
(LH), thereby inducing
9.
ovulation. May block es-
trous if implanted during
early proestrus - precede
 placement wich proges-
terone test (should be <
1 ng/dl)y.
 Deslorelin
Suprelorin@
Inserted in the SC over
Male and female
 Synthetic GnRH analog.
 Not a US FDA Approved
IVIS.
4.7 mg and 9.4 mg
the shoulders or SC near
 post-puberty adulcs 
To treat BPH in intact
Drug+ Contraindicated
 the umbilicus. Repeat in
male dogs. will cause
during pregnancy. Pel-
6 to 12 months, based on
sterilicy so should noc be
let will remain in situ,
formulation.
used in male dogs with
encased in a protective
fucure breeding potential.
synthetic sleeve.
 If care is taken with
technique and location of
 Experimental use in
insertion, may be able to
 Europe for:
remove to reverse effects.
1. To manage BPH.
 Avoid implanting into fac.
2. To treat anal gland ad-
enoma in the male dog.
For male contraception,
3. To control of reproduc-
use a 4.7 mg implant SC
 tion in male and female
every 6 months or 9.4
dogs.
mg iroplant SC every 12
4. To control roaming and
months.
 to eliminace urine odor in
male cats
5. To treat post-spaying
 urinary incontinence in
the bitch.
6. To control mammary
tumor metastatic disease
in che bicch.
Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
Compounded
0.1 to 1.0 mg tocal
Female
Synthetic estrogen. To
Compounded Drug ∞
Urethral Sphincter
dose (0.02 mg per kg;
manage urinary inconti-
Should be replaced by
Mechanism Incontinence
maximum of1 mg) PO
nence in spayed females.
estriol (Incurin T"), an
Contributors:
daily for 3 to 5 days and
 FDA approved product.
Linda Shell, DVM,
then tapered to 1 mg one
Teratogenic - contraindi-
DACVIM
to three times weekly for
cated during pregnancy.
Plumb 7th Edition.
maintenance.
Aplastic anemia, throm-
bocytopenia, or neutro-
penia have NOT been
 observed in dogs treated
with low-dose estrogen
protocols. Estradiol cypi-
onate (ECP) should never
be given as treatment for
urinary incontinence.
Dihydrostrepcomycin
Combine wich minocy-
Aminoglycoside antibiotic.
 Contraindicated during
Root Kustritz 2007.
cline (25 mg per kg PO
 Used to treat Brucella
pregnancy.
once daily for 14 days)
canis.
Dihydrostreptomycin
wich dihydrostreptomy-
and minocycline used n
cin (5 mg per kg IM every
conjunction with surgical
12 hours for 7 days) and
desexing to try co man-
点
tetracycline (30 mg per
age Brucellosis.
kg PO every 12 hours for
idices
21 days) wich strepto-
 Currently unavailable in
mycin (20 mg per kg IM
the US.
 once daily for 14 days).
418
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
 Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
lndication
 Domeperidone
Equi-Tox
0.05 to 0.1 mg per kg PO
Female
Prokinetic/ Dopamine-2
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7ch Edition.
once or twice a day.
agonist.
Equine (for fescue
roduction
Used to improve lactation 
coxicity) and human
by prolactin secretion
(to improve lactation)
stimulation effects.
use, scant canine data.
Because domeperi-
done is potentially a
neurotoxic substrate of
P-glycoprocein, ic should
be used with caution in 
those herding breeds
(e.g., Collies) that may
have the gene mutation
that causes a nonfunc-
tional protein. Clients
should understand the
investigational nature of
this drug.
Formulation may cause
 salivacion. Pregnant and
lactating women should 
use caution handling
the gel.
Doxapram
Dopram@-V
To stimulate respirations
Neonate
 CNS/respiratory stimu-
The use of doxapram
Humb 7ch Edition.
in newborns:
lant.
to initiate and stimulate
Package Insert;
1. 0.05 cc IM in the
 For Neonatal Dogs and
respirations in newboms
Dopram-v-Robins.
caudal thigh or
Cats: CNS stimulant -
is controversial. Monitor
Copley K: Parturition
2. 1 to 2 drops (1 to 2
used stimulate respira-
for red "flush" of mucus 
management: 15,000
mg) under tongue
 tions following dystocia
membranes indicating
whelpings later: An out-
or
or cesarean section.
anticipated respiratory
come based analysis. The-
3. 1 to 5 mg IV in umbili-
elfort, repeat ifindicated.
riogenology 2009; vol. 1,
cal vein. Should be used
Most likely to be
Number 2: 297-307.
wich caution if product
 benefcial to increase
 contains benzyl alcohol
respiratory efforts in
as a preservative.
newborns with ineffective
respirations, combined
with oxygen.
 Ephedrine sulfate
4 t0 5 mg per kg PO
Male
Sympathomimetic bron-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
every 8 hours, repeated 
chodilacor/ vasopressor
Avoid in patients with ar-
several hours prior co col-
Retrograde ejaculation
rhythmias, hypertension
lection or breeding.
and glaucoma. Tachy-
 cardia and dry mouth
are generally more pro-
nounced with ephedrine
 than witch PPA.
 Epinephrine
Adrenalin@
For Cardiac resuscitation
All
Alpha and beta-adrener-
To convert a 1:1000 solu-
Humb 7th Edition.
(asystole): 0.01 to-0.5 mg
gic agonist.
tion to a 1:10,000 solution
Wingfield 1985.
(0.5 to 5 ml) of 1:10,000 
 For cardiac resuscitation
for IV or intratracheal
solution intratracheally or
or anaphylaxis.
use, dilute 1 ml with 9
Traas 2009.
intravenously after ABC
ml of normal saline for
(Airway/breathing/ com-
injection.
Veterinary Anesthesia &
 pressions) are initiated.
Analgesia Support Group.
 May need to repeat
Double che dose if intra-
every 3 to 5 minutes. If
 tracheal administration is
intratracheal or IV sites
necessary.
are inaccessible, che intra-
cardiac (IC) route may
be used.
Neonates, when respira-
tory support and chest
compression fails to elicit
aheartbeat: 0.1 to 0.3 mg
per kg IV or IO.
IC dose is 0.5 to 5 micro-
grams per kg (0.0005 to
0.005 mg per kg).
Erychyromycin
Gallimycin@
 For chronic prostaticis:
 Male, female
Macrolide antibiotic.
 Considered safe during
Humb 7th Edition.
10 to 22 mg per kg every
To treat bacterial diseases
pregnancy.
8 hours PO long term as
susceptible to use of
May cause GI upset.
indicated by chronicity of
erychromycin.
 May cause neurological
disease.
 signs in dogs wich MDR1
mutation.
 Estradiol cypionate
ECp@
 NEVER use it in che dog
Female
Nacural estrogen salc.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Various.
as it may cause aplastic
Contraindicated during
ndices
anemia. Previously used
desired pregnancy.
 to incerrupt pregnancy
Seek a safer alternate
419
early.
more effective treatment
 t0 prevent pregnancy.
420
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
Estrogens, conjugated
Premarin@
 20 mcg (micrograms) per
Female
Conjugated synthetic
Extralabel Drug Use*
Chew DC, Brown SA:
kg every 4 days PO.
estrogen. To manage
Contraindicated during
Fixing the Dripping in
roduction
spayed female inconti-
 pregnancy.
 Senior Female Dogs. lams
nence.
Long-term cherapy can 
Senior Care 2004.
cause anemia - avoid
pue
long term use.
Estrogens, conjugated
Premarin@
 20 mcg (micrograms) per
Female
Conjugated synthetic
Extralabel Drug Use*
Threfall.
kg every 12 hours a week
estrogen. To manage
Contraindicated during
for only 2 weeks PO.
puppy vaginitis.
pregnancy.
Fatty acids
 Omega 3 Fatcy Acid
PO.
Male
 Nutrient.
Anecdocal evidence 
Kampschmidt.
 Supplement Multiple
See label of product.
To improve semen quality.
 products
Fenbendazole
Panacur@
50 mg per kg PO once
Neonate
 Broad spectrum anchel-
 Considered safe during
Plumb 7th Edition.
daily every 24 hours for 3
minthic.
pregnancy.
to 5 days in the neonate.
To remove ascarids,
Treat or prevent intestinal
5 day course for Giardia.
hookworms, whip-
parasites.
worms, capillaria, some
Drug of choice to treat
tapeworms, flukes, and
giardia during pregnancy.
giardia.
 Better absorbed when
 administered with food.
Fenbendazole
Panacur
TD prevent transplacen-
 Pregnant female
Broad spectrum anthel-
 Extralabel Drug Use*
Treatment and Control
tal and transmammary
minthic.
Fenbendazole is
of Gastrointestinal
transmission of somatic T.
To remove ascarids,
considered safe to use
Helminths, Western Vet-
canis andA.caninum:
hookworms, whip-
in pregnant bitches and
erinary Conference 2002,
worms, capillaria, some
is generally considered
Kevin R. Kazacos, D.V.M.,
50 mg per kg PO once
tapeworms, flukes, and
safe to use in pregnancy
Ph.D., Purdue Univer-
daily from the 40th day of
giardia.
for all species. Better
sity School of Veterinary
gestation to the 14ch day
absorbed when adminis-
 Medicine, West Lafayette,
of lactation.
tered wich food.
Indiana, United States.
Finasteride
Proscar@
0.1 to 0.5 mg per kg once
Male
5alpha reductase inhibitor.
 Extralabel Drug Use*
Plumb 7ch Edition.
Propecia@
daily PO.
To manage benign pro5-
Contraindicared during
tatic hyperplasia.
pregnancy.
Root Kustritz and Klaus-
Clients should understand
Exposure Of women - Risk 
ner 2000; Kamolpatana,
that therapy might be
  a 
Johnston et al. 1998.
prolonged before efficacy
should not handle crushed
can be determined and
 or broken finasteride
that regular dosing
tablets when they are
compliance is manda-
pregnant or may poten-
tory. Monitoring prostate
tially be pregnant because
size is required to assess
of the possibility of ab-
efficacy.
sorption of fnasteride and 
the subsequent potential
risk to a male fetus.
Avoid use in sexually
developing animals.
Relatively expensive.
Drug interactions:
Anticholinergic drugs,
adrenergic or xanthine-
derivative bronchodila-
tors may precipicate or
aggravate urinary reten-
 tion chereby negating che
effects of che drug.
Fluoroquinolones
Baytril
5 to 20 mg per kg per
Male and female, neo-
Fhoroquinolone anti-
Avoid use in dehydrated
Plumb 7ch Edition.
day PO. ay be given once
nates under 4 weeks if
biotic.
patients. Enrofloxacin 
Baytril; Package insert;
daily or divided and given
needed, not appropriate
To treat bacterial diseases
is labeled as contrain-
Bayer.
twice daily. Treatment
for older pups.
susceptible co fluoroqui-
dicated in small and 
should continue for at
nolones
 medium breed dogs from
least 2 to 3 days beyond
2 months to 8 months of
cessation of clinical signs,
age due to changes in the
to a maximum duration
articular cartilage. Large
of cherapy is 30 days.
and giant breed dogs may
 Avoid in young animals.
be in the rapid-growth
 phase for periods longer
 For chronic prostatitis: 5
than 8 months of age,
mg per kg PO every 12
50 longer than 8 months
hours.
rmay be necessary to avoid
cartilage damage. Some
indication that it is safe up
点
until the pup is 4 weeks
422
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
Frequency and Route
 Pediatri
lndication
The safety of enrofloxacin
Repr
in pregnant dogs has
roduction
been investigated. Breed-
ing, pregnant and lactat-
ing dogs receiving up to
pue 
15 mg per kg day dem-
jaea ou paeisuo 
related effects. However,
because of the risks of
cartilage abnormalities
in young animals, the
fluoroquinolones are not
generally recommended
foruse during pregnancy
unless the benefits of
therapy clearly outweigh
the risks. Limited studies
in male dogs at various
dosages have indicated
no effects on male breed-
 ing performance.
 Fuoroquinolone
Ciprofloxacin
 Adjust dose based on
Fluoroquinolone anti-
 In dogs, oral bioavail-
Plumb 7ch Edition.
reduced bioavailabilicy.
biotic.
ability of enrofloxacin is
To treat susceptible
better than ciprofloxacin.
infections.
See contraindication for
young animals above.
 Fluoroquinolone
Zeniquin@
1. For susceptible infec-
Male and female. Not
Fluoroquinolone anti-
Same contraindications
Plumb 7ch Edition.
Marbofloxacin
tions (urinary tract, skin
young animals.
biotic.
in young animals as
Package insert;
and soft tissue): 2.75 to
For che treatment of
fluoroquinolones related
Zeniquin-Pfzer.
5.5 mg per kg PO once
susceptible bacterial
to cartilage erosions and
daily. Give for 2 to 3
 infections in dogs and 
arthropathy.
days beyond cessation of
cacs.
clinical signs (skin/soft
tissue infections); and for
 at least 10 days (urinary
tract). If no improve-
ment noted after5 days,
reevaluate diagnosis.
Maximum duration of
treatment is 30 days
 2. For chronic prostatitis:
4 mg per kg per day.
Condition may require
 long term therapy but
package insert states
 paaoxa on jou voneinp
30 days.
 Fresh frozen plasma
HemoPet
 16 cc per pup SC in
Neonates
od oo
 Easiest to purchase in
Bouchard G, Plata-
divided doses over 24
To augment passive
advance from com-
Madrid H, Youngquist
hours in divided doses.
immunity in the neonate
mercial sources such as
RS, Buening GM, Ganjam
Hemopet. Can also be 
VK, Krause GF, Allen GK,
SC or IO, 16 cc per
harvested from indig-
 Paine AL: Absorption of
pup divided, not to
enous dogs in house-
an alternate source of
exceed stomach capacity
hold or kennel. Donor
immunoglobulin in pups.
(maximum capacity = 1
dogs should be health 
Am J Vet Res. Febmuary
Cc per 1 oz body weight)
screened prior to use.
1992; 53(2):230-233.
but can only use PO if
given in first 12 hours 
 See client handout in
 after birth due to loss of
appendix for handling
absorption through the
guc 12 hours or more
instructions.
post partum
 Must keep frozen until
use. Warm gently to avoid
damaging proteins.
Furosemide
Lasix?
0.2 ml furosemide IM 
Neonate
Loop diuretic.
Controversial treatment,
Hoskins, Johnny D.
up to every 8 hours, 
To manage neonates wich
jsn iyssanonsun vao
"Small Animal Pediatric
followed witch pocassium
anasarca.
first assure open airway.
 Medicine." Tufts Animal
chloride PO.
 More information in
 Expo. North Grafton MA.
Chapter 8.
2002.
Glycoaminoglycans
Glyco-flex@
 See product label.
Male
Nutritional supplement.
Not documented but
Hess, Milan. "Document-
ICSB-CF Plus@
To reduce inflammation.
anecdocal evidence.
 ed and anecdotal effects 
点
of certain pharmaceutical
agents used to enhance
 semen quality in the dog."
Theriogenology, Volume
66, Issue 3, 613-617.
424
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
GnRH
Cyscorelin@
3.3 mcg (micrograms)
Female
Hypothalmic hormone.
 Extralabel Drug Use*
 Purswell 1999
 per kg IM once daily for
To treat persistent estrus
 Bitches may have recur-
Plumb 7ch Edition.
roduction
3 days. An elevated pro-
due to cystic ovary.
rences of cystic ovaries
gesterone level (>2 ng/
Suspect cystic ovary or
on subsequent estrous
ml} measured 1-2 weeks
ovarian tumor if estrus
cycles. Should confrm
pue
 post treatment verifies
exceeds 30 days.
on ultrasound to rule out
 successful completion of
ovarian tumor Advise
ovulation.
client: Bitches are at
increased risk of develop-
ing pyometra.
GnRH
Cystorelin@
1to 3.3 mcg (micro-
Male
 Hypochalmic hormone.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Hess, Milan. "Document-
 grams) per kg IM 1 hour
Tb improve libido prior
Avoid use in dogs wich
ed and anecdotal effects
 prior to collection. Can
to semen collection by
prostatic disease as ic will
of certain pharmaceutical
be used long-term.
creating a testosterone
increase testosterone
agents used to enhance
Repeated weekly for
surge. Resulcs variable.
levels.
semen quality in the dog.
 ongoing improved libido
Theriogenology, Volume
 and spermatogenesis.
66 , Issue 3, 613-617.
HCG
Chorulon@
100 to 1000 IU IM per
Male pups
Human hormone mim-
Extralabel Drug Use*
 Feldman, Canine and
pup cwice a week for 4 to
icking LH and FSH.
Controversial use
Feline Endocrinology,
6 doses to be adminis-
To aid in testicular
Monitor for anaphylaxis.
2nd edition.
tered over 2 to 3 weeks.
descent.
 Must complete series
 Burns when given-brief
ofinjections prior co 16
vocalization post-op.
weeks of age.
HCG
Chorulon@
10 unics per pound once
Female
Human hormone mim-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Plumb 7th Edition.
daily for 3 consecutive
icking LH and FSH.
Bitches may have recur-
days.
To manage persistent
rences of cystic ovaries
estrus due to cystic ovary,
on subsequent estrou5
by inducing ovulation.
cycles. Should confirm
Suspect cystic ovary or
on ultrasound to rule 
ovarian tumor if estrus
out ovarian tumor. Risk
exceeds 30 days.
of anaphylaxis. Bitch is at
risk of developing pyome-
tra due to cystic ovary.
Hydroxyechyl Starch 6%
vetstarch TM 6%
 Shock bolus dose:
Male and Female
 Colloid volume expander. 
Considered safe during
Plumb 7ch Edition.
Hetastarch 6%
10 to 20 ml per kg IV per
Lsed as a volume ex-
pregnancy; no scudies
Morgan 1997
day by slow infusion.
 pander used to treat hy
have been conducted
 Do noc exceed 20 mol per
povolemia where colloidal
during labor and delivery
kg over 24 hours.
therapy required.
but no untoward effeccs
For IV use only.
have been reported.
Adverse Effects:
hypersensitivicy reactions,
coagulopathies possible;
 too rapid administration
to small animals may
cause nausea/vomiting.
Iodine, Tincture of
Alcohol with iodine
Neonates
 Iodine and alcohol.
Used to dip the umbilical
Davidson, Autumn. "Neo-
solution.
To prevent omphalitis,
 cord scump.
nacology." Theriogenol-
Apply to umbilicus of
an infection of the
ogy. Albuquerque, 28
newborns every 8 hours
umbilicus.
Aug. 2009.
by dipping cord until
cord is dried, has fallen 
off and site healed.
Ivermectin
Ivomec@
 200 mcg (micrograms)
Females
Avermectin antiparasiti-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Treatment and Control
 per kg once a week
cide. This prococol will
Considered safe during
of Gastrointestinal
from 3 weeks before to
reduce roundworm and 
pregnancy.
Helminths, Western vet-
3 weeks after parturicion
 hookworm infections in
Dogs who carry the
erinary Conference, 2002,
SC or PO. Administer 1
the neonates by 98 to
 MDR-1 gene should not
Kevin R. Kazacos, D.V.M.,
time per week from week
100%
be treated with this pro-
Ph.D. Purdue Univer-
5 of pregnancy to week 3
 tocol. Not recommended
 sicy School of Veterinary
of lactation.
for puppies under 6
 Medicine, West Lafayette,
weeks of age.
 Indiana, United States
Calculate dose very
carefully.
Humb 7ch Edition.
1 to 2 ml per kg PO up to
All
Gl adsorbent and protec-
Considered safe during
Kaolin and Pectin
Humb 7ch Edition.
6 times a day.
tant combination. Adsor-
pregnancy.
bent (only) anti-diarrheal
products should be safe to
use during pregnancy and
lactation. At usual doses,
kaolin/pectin generally
have no adverse effects.
Overzealous administra-
tion may lead to constipa-
ndices
tion.
Purchase from a veteri-
nary or farm store
426
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
Frequency and Route
 Pediatric
 lndication
source. Avoid human
Repr
babeled product as most
roduction
human over-the-counter
products labeled as Ka0-
Pectate now contain
pue I
bismuth subsalicylate
instead of kaolin and
 pectin. The FDA has not
given bismuth subsalicy-
late a pregnancy risk
category. There are no
scudies to show safery
so these should NOT be
used in neonates, preg-
nant bicches and lactating
dams.
Lidocaine
Xylocaine@
1. 1 to 4 mg per kg (0.5 to
Local and topical
 Considered safe during
AlI
Buprenorphine added
2.0 mg per pound). To re-
aneschetic agent. Used to
 pregnancy.
 to the local aneschetic
duce burning at injection,
 produce local aneschetic
 Useful for line blocks at
for axillary brachial
mix 0.9 cc Lidocaine, 0.1
effect.
C-section, episiotomy;
 plexus block prolongs 
 CC sodium bicarbonate,
also taildock and dewclaw
postoperative analgesia.
and 2 cc of sterile water.
removal on neonates.
Candido KD, Winnie AP,
2. Combine with bupiva-
 Do NOT combine with or
Ghaleb AH, Fattouh MW,
caine and 0.003 mg per
interchange for bupiva-
Franco CD: Reg Anesth
kg (0.0015 mg per Ib)
caine for neonates due to
Pain Med. 2002 Mar-Apr;
buprenorphine to extend
 potential toxicitcy.
27(2):162-7.
 the analgesic duration of
Veterinary Anesthesia &
local blocks to approxi-
 Analgesia Support Group.
mately 20 hours.
Levetiracetam
Keppra@
10 to 20 mg per kg
Puppies
Anticonvulsant.
 For seizure control in
 Neurologic Manifesta-
 every 8 to 12 hours.
Can be used pre-op t0
patients with known or
tions Associated wich
Titrate dose slowly up as
manage puppies with
suspected portosystemic
Portosyscemic Shunting,
needed.
liver shunts and associ-
shunts and associated
 Michael Podell, MSc,
ated seizures.
hepatic encephalopathy.
DVM, Diplomate ACVIM
Minimal side effects
(Neurology) ACvs 2007.
(drowsiness), but ex-
 pensive.
 Megestrol acetate
Ovaban
0.25 mg per pound PO
Male
Synthetic progestin.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Hutchison, Robert:
Megace@
once dail for 21 days,
To manage dogs wich
 Contraindicated during
"Canine Reproduction,
 then 0.25 mg per pound
benign prostatic hyper-
pregnancy.
Whelping and Neonatal
once a week for long
trophy.
will decrease ejaculate
Care." Lakeshore Pem-
term management.
volume, avoid use just 
broke Welsh Corgi Club.
prior to ejaculation.
Crystal Lake, IL. 25 March
2005.
 Megestrol acetate
Ovaban@
0.55 mg per kg PO once a
Female
 Synthetic progestin.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
Megace@
day for 32 days if started
T prevent estrous before
May increase risk of
7 or more days prior to
the onset of proestrus.
 pyometra, mammary
the onset of proestrus.
neoplasia and diabetes
 Do not repeat more often
mellitus.
 than every 6 months.
 Megestrol acetate
Ovaban@
2.2 mg per kg PO once a
Female
Synthetic progestin.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
Megace@
day for 8 days if started
To prevent estrus after
May increase risk of
on the first 3 days of
 proestrus has started.
pyometra, mammary
estrus. (92% efficacy).
neoplasia and diabetes
Will not work if scarted
mellicus.
later than day 3 of pro-
estrus.
 Meloxicam
Metacam
1. For surgical pain: 0.2
Male and Female
COX-2 Non-steroidal anti-
 No NSAIDs are labeled
Humb 7ch Edition.
mg per kg (or less) IV
inflammatory.
for use in pregnant or
or SC once; followed 24
To manage pain, fever, or
lactating bitches or pups
1 Mathews KA. Analgesia
hours lacer by 0.1 mg per
inflammation.
under 6 weeks of age.
for the pregnant, lactat-
kg (or less) IV, SC, PO
Carefully measure dose
ing and neonatal to
repeat every 24 hours.
(oral liquid); do not
 pediatric cat and dog.
 confuse the markings on
JVECC. 15(4) 2005,pp
2. For chronic pain: 0.2
 the syringe (provided by
273-284.
mg per kg (or less) PO
the manufacturer) wich
Veterinary Anesthesia &
once; 0.1 mg per kg (or
mls or kgs.
Analgesia Support Group.
less) PO repeat every 24
"A single NSAID dose
hours.
 poscoperatively to nor-
motensive bitches should
improve patient comfort
点
and is not chought co
idices
be of detriment to the
neonates".
428
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
 Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
lndication
 Mechylprednisolone
Solu-Medrol
1 mg per pound of
Female
Synthetic glucocorticoid.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Lopate.
Sodium Succinate
bitch's body weight IV
To increase surfaccant 
Avoid use if bicch may
roduction
SLOWLY.
in fecal lungs prior co
have an infection.
One dose only - at least
delivery.
 1 hour and preferably
18 to 24 hours prior to
delivery of pups.
Metoclopramide
Reglan@
0.1 to 0.4 mg per kg
Female
GI prokinetic agent/
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7th Edition.
 every 8 hours PO (liquid
 Dopamine agonist.
 Considered safe during
or tablet) or SC.
To aid in lactation induc-
pregnancy.
tion and maintenance,
Contraindicated - GI
For lactation - 0.5 to 1
GI stimulation and
obstruction.
mg per kg PO total daily
anti-emetic effect. Usually
 Metoclopramide is
dose, divided every 8
results are noted within
excreted into milk and 
hours.
24 hours.
may concentrate at about
Use the lowest effective
 Mechanism: prolactin
twice the plasma level,
 dose to minimize side
effects.
 secretion stimulation
but chere does not ap-
 The maximum dose
effects.
pear co be significant risk
should not exceed 5 mg
to nursing ofspring. In 
 per kg total daily dose
To minimize the GI
dogs, che most common
effets of prostaglandins
 this is likely to induce
(although infrequent)
 extrapyramidal signs.
such as Lutalyse or
adverse reactions seen
Estrumate?.
 are changes in mencation
 May start treatment 1 to 2
and behavior (motor rest-
days prior to whelping for
less and hyperactivity to
bitches with a tendency
drowsiness/ depression).
to develop agalactia or on
progescerone supple-
mentation.
 May be used simultane-
 ously wich oxytocin to
improve lactation as the
2 drugs act on different
mechanisms.
Metronidazole
Flagyl?
10 to 25 mg per kg PO
Male
Antibiotic, antiparasiti-
 Safety in che pregnant
Hoskins, Johnny D. "Vet-
once daily for 5 to 10
Female
cide agent.
and lactating bitch not
erinary Pediatrics of the
days in pups at least
Pediatric
To treat Giardia in the
escablished.
Puppy and Kitten. “Atlantic
12 weeks ofage as the
neonate.
Should be stricdly avoided
Coast Veterinary Confer-
neonatal dose.
during the first 3 weeks
ence. Atlantic City, 2005.
of pregnancy. Fenbenda-
zole less likely to cause
toxicity. Narrow safety
margin - 65 mg per kg
 can cause neurotoxicity.
Risk of neurotoxicicy is
increased in patients wich
liver dysfunction or on
long cerm therapy.
Diazepam may shorten
recovery time when neu-
rocoxicicy has developed.
 Mibolerone
Cheque@
More information in 
Female
 Androgenic, anabolic
 Compounded Drug 
Plumb 7ch Edition.
chapter 9
 anti-gonadotropic
Only available through
Hutchison.
Administered as noted
hormone.
compounding pharma-
Fontbonne 2006.
below PO once daily.
To prevent estrous
cies. Teratogenic-
Maximum 24 months of
cycles. To treat bitches
 Contraindicated during
continuous use
with short inter-estrous
pregnancy.
periods.
Need to monitor liver
To manage cystic endo-
 enzymes. Should not
metrial hyperplasia by
be used prior to frst
dosing 30 mcg (micro-
estrous.
grams) per 25 pounds
 Must start 30 or more
of body weight PO once
days prior co anticipated
daily for 6 months.
estrus.
Do not confuse vaginal
discharge wich pyometra.
Avoid use if patient has
a history of liver disease
or androgen dependent
neoplasia.
ndices
en
430
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
 Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
lndication
Minocycline
Minocin@
Minocycline (25 mg per
Male and female
Tetracycline antibiotic.
 Combined wich surgical
 Root Kustritz, Margaret
kg PO once daily for 14
Combined with dihydro-
desexing. Even long term
V. "Canine Brucellosis."
roduction
days) with dihydrostrep-
streptomycin and surgical
 treatment and desexing
Western Veterinary Con-
tomycin (5 mg per kg IM 
desexing to manage
may not clear infection.
ference, Las Vegas, 2007.
every 12 hours for 7 days)
Brucella canis.
and tetracycline (30 mg
Contraindicated during
 per kg PO every 12 hours
pregnancy and in pups 
for 21 days) wich strep-
under 4 months. Avoid 
tomycin (20 mg per kg
use in pups due to
once daily for 14 days).
effeccs on bone and cooth
 May require long-cerm
development.
treatment.
 Misoproscol
Cytotec@
1. For pyometra, 1 to 3
Female
Prostaglandin E1 analog.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Humb 7ch Edition.
mcg (micrograms) per kg
To treat pyometra or
Contraindicated during
Cain 1999.
 once daily instilled into
medically terminate
desired pregnancy due t0
the cranial vagina, near
unwanted pregnancy,
its abortifacient activicy.
the cervical o5.
Combined with Prosta-
 Anecdotal reports on
 2. For pregnancy
glandin F2 Alpha, to assist
intravaginal use only at
termination: Preg-
the cervix in opening co
time of publishing.
nancy is confrmed wich
aid in medical therapy
ultrasound, treatment is
Pregnant women to 
initiated no sooner than
handle the drug wich
 30 days after breeding. 1
caution.
to 3 mcg (micrograms)
 per kg misoproscol
 given intravaginally twice
daily concurrendly with
 prostaglandin F ,alpha or
 aglepristone.
See Chapter 9 for more
dosage information.
 Monitor efficacy with
ultrasound.
Morphine
Duramorph
 Epidural use- 0.1 mg per
Female
 Classic opiate analgesic.
Epidurals MUST be done
Plumb 7th Edition.
kg (0.045 mg per Ib.)
To improve post-C-
with only preservative
Mason DE. “Anesthesia for
Tocal volume should not
section analgesia without
free morphine. Costly
Cesarean Section'
exceed 0.15 ml per kg.
Ioss of hindlimb function.
as a result of form and
Word Small Animal Veteri-
delivery of drug..
nary Association World
Performed after general
Congress Proceedings,
aneschesia is induced, not
2006.
as a substicute for general
Veterinary Anesthesia &
anesthesia.
 Analgesia Support Group.
 The epidural space is
 smaller in a pregnant
 chan a non-pregnant dog
Oxycocin
 For labor and delivery:
Female
Hypochalamic hormone.
Keep refrigerated.
Hutchison, Robert:
 0.1 ml per 10 pounds SC
To improve uterine con-
Assure the first pup has
"Canine Reproduction,
or IM
tractions during labor.
been born, chere is not
Whelping and Neonatal
The situations in which to
To treat post partum
an obstructive dystocia,
Care." Lakeshore Pem-
avoid the use of oxytocin
retained placentas and
there are not ongoing
broke Welsh Corgi Club.
are:
metritis ifunder 24 hours
strong contractions prior
Crystal Lake, IL. 25 March
1. Prior to the delivery of
post partum.
to administration. Over-
2005.
the first pup - if the cervix
zealous use can cause
is closed or there is a mal
uterine rupcure and/or
Copley K: Parturicion
 presentation of a pup.
premature separation
management: 15,000
2. The bitch is already in
of placentae resulting in
whelpings later: An out-
hard labor
fetal death.
come based analysis. The
3. 2 doses have been ad-
More than 24 hours after
nogenology 2009; vol. 1,
 ministered in 20 minutes
parcurition, che uterus
Number 2: 297-307.
4. If 2 to 3 doses do not
responds poorly to
succeed in delivering a
Oxytocin. Prostaglandins
Plumb 7th Edition.
pup, C-section should
are indicated at this time
be recommended to the
ifuterine contractilicy is
client.
required.
OR
 Produces transient brady-
0.25 USP U to 4 USP U SC
cardia if administered too
or IM per dog per dose,
rapidly IV>
at 45 to 60 min intervals,
based on clinical response
ndices
with uterine contraction
monitoring.
432
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
 Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Freque ncy and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
Oxytocin
For lactation:
Female
Hypothalamic hormone.
 Does NOT aid in lacta-
Loar 1988.
Inject oxytocin, then 
To induce milk let-down 
tion, only in release of
roduction
warm compress for 20
in bitches with adequate
milk from the mammary
Copley.
min, then put pups on to
milk production and who
 gland.
nurse:
tolerate nursing.
and
0.5 unit SC every 2 hours
Can be combined with
X 4 doses, then
metoclopramide to pro-
1 unit SC every 2 hours X
mote milk production.
4 doses, chen
 2 units SC every 2 hours
X 4 doses, then
3 units SC every 2 hours,
then increase time
between injections t0 4,
then 6 then 8 hours, then
discontinue when lactat-
ing well.
Fhenobarbital
Dogs < 3 months 0.5 mg
All
Barbiturate.
 Contraindicated during
Hoskins, Johnny D.
 per kg PO once daily,
To manage seizures in the
pregnancy. Consider
"Small Animal Pediacric
1 mg per kg every 12
neonate
hypoglycemia, porto-sys-
 Medicine." Tufts Animal
hours PO for dogs 3 to 6
temic shunt and hydro-
 Expo. North Grafton MA.
months of age,
cephalus as underlying
2002.
 2 mg per kg every 12
causes ofseizures in the
hours PO for dogs over 6
very young patient.
months.
 Phenylpropanolamine
Proin
 3 mg per kg PO every 12
Male
Sympathomimetic. To
Extralabel Drug Use*
 Urethral Sphinccer
hours, repeated several
reduce retrograde ejacu-
Side effeccs: restlessness,
Mechanism Incontinence
hours prior to collection
lation. Avoid long term
anorexia, tachycardia,
Linda Shell, DVM,
 or breeding.
use in patients with BPH
hyper-excitabilicy,
DACVIM
or glaucoma.
tremors and GI upset.
 Hypertension possible.
Fontbonne, Alain. "Infer-
tilicy in che Bitch and in
the Dog." world Small
Animal Veterinary AssO-
ciation World Congress,
 Sydney, 21 Aug. 2007.
 Piroxicam
Feldene@
0.3 mg per kg PO once
Male and female
 Non-steroidal anti-inflam-
∞ Compounded Drug
Plumb 7ch Edition.
a day.
matory, anti-cumor
 Combined wich long-
 Frimberger 2000.
Narrow margin of safety.
juaean unie ue sy
term amoxicillin cherapy
Give with food.
of transitional Cell Car-
 to manage TCC.
cinoma - bladder May
Do NOT combine with
also be of benefit in squa-
other NSAIDs.
mous cell carcinomas, 
Narrow margin of
 mammary adenocarci-
safecy - may require
noma, and transmissible
compounding to deliver a
venereal tumor (TVT).
precise in dosage.
Consider adding
misoprostol at 3 mcg
(micrograms) per kg, PO
every 8 hours for dogs
who tolerate NSAIDs
poorly. Discontinue
if severe irrication or
ulceration occurs. Treat
ulcers and if signs abate,
may resume piroxicam
with misoproscol.
Pocassium chloride
1 meq of potassium chlo-
Neonates
Electrolyce.
Combine wich furose-
Hoskins, Johnny D.
ride PO every 3 hours for
To treat anasarca or
mide cherapy. Discon-
"Small Animal Pediatric
every 30 gms or 1 ounce
walrus puppy
tinue the potassium
Medicine." Tufts Animal
of weight lost.
chloride when the furose-
Expo. North Grafton MA.
10% potassium chloride
mide is discontinued.
2002.
solution contains 1
meq in 1 ml (1 ml = 20 
drops). See Chapter 8
 more information.
Prednisone
2.2mg per kg daily for 14
Puppies
Classic glucocorticoid.
 Containdicated during
 MacDonald, John M.
days, tapering slowly.
To treat strangles or
pregnancy.
"Potpourri of Juvenile
Combined with
 juvenile cellulicis com-
Must combine wich
Dermatoses." western
appropriate antibiotic,
bined with antibiotics.
antibiotic therapy. May
Veterinary Conference,
anti-pruritics and
relapse if taper steroids
Las Vegas, 2002.
点
astringent (Dome-boro?)
 too quickly.
soaks.
433
434
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Freque ncy and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
Progesterone in oil
 2 to 3 mg per kg IM every
Female
Naural progesterone.
∞ Compounded Drug
Fontbonne, Alain.
1 to 3 days, with dosage
Used ONLY when
Considered safe during
"Infertilicy in che Bicch."
roduction
frequency based on
necessary to support
late pregnancy. Can alter
World Small Animal
response to therapy.
pregnancy chreatened by
fetal sexual develop-
Veterinary Association
hypoluteoidism.
ment if given too early in
World Congress, Prague,
pue
 pregnancy.
11 Oct. 2006.
Can monicor response to
treatment with progester-
one blood levels.
Monitor for signs of
pregnancy failure or
 pyometra, discontinue if
all fetuses not viable.
Propofol
Propoflo@
 Standard Induction: 1.0
All
Short acting injectable
After induction, change
Humb 7th Edition.
Diprivan
to 6.0 mg per kg (0.5 to
hypnotic anesthetic
to Sevoflurane or
Rapinovet
3.0 mg per Ib) IV over 30
agent.
isoflurance after intuba-
Mason DE."Anesthesia
to 90 seconds.
Used co induce general 
tion and steady plane
for Cesarean Section."
anesthesia.
of anesthesia is attained
World Small Animal
C-section induction wich
 Considered safe during
Veterinary Association
no pre-op sedation:
pregnancy. Dose propo-
World Congress Proceed-
3-8 mg per kg, to allow
fol to effect to minimize
ings, 2006.
 intubation, then maintain
respiratory depres-
Veterinary Anesthesia &
with SevofluraneR (pre-
sion and hypotensive
 Analgesia Support Group.
ferred), isoflurane, or CRI
potential.
 propofol.
Apnea possible ifadmin-
istered too rapidly.
CRI ac 0.05 to 0.2 mg per
kg per minute (0.025 to
0.1 mg per bper minute),
 adjust as needed.
Prostaglandin F 2 alpha
Lutalyse@
To treat Pyometra - used
Female
THAM salt of natural
Extralabel Drug Use*
Verstegen J, Dhaliwal
with antibiotics, fluids,
occurring prostaglandin 
Contraindicated during
G, Verstegen-Onclin K.
and bromocriptine or
F2alpha.
desired pregnancy.
Mucometra, cystic endo-
cabergoline. See more
THAM salt of natural
Follow size ofuterus with
metrial hyperplasia, and
 dectail in chapter 9.
occurring prostaglandin 
ultrasound - look for a
pyometra in che bicch:
LUTALYSE 10 mcg
F2alpha.
50% decrease in uterine
Advances in treatment
 size wichin 3 to 4
and assessment
(micrograms) per kg 3 t0
Used to evacuate the
days. Use for 7 to 10 days
 annnpoudau auny go
5 times per day, SC.
utemus and lyse the 
maximum. IF refractory,
success. Theriogenology,
Slowly increase to 50 mcg
corpus luteum which is
may improve response by
Volume 70, Issue 3, Pages
(micrograms) per kg 3
 supporing che pyometra
 scopping and restarting
364-374.
to 5 times per day over3
hormonally.
injections.
to 5 days, continue until
Risk of DIC, uterine rup-
resolved.
ture (especially if cervix
May combine wich
is closed at onset of treat-
metoclopramide and
mency or poor response
15 minute walks after
to treatment.
injections to minimize
Not all patients will 
side effects of nausea,
respond orbreed back
vomiting, salivation, and
after treatment.
diarrhea.
 Pregnant women should
not handle; handle with
 caution in humans wich
asthma and women of
childbearing age.
Prostaglandin F 2 alpha
Lutalyse?
To treat SIPS: 50 mcg
Female
THAM salt of natural
Extralabel Drug Use*
Plumb 7ch Edition.
(micrograms) per kg SC
occurring prostaglandin
 Contraindicaced during
o, ye a
every 12 hours until RBCs
F2alpha.
 desired pregnancy.
mal Conditions of the
are no longer seen on
To treat SIPS - Subinvolu-
Pregnant women should
Bitch." AVMA, Honohulu.
vaginal cytology.
tion of placental sites
not handle; handle wich 
16 July 2006.
caution in humans wich
aschma and women of
childbearing age.
Prostaglandin F 2 alpha
Lutalyse@
 To improve semen col-
Male
THAM salt of natural
Extralabel Drug Use*
Hess, Milan. "Document-
lection:
occurring prostaglandin
 Contraindicaced during
ed and anecdotal effects 
50 to 100 mcg (micro-
F2alpha.
 desired pregnancy.
 of certain pharmaceutical
grams) per kg
Aids with sexual prepara-
 Pregnant women should
agents used to enhance
(0.05 to 0.1 mg per kg)
tion - Improve ejaculate.
 not handle; handle wich
semen quality in the dog.'
SC 15 min prior to semen
May not have an erection
 caution in humans with
Theriogenology, Volume
collection.
and may have a small
asthma and women of
66, Issue 3, 613-617.
 Once per collecion, not
volume of ejaculate, but
childbearing age.
more than 1 dose per day
improves sperm count in 
many patients.
Side effeccs - panting,
ndices
salivation, vomiting, uri-
nation, diarrhea, anxiety,
435
resclessness, abdominal
436
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
 Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
 Pediatric
 lndication
pain, rarely collapse.
Repr
Should be used wich
roduction
caution in brachycephalic
dogs or older patiencs.
Client should be advised
pue
ofeffeccs prior to admin-
istration.
Prostaglandin F 2 alpha
Lutalyse
To manage metritis -
Female
THAM salt of natural
 Extralabel Drug Use*
Verstegen J, Dhaliwal
used with antibiotics and
occurring prostaglandin 
 Contraindicated during
G, Verstegen-Onclin K.
fluids.
F2alpha.
 desired pregnancy.
Mucometra, cystic endo-
LUTALYSE 10 mcg (mi-
 To manage metritis com-
 Pregnant women should
 metrial hyperplasia, and
 crograms) per kg 3 times
bined with antibiotics
not handle; handle with
 pyometra in che bicch:
per day, SC.
and supportive care.
caution in humans wich 
Advances in treatment 
 Slowly increase to 50 mcg
asthma and women of
auoy jo juassasse pue
(micrograms) per kg 3
childbearing age.
reproductive success.
to 5 doses per day over 3
 Theriogenology, Volume
t0 5 days, continue until
70, Issue 3, Pages 364-374
resolved.
May combine with
 metoclopramide and
15 minute walks after
injections to minimize
side effects of nausea,
vomiting, salivation, and
diarrhea.
Pseudoephedrine
Sudafed?
4t0 5 mg per kg PO up to
Male
Oral sympathomimetic.
Extralabel Drug Use*
Fontbonne, Alain. "Infer-
3 times a day, 1 to 3 hours
To diminish retrograde
Having che bladder full
tility in che Bitch and in
 prior to ejaculation.
ejaculation.
prior to ejaculation also
the Dog." world Small 
aids in minimizing retro-
Animal Veterinary Ass0-
ciation World Congress,
grade ejaculation.
 Sydney, 21 Aug. 2007.
Pyrantel pamoate
Nemex@
Dogs and puppies under
 Pyrimidine anthelmintic.
Considered safe during
All
Humb 7ch Edition.
Strongid T@
 5 lbs: 10 mg per kg PO.
To treat or prevent
pregnancy.
www.capcvet.org
For dogs and puppies
ascarids, hookworms and
 Important to educate and
weighing more than 5
stomach worms.
 protect clients against 
Ibs: 5 mg per kg PO.
20onotic diseases. All
Starting when che pups
pups and dams should be
are 2 weeks old, worm
treated. See www.capcvel.
at 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12
 org for more information
weeks ofage.
o preventing zoonoses.
Selamectin
Revolution@
 Apply copically to che
Female
Topical avermectin anti-
Extralabel Drug Use*
Kazacos, KR:"Treatment
bitch at 6 mg per kg at
 parasicicide. This proco-
 Considered safe during
and Control of Gastro-
6 and 2 weeks before
col reduced roundworm
pregnancy.
 intestinal Helminths."
whelping and at 2 and
burdens in puppies by
Avoid in dogs who carry
Western Veterinary
6 weeks after whelping.
98%, and reduced egg
the MDR-1 mutation.
Conference. Las Vegas.
(Week 3 and 7 of preg-
shedding by 99.7% in che
2002.
nancy and week 2 and 6
dams.
of lactation.)
Simethicone
Gasx@
 Several drops PO as
Neonates
Oral anti-foaming agent.
Sympcomatic only -
Various
Phazyme@
 needed co relieve gas and
To relieve intestinal and 
should determine and
bloating.
gastric gas.
 treat underlying cause.
 Available OTC in several
Surfactant.
forms.
Sucralfate
Carafate@
0.5 gm (small dogs) o 1
Any
Gastroprocectant. To
Frobably safe during
Humb 7th Edition.
gm PO every 8 hours.
manage oral, esophageal,
pregnancy as only 3 to
gastric, and duodenal
5% absorbed. Best given
ulcers. Also useful for
 on an empty scomach.
non-specifc gastritis and
Suspension works better
esophagitis.
- can dissolve tablecs
prior to use.
点
Check formulary to
idices
assess timing when used
wich ocher drugs, as may
decrease absorption of
 certain pharmaceuticals.
438
Generic Drug Name
Trade Drug Name
 Dose Range with
Male Female Neonate or
Drug Class and
Comments
Reference or Source
Canine F
 Frequency and Route
Pediatric
 lndication
Sulfadimechoxine
Albon?
 50 mg per kg PO first
Pediatric
Sulfonamide antimicro-
 Use caution in patients
Plumb 7th Edition.
dose, chen 25 mg per kg
bial. To control coccidia
with dehydration,
roduction
in pups 2 to 6 weeks of
in the neonate.
diminished renal or
age once every 24 hours
hepatic function, or
for 5 to 10 days.
urinary obstruction. Can
pue
cause KCS.
Contraindicated in
 Doberman Pinschers.
Tetracycline
Panmycin@
Minocycline (25 mg per
Male and female
 Tetracycline antibiotic.
Avoid use in the last half
 Root Kustritz, Margaret
kg PO once daily for 14
 To help manage canine
of pregnancy and in pups
V. "Canine Brucellosis."
days) with dihydrostrep-
brucellosis when com-
wichout full adult denti-
Western Veterinary Con-
tomycin (5 mg per kg IM
bined with ocher antibiot-
tion as ic affeccs tooch
ference, Las Vegas, 2007.
every 12 hours for 7 days)
ics and desexing.
 and bone development.
 and tetracycline (30 mg
To manage canine brucel-
per kg PO every 12 hours
losis in conjunction wich
for 21 days) with strepto-
surgical desexing. Even
mycin (20 mg per kg IM
long term treatment and
 desexing may not clear
once daily for 14 days).
infection.
Terbutaline
Brethine@
0.03 mg per kg PO or
Pregnant female
 Tocolytic/beta-adrenergic
Extralabel Drug Use*
Adams, Ana."Increasing
SC every 4 to 8 hours a5
agonist. To quiet inap-
Considered safe during
 Conception Rates and
needed to control pre-
propriate or premature
 pregnancy.
Litter Sizes." western
temm labor contractions.
uterine activity. Discon-
To quiet excessive uterine
Veterinary Conference,
OR
tinue the drug 48 hours
activity associated wich
Las Vegas, 2004.
0.03 mg per kg IV by con-
before predicted delivery
 premature labor Can be
 tinuous infusion to effect
date to allow che bicch to
combined wich proges-
Copley K: Parturition
OR
initiace normal labor and
 terone and antibiotics if
management: 15,000
2.5 to 5 mg total dose PO
delivery.
indicated.
whelpings later: An out-
every 8 to 12 hours.
come based analysis. The-
Maternal pulse should be
Dose may be titated to
riogenology 2009,; Vol. 1,
evaluated for tachycardia
 effected based on tocody
 prior co and 1 hour after
Number 2: 297-307.
nometry.
each terbutaline dose.
Tramadol
Utram@
1 to 5 mg per kg PO
Female post-op
Synthetic mu-receptor
No documentation but
Hardie, Lascelles et al.
 every 8 to 12 hours.
opiate agonist.
experience shows safe
2003
To manage post-op pain.
use in bitches post- surgi-
Plumb 7th Edition.
cal AI and post- C-section.
May have CNS and GI
effects.
Trimechoprim-sulfa
Tribrissen?
15 mg per kg in che neo-
Neonate
Potentiaced sulfonamide
Avoid in pregnant bicches
Humb 7th Edition.
Bactrim@
nate PO every 12 hours.
antimicrobial.
or those intended for
Dose is calculaced by
To treat bacterial infec-
breeding - teracogen.
adding the combined
tion susceptible to cthis
amount of the 2 drugs.
drug class.
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
Tribrissen?
30 mg per kg every 12
Male
Potentiated sulfonamide
Avoid in pregnant bitches
Humb 7ch Edition.
or
Bactrim@
hours PO, IV or SC for
antimicrobial.
or those intended for
Trimethoprim-Sulfa-
chronic prostatitis.
To treat bacterial infec-
breeding. Monitor
methoxazole
Dose is calculated by
tions susceptible to chis
closely for side effects
adding the combined
drug class.
of keratoconjunctivitis
 amount of the 2 drugs.
sicca, hypersensitivity
(cype 1 or type 3) acute
neutrophilic hepatitis
witch icterus, vomiting,
anorexia, diarrhea,
fever, hemolytic anemia,
urticaria, polyarthritis,
facial swelling, polydipsia,
crystalluria, hematuria,
polyuria, cholestasis,
hypochyroidism, anemias,
agranulocytosis, thromby-
cytopenia, idiosyncratic
hepatic necrosis in dogs.
Stop ifany develop.
Vicamin A analogs
 asop sadeiayp on 
Female
Fat soluble vicamin.
Contraindicated during
recommended. Avoid 
pregnancy as a teratogen
excesses and liver during
may cause cleft palates.
 pregnancy.
Vitamin K
Mephyton@
0.01 to 0.1 mg SC or IM
Neonate
Fat-soluble vicamin.
 Considered safe during
Humb 7th Edition.
one time only.
To minimize neonatal
pregnancy.
 Macintire, Douglass K.
Useful when chere is
hemorrhage.
Neonates under 48
"Pediatric Emergencies."
spontaneous hemorrhage
hours old are deficient in
Western Veterinary Con-
点
or if chere is excessive
thrombin and may show
ference, Las Vegas, 2004.
idices
bleeding at taildock or
signs of hemorrhage
dewclaw removal.
associated wich sepsis,
439
 trauma, or other illness.
440
pue sama paaouddv vle sn von asn ap iaqe-enxg sauoaien jeiaua cane auaul pasn aaesop io 'anoi sapads uoneipu ayp Joy palaqel nou ane auipaw Aieuuaia vl pasn somp Auen
Compounded drugs. These drugs may have anecdotal, not evidence-based criteria for use. All 3 are associated wich liability to the prescriber Consider the risk-beneft ratio of the product, what is
Can
best" frthe patient, the altemative treament options,che relationship ofthe prescriberto che client, your professional liability insurance status and che informed consent lawsin yourstate before
卫
prescribing. Keep good records including che rationale for use of che producc. Economic decisions are not che basis for selection and use of one of chese produccs. These produccs are to be used for
odu
ap paddeun ue ujo saads paadden ue u oeu paoddeun ue ioy senad qusad jo aeid aup si asn p iaqelexg an  aqeyojo na) as ix
or route ofadministration. See AMDUCA at: http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/GuidanceComplianceEnforcement/ActsRulesRegulations/ucm085377.htm ELDU applies if a product is used for
an indication not in the approved labeling. In this case, the prescriber has the responsibility to be well-informed about the product, to base its use on frm scientific rationale and on sound medi
cal evidence, to maintain records of che products use and effects, and to have the client's informed consent regarding ELDU and treatment alternatives. In addition, a valid veterinary-client-patient
relationship (VCPR) must exist. Pror to ELDU, che prescriber must verify chere is no approved animal drug chat is labeled for such use in che species, or that contains the same active ingredient in
the required dosage form and/or concentration that would ocherwise be appropriate for che patient. ELDU of an FDA approved drug may be used if eicher there is no approved animal drug chac is
ging sisixa uonipuon pue saiads jeun joy aup eue paaoidde ve haaneuane jo voneuanuon pue wugy aaesop panbai aun v juaipaiai aaoe aes aun sueuon jeun io asn yons ioy paiage
veterinarian finds, wichin the context ofa VCPR, that the approved drug is clinically inelffective for ics labeled use. The decision cannot be made on an economic basis.
o aun pue leaoidde pyo wasis pase-auapiaa syae ai vae Sn aun Aq peaoidde joy pagns jo paaoidde uaaq nou sey jeun lennaneud Jo p y a paaoiddy vae S e non +
monograph system play essential roles in ensuring drugs are boch safe and effective. See: http://www.fida.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulacoryinformation/EnforcementAccivitiesbyFDA/Select-
edEnforcementActionsonUnapprovedDrugs/default.htm
oo Compounded Drug: A compounded drug is a pharmaceutical or chemical product altered or manipulaced chat resulcs in a product used as medication. This category may create the greatest li-
abilicy for che prescribing practicioner Perform due diligence on the compounding pharmacy prior to use of cheir services and products Be certain che compounding pharmacy is not manufacturing
the product is prescribed.
See: hctp://www.fda.gov/ICECI/ComplianceManuals/CompliancePolicyGuidanceManual/ucm074656.htm.
D-14. Algorithm for prostate disease
Abnormal cells in ejaculate or urine
J0
Prostate exam - digital rectal
blood dripping from penis 
and abdominal palpation 
 independent of urination 
Cytology on urinalysis
Compare voided and cath/cystotomy sample
Res ults of ejaculate cytology shows:
 Submit to pathologist to comfirm
Microscopic exam
WBC's and Bacteria
Atypical epithelial cells
Abnormal Sperm
shows RBC's only or
morphology/motility/count
blood grossly visible
CBC/CS
U/S +/- Bx or FNA
CBC/CS
U/S +/- FNA
Blad der/prostate/
Double contrast 
U/S testes + U/S prostate
biopsy prostate
testes U/S to R/O
 pneumocystogram to
+/FNA or biopsy
Abcess or acute/
R/O prostatic or bladder
R/O medication,
[BPH in dogs >5 yrs dld]
 chronic prostatitis or
tumor
Thermal damage
paraprostatic cyst
{TCC/Adenocarcinoma)
Stress
Castrate
 Megestrol 
 Finasteride,
 GnRH agonist 
Illness
C & S of ejaculate or 
 acetate
 osaterone acetate
if no longer
U/S guided aspirate
Fever
or other steroidal
breeding
Blunt trauma
antiandrogen
Testicular tumor
Antibiotics base on C & S plus
[Prostate
[Bladder stones]
[Bladder tumor
Remove inciting cause
megestrol acetate or finasteride/
steroidal anti-androgen {urine
R/O prostate
[Cystotomy]
Sx rarely
 Piroxic am/
Nutritional 
 Dopamine
Endocrine
culture may be (-) but patient 
cancer
 effective
meloxicam
 support
agonist Rx
may still have prostatitis)
Workup
 Pain + fever = acute prostatitis
+ Antibiotic
Consider adding NSAID
 + Nutritional Rx 
Sexual rest ]Deslorelin orCabergoline
442
D-15. Page 1. Algorithm for female infertility
Infertile 
roduction
 Not cycling or
 Cycling @ 6-12
 Cycling < every 120 to 160
cycling @ > 12
mo intervals
days esp German Shepherd
pue
 month intervals
 Rottweller or Basset Hound
Neoni
PE
Progesterone >
Under 2yrs.
Over2yrs
Progesterone
Granulosal cell
Dx by seeing
1. Thyroid {low)
 5 ng/ml short 
 Premature decline
< 5 ng/ml for
tumor
cornified
 2. Adrenal Hyperadreno
- interestrous
in progesterone
30 days
epithelium for
 Carefully examine
1. CBC/CS/UA
corticism
during diestrus
Cystic ovary
6 wks
external genitals and
2. Progesterone test 
 periods
 3. Hyperprolactinemia
R/O Split cycle
complete physical 
3. Weekly vaginal cytologies +
4. Exposure to hormone
Induce ovulation 
Rx Mibolerone or
Wait till it comes 
 Ultrasound guided
exam for masculine 
 monthly progesterone
therapy including.
 assays to monitor for silent 
aspiration of fluid
traits including
 accidental ingestion/
magestrol acetate
in and breed that
GnRH or HCG
heat
from ovarian 
 prominent os clitoris
exposure
to increase
cycle
+/- Deslorelin 
4. Ultr asound with radiologist
a.Androgens
interestrous period
cyst(s)
(Looks "doggy")
implant when <
to look for ovaries and
b. Progestagens
 Test progesterone
 70% anucleated
uterus
c. Anabolic steroids
level in aspirated 
Wait until > 2 yrs
cells on cytology
5. Drugs - including 
 5. 0varian cysts
fluid 
of age
& U/S shows
 accidental ingestion/
6. Environmental causes
exposure
 preovulatory
Then
a. Low lighting
6. Karyotype if not cycling
b. Poor nutrition
10
follicles
7. Thyroid and TSH + T
c. Overcrowding
8. 2 LH levels @ >24hr interval
 Breed next 
or single AMH test to check 
cycle-eggs too old 
for presence of ovaries 
 Sperm count and
in most cases to be
morphology
9. Inadequate nutrition 
 fertile in this cycle
10. Excess stress or work 2° to
housing or performance 
11. Last resort-R/O
 Hermaphroditism or 
Pseud ohermaphroditism 
Exploratory laparotomy with
biopsy of gonads
D-15.Page 2.Algorithm for female infertility
Failure to copulate-
History evaluate for
a. Dominant  Al required
1. Welitimed breeding
Infertility 
b. Congenital acquired
2. Witnessed breeding or Al
vag abnormalities:
3.  &o past successful
strictures, vaginal
breeding history
Bitch cycling, 96-12
Hyperplasia, bipartate
 No pups at U/S, R/0 
4. llness of 
mos. Bitch Bred 
vaginas
5. No adverse meds in hx
OR
Require Al
6.Toxin exposure hx-no toxins
 No pups at term 
Failure to copulate-c
60% of normal  have aerobic bact in cran vag
7. Good nutrition hx
a. Prostate pain-treat 
90% of normal  have sim bact in caud vagina
b. Spine or leg pain-treat
Olson 1978 JAvr in Euk 97 book pg11
 Breed next cycle with
<250x10 normal
c. Poor libido Rx
Time 
No diff in fertile v infertile  Ct. Euk 97 pg11
ovulation Timing
Sperm Count +
GnRH, +/- Lutalyse, Al
Adequate semen quality
+ Sperm Count
d. Penis abnormalities
 Brucella 
& delivery
 + Brucella test 
Oophoritis
Culture/Serology
a.
Immune medicated
 Sperm count or
b. Inflammatory or
 infectious causes not
Next Breeding Plan
reeval of info @
yet identified in dogs
1. Exc ellent ovulation timing
breeding-semen/@
2. Assess semen quality
Incomplete or obstructive
substandard + cranal
3.Assisted breeding
diseases of female
vaginal culture during 
a.Al
reproductive tract
b. TCI
estrus Treat based on C
Cystic endometrial
c. Surgical Al
& S for 2-4 wks + T, test
4. Anterior vaginal culture during early proestrus.
hyperplasia
Treat with appropriate antibiotic for 2 wks.
TCl or Surgical Insem 
Brucella/Herpes/other
5. Uterine biopsy-endoscopic or surgical for:
@ next with timing of
infectious diseases
a.Histology
ovulation 
Poor ovulation Timing
b. Culture - aerobic/mycoplasma prior to
next breeding
Subclinical uterine
6. Different stud dog/type of semen used.
No Pregnancy
infection
On stud dog/low sperm
Uterine Bx with C + S
U/S ovaries
(aer + anaer) mycopl
 count/poor quality semen 
+ Histopath @ Cornell
Progesterone level @
 30-60 d after ovulation 
negative U/S to assess for
Prog level-
lutealfailure
hypluteoidism to R/0
Failure-
Herpes tite v PCR/DNA
Try again with diffstud dog
Rad No pups at term
 Resorption or Abortion 
 Brucella test/C & S/
点
Pups + U/S
C + S of vag dischg @
 other infectious causes
idic
[proestrous + treat acc ordingly
{Lepto/Neosporum) +
 Resoption <45 days 
Abortion > 45 days of
histopath on tissues
 of pregnancy at time
pregnancy at time of
passed
of fetal demise
fetal demise
D-16. Page 1. Algorithm for male infertility
Infertile o
a. Complete physical exam 
b. CBC/CS/T,/UA/Brucella
Reasons to work up o
c. UA-is sperm present?
1. Prebreeding examination
d. Palpate to loc ate testes/
2. Unable to get  pregnant
size, shape, texture of testes/
3. Sire with <75%  pregnant
 palpate prostate/palpate
4. ↓ Litter size
 scrotum
 5. Change in testicular size or
e. Examine prepuce
[f. Ultrasound prostate and testes]
character on palpation
6. Prepurchase examination
 Ejaculate using estrus teaser bitch
Lov libido
 Sertoli cell tumor
Physical problem:
[Psychological]
Karyotype
 Hypothroidism 
Drugs/Meds
Back or orthopedic pain 
for
or
steroids/antineoplastic
Prostate pain 
intersex
other endocrine
treatment
Genital pain past or
 disorder
present
1. Different 
2. Have owner leave room
3. Change environment 
 0 sperm, aspermia vs azoospermia
Dx and Rx
Dx and Rx
4. Lutalyse +/- GnRH
ALK Phos.
Source of 
Source of 
5. Anti anxiety drugs
[orthopedic pain]
genital pain
6. Change person collecting
<5000
>5000
Incomplete 
Complete
ejaculate 
 ejaculate 
GnRH +/-
Catheterize
Lutalyse
urinary
bladder/UA
 Try again
to assess for
retrograde
ejaculation
1° Infections in the testicle
Semen evaluation includes
1. Descending from prostate
1) Sperm #, morphology,motility
2. Penetrating wound 
2) Inflammatory cells
3. Brucella
3) Blood
4.Beta strep
4) Bacteria
5. Mycoplasma/ureaplasma
5) AP assay
6. Herpes
7. Chlamydia?
2° from both or contralateral
testicular inflam m ation
1. Torsion
2. Trauma 
3. Atrophy
4. Tumor
5. Infection 
6. Immune mediated cause 
7. Systemic disease/illness
8. Intrascrotal hernia
444 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
Differential Diagnosis for:
Testicle ↑ in size - Active disorder
1. Active orchitis
 2. Recent torsion
3. Sertoli cell tumor
Testicle ↓ in size - Degenerative disorder
1. Chronic orchitis
2. Previous trauma or torsion
3. Leydig cell tumor
4. Epididymis - sperm granuloma - can be bilateral
High to normal libido
 Low count 
High to normal count
(< 10 Mil/#BW)
(> 10Mill/#BW)
Trauma]
Testicular
 Normal
 Abnormal
[Neoplasia
morphology
morphology
 Thermal
Drugs
 Stress or
Illiness
Age
damage
psychological
(General
Abnormal penis:
 Thermal 
Drugs
 Stress
 Exposure to
 Eliminate
(see under low
disease)
1. Phimosis 
Damage
OR
environmental
underlying
libi do}
including
2. Penile frenulum 
llness
hormones/
cause/
Brucellosis
3. Hypospadia
 chemicals
Retest
[4. Small penis
[in 90 days]
Unable to tie bitch
Next diagnostics should include:
1. T + TSH 
2. Adrenal/Pituitary testing
3. Testicular Ultrasound/Prostate
4. Aerobic culture of ejaculate 
with broth enrichment
 5. Last resort:
Testicular Biopsy to R/Q
a. Tumor
b. Infectious causes-see 1°
infectious causes preceeding
page
c. Immune mediated cause
d. Contralateral testicular
inflam m ation
e. Senile degeneration 
Appendices 445
D-16. Page 2. Algorithm for male infertility
XH
1)  - a) Estrus detection
b}#of times  bred
c) Methods of Preg Dx
2) Controlled trial to proven Q?
3) Libido, Use and Frequency
4)#of Pups/litter
 5) Hx of illness, urination, defec ation, toxins and trauma
6) Medications, hormones/gluco corticoids
7)Family Hx of reproductive performance of father +littermates
 Aspermia vs Azoospermia
Move to O sperm
 Congential
Acquired」
[Retrograde ejaculation]
J0 AXX
Inflamm ation]
XXmale
Failure of spermatogenesis
vasectomy
Neoplasia
Obstruction of Epididmis or
 Bilateral sperm 
Vas Deferens 
granuloma
 Systemic illness
Chemotherapy
Brucella
Immune mediated 
Bilateral aplasia
:sanp J0
Maybe associated with Immune
 Steroids
Hyperadrenocorticism
 mediated thyroiditis and orchits
Ketoconazole
Dx=CBC/CS/UA
Low dose
 dexamethasone
sup pression
Definitions:
Teratospermia - Morphologicaly abnormal sperm < 80% normal
Asthenospermia - < 25% sperm of sperm have normal motility, congenitial = Ciliary dyskinesis usually caused by contamination by
Wwater, lubes, powder, and disinfectants 
Oligospermia - low sperm count
Aspermia or azospermia = no sperm
Hematospermia - blood in ejaculate
446 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
This page intentionally left blank
D-17.Pyometra
Pyometra Suspect Intact
Vaginal Discharge with
WBC's and Bacteria
Witnessed Breeding
No hx of breeding
1 of more of
1 or more of 
symptoms on list
 sym ptoms on list 
1.6-9 wks post estrus (Range 2-12 wks)
1. 6-9 wks post estrus (Range 2-12 wks)
2. PU/PD
2. PU/PD
3. ↑ WBC
3.↑WBC
4. ↓ appetite/Anorectic
4. J appetite/Anorectic
5. V and/or D
[5. V and/or D
Ultrasound
Ultrasound
Mucoid vag dischg
 No fetal membranes or 
 Radiograph to rule out 
Hydrometra or
structures suggestive of
 missed fetal structures
cytology-few WBC's and
ifseen
mucometra
> 45 days of age or
/or Bacteria
pregnancy
mummified fetuses
Medical Rx 
Surgical Rx
 Bitch not quite
Clinically normal 
Fluid in pockets
Normal ovaries
Ovaries
as below
OHE
healthy +/- ↑ WBC 
with normal CBC
segmental pyo)
and uterus/no
Abnormal
vag dischg
Treat as for
Monitor for 
 Pyometra 
Pyometra
Pyometra
Clinically
Aspirate if not 
Laparotomy 
clinic ally
ill
likely to be 
J0
 neoplastic
Laparoscopy
 Poor surgical 
Monitor for pyometra
Search for other cause
candidate or plan to 
of illness
use for breeding
Medical Therapy
1. Lutalyse or Cloprostenol 
2. Ab's-4-6 wks
3. Cabergoline or
bromacriptine &
progesterone > 5ng/dl
4. Fluids
5. Supportive care
Recheck uterus with U/S]
 Continue
Pyometra
RX
resolved
[OHE
Breed next cycle or
mibolerone for 3 to 12
months/breed on lst heat
 after d/c mibolerone 
448 Canine Reproduction and Neonatology
No Vaginal Discharge]
Witnessed Breeding
No hx of Breeding 
1 or more of symptoms on list
1 or more of symptoms on list
1. 6-9 wks post estrus (Range 2-12 wks)
1. 6-9 wks post estrus (Range 2-12 wks)
2. PU/PD
2. PU/PD
3. ↑ WBC
3.↑ WBC
4. ↓ Appetite/Anorectic
4. ↓ Appetite/Anorectic
5. V and/or D
5. V and/or D
6. Sick clinically
6. Clinically ill 
7. Distending Abdomen
7. Distending Abdomen 
8. ↑ BUN/Creat
8. ↑ BUN/Creat
9. lsosthenuric urine
9. Isosthenuric urine
(No cystocentesis!)
(No cystocentesis!)
Viable Fetuses
1.Viable Fetus(es)
concurrent without
2. No fluid suggestive
1. Excess fluid in uterus
of Pyometra
2. Dead fetuses 
3. Normal to sl ↑ WBC
3.↑ WBC
[4.  Clinically healthy]
4.  Clinically ill
Progesterone Level
1. Antibiotics (safe for preg)
Surgically Abort
Medic ally Abort
10-90 ng/dl
Less than 5 ng/dl
2. Monitor bitch closely
litter
litter-use
with U/S + WBC
 protocol for
Normal Pregnancy
High Risk Pregnancy
3. Monitor progesterone levels
medical Tx
4. Supplement progesterone 
Pyometra
Follow with U/S
if bitch shows no signs of
1. Progesterone testing
illness
sequential
[5. Whelpwise
2. +/- Antibiotic Rx 
3. +/- Progesterone
Allov
 C-section-
OHE if  not 
C-section-know
supplementation
premature 
 premature
valuable to
 premature 
Therapy if < 2-5 ng/dl
delivery of
4. +/- Terbutaline therapy
pups-will
breed again
pups-will not
5. Herpes test
dead fetuses]
not survive
survive
[6. Whelpwise 
Allow premature
C-section
OHE if  not of 
delivery of dead
premature pups
value to breed
fetuses
will not survive
again 
Manage High Risk Pregnancy
C-section when pups are mature]
 Uterine Biopsy/Placentas for
 culture and Histopath
Monitor Next pregnancy beg @
4 wks of preg with wkly U/S and
Progesterone levels
Appendices 449
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
IS8N 159161041-9
TETON NEWMEDIA
1
www.tetonnm.com