Handbookof
SmallAnimal
RegionalAnesthesia
andAnalgesia
Techniques
Phillip Lerche
Turi Aarnes
Gwen Covey-Crump
Fernando MartinezTaboada
WILEYBlackwell
Handbook of Small Animal Regional
Anesthesia and Analgesia Techniques
Handbook of Small
Animal Regional
Anesthesia and
Analgesia
 Techniques
Phillip Lerche BVSc PhD DipAcVAA
Associate Professor - Clinical
Anesthesiology and Pain Management
Department of Veterinary Clinical Science s
The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Columbus, Ohio, USA
Turi K. Aarnes Dvm Ms DipAcvAA
Associate Professor - Clinical
Anesthesiology and Pain Management
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Columbus. Ohio, USA
Gwen CoVey-Crump BVetMed CertvA DipECvAA MRCvs
Specialist in Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
Clinical Teacher
Langford Veterinary Service s
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK
Fernando Martinez Taboada Lv CertvA DipEcvAA
MRCVS
Specialist in Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
The Veterinary Teaching Hospital
Faculty of Veterinary Science
The University of Sydney
Sydney. Australia
This edition first published 2016 @ 2016 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Regsteredoffice:
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
West Sussex, PO19 8SQ. UK
Editorial offces:
9600 Garsington Road. Oxford. OX4 2DQ. UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ. UK
1606 Golden Aspen Drive, Suites 103 and 104, Ames. Iowa 50010. USA
For details of our global editorial offices. for customer services and for information about
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our
website at www.wiley.corm/wiley-blackwell
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with the UK Copyright. Designs and Patents Act 1988
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted. in any form or by any means, electronic, me chanical,
and Patents Act I988. without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names.
service marks, trademarks or registered tradermarks of their respe ctive owmers. The
publisher is not associated with any pro duct or vendor mentioned in this book. It is
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research.
understanding. and discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied
health science practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and the author
of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, inclucing without
limmitation any irmplied warranties of fitness for a particular purp ose. In view of ongoing
research. equipment modifications. changes in governmental regulations, and the
constant flow of information relating to the use of me dicines, equipment, and devices,
the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package
insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment., or device for, among other things.
any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and
pre cautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that
source of further inforrmation does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses
the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may
make. Further, readers should be aware that Intermet Websites listed in this work may
have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statemments for this work.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress and the
British Library.
ISBN: 9781118741825
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Somme content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Main cover image: with permission from The Ohio State University
Set in 9/ 12pt Mieridien LT Std by Aptara Inc.. New Delhi, India
12016
Contents
1  Introduction, 1
Reasons to provide regional anesthesia, 2
History of regional anesthesia/analgesia, 3
Principles of the major techniques, 3
Local anesthetic drugs. 4
Additives to local anesthetics, 6
Equipment, 7
Syringes. 7
Needles. 7
Epidural catheter kits, 8
Nerve locators, 8
Differential pressure transducer, 9
Acoustic device, 9
Complications and contraindica tions, 9
Local, 10
Systemic,10
Species differences and considerations, 10
Safe practice, 11
Gaining confidence, 1l
Making a plan, 11
References, 1l
Further reading. 12
2 Cutaneous Innervation Index, 13
Cutaneous innervation index, 14
Canine dermatomes
Body. 14
Head,15
Thoracic limb, 16
Pelvic limb, 18
vi
Contents
3 Infltration Blocks, 21
Infiltration for mass removal, 22
Line and ring blocks, 22
Inverted "L" block, 24
Block of the surgical incision, 26
Single injection of the surgical incision , 26
Diffusion catheter/"soaker” catheter/"pain buster", 28
Intercostal blocks, 30
 Interpleural block (also known as intrapleural or pleural),. 32
Intraperitoneal block, 34
References. 35
4 Blocks of the Head, 37
Retrobulbar, 38
Maxillary, 40
Infraorbital, 42
Mandibular (or inferior alveolar). 44
Mental (or middle mental}. 46
Auriculotemporal and great auricular, 48
References, 52
5 Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs, 53
Thoracic limb regional anesthetic blocks, 54
Brachial plexus, 56
Paravertebral: C6-Tl, 58
RUMM (radial/ulnar/median/musculocutaneous), 60
Bier block (intravenous regional anesthesia). 62
Pelvic limb, 64
Femoral/saphenous nerve block, 66
Sciatic nerve block, 70
References, 74
6 Epidurals and Spinals, 75
Lumbosacral epidural and spinal in dogs. 76
Lumbosacral epidural in cats, 78
Caudal epidural in dogs and cats, 80
References, 82
7 Emergency Procedures, 83
Complications associated with local anesthetic techniques, 84
Bleeding.84
84
Contents
vii
Complications associated with local anesthetic drugs. 84
Allergic reactions to local anesthetic drugs. 84
Methemoglobinemia, 85
Systemic toxicity of local anesthetics, 85
Cardiovascular toxicity. 85
References. 88
Further reading. 88
Index, 89
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
PhillipLerche
Handbookof Small Animal Regiona?Anesthesia αnd Anaigesia Techniques, First Edition.
By Phillip Lerche. Turi K. Aarnes, Gwen Covey-Crump and Fernando Martinez Taboada.
@ 20l6 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd. Published 20l6 by John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.
 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Reasons to provide regional anesthesia
management has gained acceptance and popularity in small animal
practice over the past few decades. Reasons for this include the fact
that many of the regional blocks are straightforward to perforrm,
requiring moderate technical skill given familiarity with patient anat-
omy: they can be conducted relatively safely given an understanding
of local anesthetic drug pharmacology, complications and side effects;
and they contribute to the two major tenets of treating pain: pre-
emptive and multimodal analgesia.
Providing pre-emptive analgesia by performing regional anes-
thesia prior to surgery leads to a drastic reduction in intraoperative
nociceptive (pain} stimulation. This results in a decrease in anes-
thetic maintenance drug as well as intra- and postoperative analgesic
during surgery. and improving postoperative patient comfort as well
as duration of pain relief. Some techniques can be continued postop-
once the patient has recovered from anesthesia, e.g. instilling local
anesthetic into a chest tube after thoracotomy. or injecting local
anesthetic into an epidural or spinal catheter after pelvic limb or
abdominal surgery.
The experience of pain, a sensory process involving the nocicep-
tive pathway. is complex, and involves several steps. Noxious stimuli
involving mechanical, chemical or thermal injury to tissue are first
receptors}. These electrical irmpulses are then transmitted to the spi-
 h a  s   a  a o l
   a    an    a jo
increased (amplified} or decreased (suppressed). Finally, the nocice-
ptive signals are projected via lateral nerve fibers to the brain where
they are perceived.
rotransmitters released in the nociceptive pathway. drugs used t0
provide regional anesthesia block sodium channels in neurons. This
cord to the brain in the case of epidural or spinal analgesia, thus pro.
viding effective pain relief for the duration of the block. Using regional
anesthetic techniques in conjunction with other analgesic drugs that
act in different ways on the nociceptive fibers (e.g. with opioids.
alpha-2 agonists, ketamine} results in multimodal analgesia, contrib-
Introduction
the pain pathway both during and after surgery. This approach allows
for the lowest effective dose of each drug to be used, which decreases
side effects and enhances patient safety.
History of regional anesthesia/analgesia
The use of a local anesthetic drug was first demonstrated in l884
when cocaine was used to desensitize the eye prior to surgery. Due
'      n   o
well as the emergence of techniques allowing artificial synthesis
of chemical compounds in the 19o0s, non-toxic, non-addictive
local anesthetics were sought, discovered, and manufactured. Ini-
tially, amino ester-type compounds were produced, until in 1943
lidocaine, an amino amide drug. was developed. Amide-type local
 n    n  a si n
and several compounds in this group were discovered in the latter
half of the 2oth century. including mepivacaine, bupivacaine, and
ropivacaine.
Principles of the major techniques
Topical application
Local anesthetic drops, e.g. proparacaine, can be directly applied to
the eye for immediate relief of keratoconjunctival pain, although
prolonged use delays corneal healing and is not recommended.
Local anesthetic can also be directly applied to exposed tissue.
Drug is directly deposited into the surgical field by dripping from a
syringe, or soaking surgical sponges in local anesthetic and applying
them to the tissue. Local anesthetic can also be instilled into the
chest via a thoracostomy tube to desensitize the pleura following
chest surgery, and into the abdominal cavity to treat pain following
incision of the peritoneum. Local anesthetic cream is available as
a mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine, which is used to desensitize
skin for intravenous catheter placement. Lidocaine is also available
as a transdermal patch.
Regionafinfitration
regional analgesic techniques. The catheter is then attached to an
infusion pump or an elastomeric bulb which delivers a set rate of local
anesthetic over a specified period of time
intravenous regional analgesia
 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Intra-articufarinjection
Local anesthetics injected into joints have a long duration of action
due to slow systemic uptake. There is in vifro evidence that local anes-
thetics may be detrimental to chondrocyte health, with preservative
free formulations being preferred. However, in vivo, this has not been
shown to be definitively the case (Chu et al, 2o08}.
Perpheraf nerve bfockade
Individual or groups of sensory nerves supplying a specific region are
located by palpation, electrophysiology. ultrasound or varying combi-
nations of two or three of these techniques. Local anesthetic is then
deposited adjacent to, but not into, the nerves. Nerves are typically
blocked at sites proximal and distant to the site of surgery.
Epidurafandspinafinjection
Using specific epidural/spinal needles, local anesthetic is deposited
either into the extradural space (epidural injection) or into the suba
rachnoid space (spinal or intrathecal injection). This provides longer
lasting. more intense analgesia and muscle relaxation, while minimiz-
ing systemic side effects. Preservative-free formulations of drug are
recommended for epidural or spinal injection whenever possible
Local anesthetic drugs
Mechanism of action
Local anesthetics mainly act by blocking sodium (Nat} channels,
which prevents depolarization of the neuronal cell membrane, and
thus generation of an electrical impulse does not occur in response to
noxious stimuli. There is evidence to suggest that local anesthetics can
reuptake of the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA, thus enhancing
its effect.
Physicochemical properties
Local anesthetic drugs have an aromatic ring and an amine group sep-
arated by a hydrocarbon chain. The amine group can be ester or amide
linked. Esters are typically shorter acting than amides as they can be
hydrolyzed by plasma cholinesterases. Esters are therefore not reliant
bility and pKa, i.e. the pH at which the drug exists in equal amounts
of charged and non-charged molecules. Duration of effect increases as
lipid solubility increases, and decreases as the rate of systemic absorp-
tion increases. Drugs that cause vasodilation, like lidocaine, have a
Imtroduction
Table 1.1 Clinical pharmacology of local anesthetic agents in cats and dogs
Lidocaine
Mepivacaine
 Bupivacaine
Ropivacaine
Onset
5-10
5-10
20-30
20-30
(minutes)
Duration
1-3
1.5-3
3-8
3-8
(hours)
Clinical dose
0.5-2.0 dog
Up to 3.0 dog
1.0-1.5 dog
Up to 3.0 dog*
(mg/kg)
0.5-1.5 cat
Up to 1.5 cat
1.0 cat
Toxic dose
6.0 dog
6.0 dog
bop 0'E
*6op 0'5
(6xy/6w)
3.0 cat
3.0 cat
2.0 cat
*Toxic dose not established in cats. Recommend not exceeding 2 mg/kg total dose.
Specific drugs
 Amide-type local anesthetic drugs are preferred in current veterinary
practice for their longer duration of action compared to ester-type
drugs. See Table l.1 for summary information.
Lidocaine
Lidocaine has a short onset due to its low pK。 of 7.9. Duration of
action is short, lasting up to 2 h. This is due to its relatively low level
of protein binding (7o%). and the fact that it is a potent vasodila-
 tor. Lidocaine formulated with epinephrine has a longer duration of
action due to the vasoconstriction epinephrine causes. Lidocaine is
(IV}. and can be administered IV to treat pain systemically. as well as
to treat ventricular dysrhythmias.
Mepivacaine
Mepivacaine has a low pK。 of 7.6. and therefore a rapid onset of
action. It is highly protein bound (95%), resulting in a duration of
action of 6-8 h.
Bupivacaine
Bupivacaine has a pK, of 8.l and is highly protein bound (95%),
resulting in a longer duration of action (6-8 h). The margin of safety
is the lowest when compared to lidocaine, mepivacaine, and ropiv-
acaine.
Ropivacaine
Ropivacaine has physicochemical properties similar to bupivacaine, and
therefore has a similar onset and duration of action. Other local anes-
thetics are synthesized as racemic mixtures, whereas ropivacaine is a
6Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Combination of drugs
Lidocaine and bupivacaine can be mixed in a l:l ratio to take advan-
tage of lidocaine's shorter onset and bupivacaine's longer duration of
action.
Additives to local anesthetics
Other drugs can be added to local anesthetics to enhance or extend
Opioids
Opioids, particularly preservative-free morphine, are commonly
administered with local anesthetics for epidural or spinal analgesia
This produces additive or synergistic multimodal analgesic effects,
with analgesia lasting up to 24 h, far longer than with individual
drug therapy. Complications of adding opioids include respiratory
depression, particularly if high doses or volumes are used, urinary
retention, vomiting (in conscious dogs), and pruritus. Myoclonus.
hindlimb paresis, altered proprioception, and hyperesthesia are rare
complications.
Aipha-2 adrenoceptor agonists
Agonism of pre- and postsynaptic alpha-2 receptors in the pain
pathway results in analgesia. Xylazine (0.25 mg/kg) and medeto-
midine (15 μg/kg) have been used epidurally in dogs, with medetomidine
dia and hypertension. Dexmedetomidine produces analgesia in a
dose-dependent manner when given intrathecally and epidurally
in dogs.
Ketamine
Ketamine most likely produces its analgesic effects when adminis-
ered epidurally by blocking NMDA channels. Ketamine also blocks
some sodium and potassium channels, thus decreasing propagation of
nociceptive signals. Effective doses are 1-3 mg/kg. Side effects include
increased heart rate, blood pressure, and myocardial work.
Epinephrine(adrenaline)
Epinephrine can be added to local anesthetic at a concentration of
5 μg/mL. Deposition of the combination results in local vasocon-
striction, which leads to decreased systemic uptalke and prolongation
effects due to decreased plasma concentration of local anesthetic. Epi-
nephrine should not be used when performing a Bier block or a ring
block, as nerve ischemia may occur.
Introduction
Sodiumbicarbonate
Addition of sodium bicarbonate at l mEq per l0 mL of local anes-
thetic increases the amount of active (non-ionized) drug present,
increasing diffusion across the cell membranes of neurons. This may
lead to a shorter onset and longer duration of blockade. Pain experi-
enced on injection of local anesthetic in the conscious patient is also
decreased by addition of sodium bicarbonate.Sodium bicarbonate
should not be added to bupivacaine or ropivacaine as precipitation
will occur.
Hyafuronidase
Hyaluronidase improves permeability of tissue by depolymerizing
be added at 3.75 IU per mL of local anesthetic to enhance the qual-
ity of blockade. Due to the enhanced permeability. duration may be
decreased and toxicity increased due to increased systemic absorption.
Equipment
Syringes
Due to the variety of sizes of dogs, a variety of sizes of syringes ranging
from 1 mL to 20 mL should be available. Glass syringes, or specially
made low-resistance plastic syringes, are useful when performing
epidural techniques to check for loss of resistance. A specific type of
an alternative to glass syringes when performing epidural anesthesia.
This syringe features a compression spring. which supplies a constant
pressure when attached to a needle. The operator can advance the
needle using both hands, rather than one hand, allowing for steadier
needle advancement and a visual sign that the epidural space has been
entered (Riley & Carvalho, 2007}.
Needles
Hypodermic needles ranging from 25 Ga to 20 Ga and 2-5 cm are used
to perform many local nerve blocks.
Epidural/spinal needles are used when performing epidural or
spinal analgesia. These needles have a sharp bevel and incorporate a
space. These needles are available in a range of gauges (18, 20, and
22 Ga) and lengths (3.8, 6.3, and 9.0 cm).
A modified spinal needle, or Tuohy needle, is slightly curved at the
tip. which facilitates advancement of the catheter when placing it in
8
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
the epidural space. This type of needle is usually marlked in increments
the catheter. Tuohy needles are typically of larger gauge (l6 and 18
Ga) than standard epidural needles in order to place the catheter more
easily. although this may hinder placement in small patients.
Epidural catheter kits
Sterilized kits for placing epidural catheters are available commercially.
They typically include a Tuohy needle, a loss of resistance syringe. a
radiopaque catheter with guidewire, a connector, and an antibacterial
filter. Some kits also include a sterile pen, which is used to mark on
the catheter the distance it should be advanced through the Tuohy
needle.
Nerve locators
Nerve locators are used to improve accuracy of local anesthetic dep-
osition, decrease local anesthetic dose required, and limit side effects.
Peripheral nerve stimulators
Peripheral nerve stimulators (PNS) are used in conjunction with
to locate nerves using an electrical current (Figure l.l). The Teflon
coating ensures that only the tip of the needle transmits the electri-
           
advised to refer to the instruction leaflet enclosed with the peripheral
nerve stimulator.
of a sticky electrode (ECG pad) and the negative lead (cathode) is con-
nected to the needle. Anatomical landmarks are palpated and the nee-
dle is inserted through the skin. The needle is advanced until it is in
close proximity to the nerve. The operator then turns the nerve stim-
ulator on, setting a current of 1.0-2.0 mA, pulse frequency 1-2 Hz and
Figure 1.1 A, Peripheral
nerve stimulator. B, Teflon-
coated needle. C, Positive
lead (anode) and sticky
electrode {ECG pad). D,
Negative lead (cathode).
E, Syringe, injection port,
and tubing. Reproduced with
permission from The Ohio
Introduction
duration 0.l-0.3 msec. This generates an electrical field adjacent to
the nerve, resulting in depolarization and muscle contraction, or
twitches. The current required to elicit a twitch increases exponen-
tially as the distance between the nerve and the needle increases.
The current is reduced to the lowest possible setting required to
elicit a twitch, and this is done whilst carefully redirecting the nee-
dle so that it is in close proximity to the nerve. The useful cur-
rent is not a painful stimulus, and can be lsed in a sedated patient.
Once the lowest possible current required to elicit a twitch has been
determined, local anesthetic is injected through the needle via tub-
ing. Injection of local anesthetic pushes the needle a little further
away from the nerve, so twitches are usually diminished or lost
immediately after injection.
Uitrasound
Ultrasound probes can be used to visualize nerves directly both prior
t0 and during needle placement and anesthetic drug deposition.
which allows for improved accuracy of blockade. This technique is
often combined with a nerve stimulator to confirm nerve location,
allowing drug deposition close to, but not into, the nerve.
Differential pressure transducer
The likelihood of injury to nerves during local anesthetic injection is
of an in-line pressure transducer allows consistent force to be applied
during injection.
Acoustic device
Identification of needle entry into, or puncture of, the epidural space
can be difficult using the conventional loss of resistance technique.
Acoustic amplification has been used to detect puncture more accu-
rately. An in-line pressure transducer is attached to a pressure ampli-
fier, which in turn is attached to a loudspeaker. The sound of the
resistance of the ligamentum flavum can be appreciated audibly
(Lechner et al, 2002).
Complications and contraindications
In general safe practice, knowing when a local anesthetic technique
is contraindicated is essential, as is an understanding of the compli-
cations of local anesthetic administration and how to treat them.
Complications can be broadly categorized as local or systemic
10 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Local
Skin
 a a     i  o
overlying the site of injection is inflamed, infected, or clearly neoplas-
isms or neoplastic cells into adjacent tissue.
Nerve
Direct trauma to nerves from the needle or high-pressure injection
may result in loss of sensation, pain, discomfort and/or motor weak-
ness that may be temporary. lasting days to years, or permanent.
Damage to blood vessels close to nerves, particularly those with poor
blood supply, may lead to ischemia. Finally, local anesthetic drugs or
additives may be directly toxic to nervous tissue.
Systemic
Centralnervoussystem
Excessive systemic uptalke of local anesthetic can cause seizures. This
occurs because inhibitory neurons are more sensitive to Na+ channel
blockade, and if they are blocked then excitation results.
Cardiovascular
Local anesthetic techniques should be performed with caution or
drug administration into a vein or unexpected rapid systemic drug
absorption may lead to cardiovascular collapse.
Coagulopathy
Techniques in which hemorrhage is a possible complication, e.g. epi-
dural block, should not be performed in patients where coagulopathy
has been demonstrated or is suspected. Laceration of a blood vessel
may lead to bleeding that will be hard to control. If uncontrolled hem-
orrhage occurs in a closed space, it may lead to pressure necrosis of
adjacent tissules.
Species differences and considerations
As a species, cats are generally less amenable to being restrained for
to dogs in which some techniques can be performed with light seda-
tion. It can also be more challenging to accurately weigh cats, which
Imtroduction
11
accurate dosing will lead to fewer complications. Inhalant anesthe-
sia with isoflurane or sevoflurane decreases metabolism of lidocaine
low inhalant doses, whereas this is not the case in dogs (Thomasy et
al, 2o05). Rapid inadvertent intravenous injection of lidocaine, while
Safe practice
Gaining confidence
Local anesthetic techniques vary in their level of difficulty to per-
form, effectiveness of block, and complexity of equipment required.
way of extra equipment, and have been reported to have high sulccess
rates, is recommended. Once comfortable with simple techniques, the
education seminars and courses on local anesthetic techniques, par-
mended. We also believe that using this book will be an asset when
it comes to performing techniques where the practitioner has little or
no experience.
Making a plan
cations that might occur and is able to develop a plan to treat them
(see Chapter 7). The person performing the block should also have
in mind an alternative plan for providing analgesia should the block
prove impossible to perform, or in cases where continuing with the
block is contraindicated (e.g. severe drop in blood pressure during epi-
ent after clipping)
References
Chu, C.R., Izzo, N.J., Coyle, C.H., et al. {2008) The in vitro effects of bupiv
acaine on articular chondrocytes. J Bone Joinr Surg 90: 814820.
Lechner, T.J.M., van Wijk, M.G.F & Maas, J.J. (2002) Clinical results with a
mew acoustic device to identify the epidural space. Anaesthεia 57: 768-772.
12 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Riley, E.T. & Carvalho, B. (2007) The Episure syringe: a novel loss of resistance
syringe for locating the epidural space. Anesrh Analg 105: 1l64 1 l66.
Thomasy, S.M., Pypendop, B.H., 1lkiw, J.E. & Stanley, S.D. (2005) Pharma-
cokinetics of lidocaine and its active metabolite, monoethylglycinexylidide,
after intravenous administration of lidocaine to awake and isoflurane-
anesthetized cats. Am J Ver Res 66: 1162-1166.
Further reading
Campoy. L. & Read, M.R. (2013) Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesid
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Shelby, A.M. & McKune, C.M. (20l4) Small Animal Anesrhesia Technigues. Ames,
IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Tranquilli, W.J., Thurmon, J.C. S Grimm, K.A. (20o7) Lumb  Jones Vererinary
Anesthesia, 4th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell
CHAPTER 2
Cutaneous
Innervation Index
GwenCovey-Cruinp
Handbookof Small Animal Regiona? Anesthesia αnd Anaigesia Techniques, First Edition.
By Phillip Lerche. Turi K. Aarnes, Gwen Covey-Crump and Fernando Martinez Taboada.
@ 20l6 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd. Published 20l6 by John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.
14
Handbool of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Cutaneous innervation index
Use this chapter as an aid to choosing an appropriate regional anesthetic
technique for the planned procedure.
Canine dermatomes - Body
C4
C5
L1L2
113
L4
L5S1S2
10
C
T2T3T4T5T6
Figure 2.1 Canine dermatome map. Cutaneous innervation according to spinal
and variation between animals exist. Redrawn from Oliver, J.E. & Lorenz,
M.D. (eds) {l983) Veterinary Neurologic Diagrosis. Philadelphia: W.B.Saunders Co
Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University
Cutaneous Innervation Index
15
Head
Maxillarynerve
Ophthalmicnerve
Mandibularnerve
Facialnerve
VentralcutaneousbranchC2
DorsalcutaneousbranchC2
DorsalcutaneousbranchC3
Figure 2.2 Cutaneous innervation of the canine head. Autonomous sensory
regions are shown. Some overlap and variation between zones and animals
exist. Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
16
Handbool of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Thoracic limb
Cranial
Lateral
Caudal
Medial
Brachiocephalic
LCB-T2
Musculocutaneous
UInar
Radial
Figure 2.3 Cutaneous innervation of the canine thoracic limb. Autonomous
sensory regions are shown. Some overlap and variation between zones and
animals exist. LCB-T, lateral cutaneous brachial nerve-thoracic 2. Reproduced
with permission from The Ohio State University.
Gutaneous Innervation Index
17
Table 2.1 Sensory innervation of the canine thoracic limb
Region
Nerve
Techniques
C6-7
Lateral shoulder and joint
 Suprascapular
CP
Subscapular
CP
C7-8
Craniomedial antebrachium
Musculocutaneous
CP, BP, RUMM
c8
Caudal shoulder joint,
Axillary
CP, BP
lateral brachium 
C7-T1
 Lateral elbow joint.
Radial
CP, BP, RUMM
craniol ateral antebra chium,
carpus and digits
C8-T1
Medial elbow joint
Median
CP, BP, RUMM
C8-T2
Caudal elbow joint.
Ulnar
CP, BP, RUMM
caudolateral antebrachium,
carpus and digits
BP, brachial plexus; CP, cervical paravertebral; RUvIM, radial, ulnar, median, musculocutaneous.
18
Handbool of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Pelvic limb
Cranial
Lateral
Caudal
Medial
oloolo
LCFN
CCFN
GN
Saphenous Sciatic
Tibial
Peroneal
Figure 2.4 Cutaneous innervation of the canine pelvic limb. Autonomous
sensory regions are shown. Some overlap and variation between zones and
animals exist. Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
Gutaneous Innervation Index
19
Table 2.2 Sensory innervation ofthe canine pelvic limb
Region
Techniques
L4
Hemipelvis (excl. skin
Femoral
Saphenous
Inguinal
Overlying hip joint, medial
Preiliac
L5
thigh, stifle, leg. hock
Ps0a5
L6
compartment
L7
 Entire limb 
Dorsolateral
Sciatic
Peroneal
Lateral
distal to
 distal limb
Parasacral
51, S2
stifle (excl.
Laterocaudal
Tibial
Transgluteal
medial strip)
 distal limb
CHAPTER 3
Infiltration Blocks
Fernando Martinez Taboada
Handbookof Small Animal Regiona?Anesthesia αnd Anaigesia Techniques, First Edition.
By Phillip Lerche. Turi K. Aarnes, Gwen Covey-Crump and Fernando Martinez Taboada
@ 20l6 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd. Published 20l6 by John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.
22  Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Infiltration for mass removal
Line and ring blocks
indications
Target nerves
Cutaneous nerves of the affected area
Region anesthetized
and, in the case of performing a ring block, area circumscribed by it
Landmarks
Surrounding tissue around the area of interest. It is fundamental that
the subcutaneous tissue is clearly identified
Needle
    a      
small in size needle (e.g. 23 Ga 2.5-3.8 crm)
Depth
Subcutaneous injection of local anesthetic
Technique
1 Identify the area of interest. If a mass is being resected, the total
contour of it and the margins must be taken into account
2 The line and ring blocks are the easiest blocks to perform, as they
do not require specific knowledge of neuroanatomy
3 Introduce a long hypodermic needle to its whole length in the sub-
cutaneous tissue
4 Aspirate to prevent accidental intravenous administration and
deposit some local anesthetic (e.g. 0.2 mL bupivacaine)
5 Withdraw the needle approximately 5 mm (the distance can vary
depending on the volume injected in each point. The bigger the
volume, the longer the distance can be), aspirate again and inject
a bit more local anesthetic
6 Repeat the sequence until the area of interest is circumscribed
7 When performing ring or curve line blocks, it is recommended to
withdraw the needle almost totally before redirecting it in a differ-
Cautions
Accidental intravenous injection of local anesthetic. This type of block
substitutes for accuracy by using a large volume of local anesthetic.
Overdose of local anesthetic is a serious hazard if the total dose is not
Infiltration Blocks
23
Figure 3.1 Line block. Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
lmlmlimhmhn
Figure 3.2 Ring block. Performed as a combination of line blocks to avoid needle
bending. Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
24
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Inverted "L" block
indications
Surgical resection of cutaneous or superficial masses, surgical closure
of lacerations
Target nerves
Cutaneous nerves originating in the dorsal spinal nerves
Region anesthetized
The area of interest usually is located within the trunk of the animal.
Classically, this technique has been used to desensitize the flank
Landmarks
Surrounding tissue around the area of interest. It is fundamental to
identify the subcutaneous tissue and the muscular layers, if there is an
involvement of these structures
Needle
Hypodermic needle. It is recommended to use a longer length but
small in size needle (e.g. 23 Ga 2.5-3.8 cm)
Depth
Subcutaneous injection of local anesthetic
Technique
1 Identify the area of interest. If a mass is being resected, the total
contour of it and the margins must be taken into account
2 Following the steps described in the previous block, two line blocks
must be performed (forming the inverted "L")
3 Perform a line block between the mass (or area of interest) and the
patient's spine
4 Add another line block cranial to the area of interest
5 If there is involvement of muscular layers, it is necessary to block
the subcutaneous tissue (for blocking the cutaneous branches of
the nerves), but also to perform a deep block to block the muscular
branches. The injection of local anesthetic in the muscle is very
stimulating. so the subcutaneous block is advisable before attempt-
ing the deeper block
Cautions
Accidental intravenous injection of local anesthetic. Overdose of local
anesthetic is a serious hazard as a great volume of local anesthetic
Infiltration Blocks
25
Figure 3.3 Inverted "L" block {blue arrows) for the resection of mast cell tumor
(red arrow).
26
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Block of the surgical incision
This block can be achieved by a single injection at the time of closure
or via a diffusion catheter placed in the deep layers of the surgical inci-
sion allowing continuous administration of local anesthetics.
Single injection of the surgical incision
Indications
Analgesia of wounds or surgical incisions
Target nerves
Cutaneous nerves of the affected area
Region anesthetized
Surgical incision edges
Landmarks
Subcutaneous tissue around the incision
Needle
23-25 Ga 1.6-1.9 cm hypodermic needle
Depth
Skin to subcutaneous tissue
Technigue
1 Probably the oldest and easiest nerve block to perform
2 The injection of local anesthetic in the subcutaneous tissue exposed
in the surgical wound is more effective than a simple splash of the
drug in the incision
3 Injection of local anesthetic should be done in the same way as the
line block (see previous description in this chapter)
  a       
performed before the first incision than when it was performed before
suturing.
Cautions
Overdose of local anesthetic is a serious hazard as a great volume of
local anesthetic may be necessary to desensitize a large area of the
body. Dilution of the local anesthetic with sterile saline may be an
option to achieve the desired volume
Infiltration Blocks
27
Figure 3.4 Single injection incisional block. Reproduced with permission from
The Ohio State University.
28  Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Diffusion catheter'"soaker" catheter"pain buster"
indications
Analgesia of wounds or surgical incisions
Target nerves
Cutaneous nerves of the affected area
Region anesthetized
Surgical incision from deep layers to skin edges
Landmarks
Surgical incision
Needle
None. The catheter is a flexible polyurethane tube of small diameter
with multiple pores for even distribution of the local anesthetic. The
catheter is placed during the surgical closure of the incision
Depth
Skin to the deepest layers of the surgical wound
Technique
a few centimeters from the incision edge (so it does not interfere
with healing)
2 Place the catheter in the deeper layers of the incision
3 Make sure the length of tube with pores is completely in the inci-
sion and that it is long enough for the size of the incision
4 Close the soft tissue above the catheter
5 Secure the catheter externally to the skin to prevent its movement
6 The analgesia can be achieved by the intermittent administration
of bupivacaine 2 mg/kg every 6 h (some overlapping between
      n  s
administration). A constant infusion avoids an analgesia "gap’
between doses. Constant infusion dose of lidocaine: dogs 2-3 mg/
kg/h, cats 1-1.5 mg/kg/h
Hansen et al (20l3) demonstrated no difference between commer-
cial catheters and handmade ones. They also found that very slow
infusion rates produce an erratic distribution of the drug.
Cautions
The total volume to be used is dependent on the incision length and
not the size of the patient. Always double-check the total dose to be
injected and dilute it with sterile saline, if the volume is not sufficient.
Infiltration Blocks
29
Figure 3.5 Placement of a soaking catheter in the deep layers of the incision
before closure. Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
Figure 3.6 Soaking catheter used in a cat for pain management after an injection
sitesarcorma.
30
Handboolk of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Intercostal blocks
Indications
Lateral thoracotomy. analgesia for rib fractures, analgesia for chest
drain placement
Target nerves
Intercostal nerves
Region anesthetized
Intercostal space distal to the injection
Landmarks
Needle
23 Ga 1.9-2.5 cm
Depth
Caudal edge of the rib. Caution: introducing the needle further may
penetrate the pleura. Directing the tip of the needle underneath the
rib may damage the intercostal vein and/or artery
Technique
1 Palpate the caudal edge of the rib and follow it towards the spine
 2 Introduce the needle perpendicular to the skin and direct its tip
towards the caudal edge of the rib
3 Aspirate to prevent intravascular injection
4 Administer 0.3-1 mL bupivacaine
5 Repeat the previous steps in at least two intercostal spaces cranial
and caudal to the area of interest (Thompson & Johnson, 199l).
Although desensitizing three spaces, the results are better
when respiratory function was assessed in patients after lateral thora-
cotomy (Berg & Orton, 1986).
Cautions
Hematoma,hemothorax, intravascular injection, nerve damage
Infiltration Blocks
31
Figure 3.7 Intercostal nerve block. Palpate the rib and then slide the needle over
the caudal edge. Reproduced with permission frorn The Ohio State University.
Figure 3.8 An effective intercostal block requires three intercostal spaces on
either side of the area of interest. Reproduced with permission from The Ohio
State University.
32 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Interpleural block (also known as intrapleural
or pleural)
Indications
a lateral thoracotomy or a sternotomy. as it produces less respiratory
depression than opioids alone (Berj & Orton, 1986; Conzemius et al,
1994). In human medicine, it is indicated for other conditions, e.g. bra-
chial plexus tumor (Dionne, 1992), cholecystectomy (VadeBoncouer
Targetnerves
The mechanism of action is unknown. It is speculated that the technique
the splanchnic nerves, and /or blockage of the ipsilateral brachial plexus.
Region anesthetized
Thoracic cavity, cranial abdominal cavity
Landmarks
Interpleural cavity in an intercostal space
Needle
Over-the-needle catheter (14-18 Ga 4.8-3.2 crm). It is advisable to use
 a  ad ad i s aq i s
Depth
Skin to interpleural cavity
Technique
For repeatable block, it is advisable to place an indwelling thoracic
drain or diffusion catheter although the technique may be performed
by single injection.
and advance the tip of the needle, tunneling in the subcutaneous
tissue to the following intercostal space
2 Penetrate the thoracic wall at the intercostal space. avoiding the
caudal edge of the rib where the nerve, artery, and vein are located
3 Introduce the catheter at a shallow angle to decrease the chance of
damaging the lung
4 Analgesia can be provided with bupivacaine 2 mg/kg every 5-6 h
Cautions
Pneumothorax, hemothorax, overdose of local anesthetic. Complica-
tions are rare if the catheter/chest drain is manipulated carefully. The
cardiopulmonary effects of the local anesthetics in the interpleural
spaceareverytransientandnotclinicallysignificant,evenafter peri
Infiltration Blocks
33
Figure 3.9 Interpleural block. The needle is introduced closer to the cranial edge
of the rib to avoid the intercostal vessels. Reproduced with permission from The
OhioState University.
34
Handboolk of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Intraperitoneal block
indications
Analgesia of the abdominal cavity. This block has become a common
postoperative analgesic technique for laparotomies and laparoscopies
in human medicine
Target nerves
Splanchnic nerves responsible for the visceral component of the
abdominal pain
Region anesthetized
Abdominal cavity (exclusively the visceral component)
Landmarks
Abdominal cavity (specifically the area of interest, e.g. ovary, kidney.
gallbladder ...)
Needle
No needle is required, it is applied in the abdomen before closing the
linea alba
Depth
Abdominal cavity
Technique
1  Use 1-2 mg/kg bupivacaine
2 Dilute with sterile saline if the area of interest is too large for the
calculated volume
3 Splash the local anesthetic over the area of interest, for instance
the ovarian pedicle
4 Alternatively, splash the volume into the cavity. trying to achieve
a uniform distribution
5 Close linea alba
Some authors recommend infiltration of the surgical incision to
minimize parietal or somatic pain (Carpenter et al, 2004).
Cautions
The total volume to be used is dependent on the abdominal cavity or
the size of the area of interest and not so much on the length and size
of the patient. Always double-check the total dose to be injected and
dilute it with sterile saline, if the volume is not sufficient.
Infltration Blocks
35
References
Berg. R.J. & Orton, E.C. {1986) Pulmonary function in dogs after intercostal
thoracotomy: comparison of morphine, oxymorphone, and selective inter-
costal nerve block. Am J Ver Res 47: 471-474.
Bernard, F, Kudnig, S.T. & Monnet, E. (2006) Hemodynamic effects of inter-
pleural lidocaine and bupivacaine combination in anesthetized dogs with
and without and open pericardium. Ver Surg 35: 252-258.
Carpenter, R.E., Wilson, D.V. & Evans, A.T. (2004) Evaluation of intraperito-
neal and incisional lidocaine or bupivacaine for analgesia following ovari-
ohysterectomyin the dog. Ver Anaesth Analg 3l: 46-52.
Conzemius, M.G., Brockman, D.J., King, L.G., et al. (1994) Analgesia in
dogs after intercostals thoracotomy: clinical trial comparing intravenous
buprenorphine and interpleural bupivacaine. Ver Surg 23: 291-298.
Dionne, C. (l992) Tumour invasion of the brachial plexus: management of
pain with interplural analgesia. Can J Araesth 39: 520-521.
Hansen, B., Lascelles, B.D., Thomson, A., et al. {20l3) Variability of perfor-
mance of wound infusion catheters. Ver Anαesrh Anag 40(3): 308-315.
Savvas, I., Papazoglou, L.G., Kazakos, G., et al. (2oo8) Incisional block with
44(2): 60-66.
Thompson, S.E. & Johnson, JM. {l99l) Analgesia in dogs after intercosta]
thoracotomy. A comparison of morphine, selective intercostals nerve block,
and interpleural regional analgesia with bupivacaine. Ver Surg 20: 73-77.
VadeBoncouer, T.R., Riegler, FX., Gautt, R.S., et al. {1989) A randomized, dou-
ble blind comparison of the effects of interpleural bupivacaine and saline
tomy. Anesthesio/ogy 71: 339-343.
CHAPTER 4
Blocks of the Head
Fernando Martinez Taboada
Handbookof Small Animal Regiona?Anesthesia αnd Anaigesia Techniques, First Edition.
By Phillip Lerche. Turi K. Aarnes, Gwen Covey-Crump and Fernando Martinez Taboada
@ 20l6 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd. Published 20l6 by John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.
381
 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Retrobulbar
Indications
Surgical procedures involving the eye and/or procedures requiring
alinesia of the eye
Target nerves
Ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (V) (sensory perception).
also within the ocular cone, cranial nerves optic (II), oculomotor (IIl) and
abducens (VI) (motor function of the extraocular muscles). The trochlear
nerve (IV) is outside the ocular cone, but is frequently blocked by diffu-
sion of the anesthetic drugs and contributes to the akinesia of the eye
Region anesthetized
Eye including conjunctiva, cornea, and uvea
Landmarks
Eye globe, orbit of the eye, Zygomatic arch, vertical ramus of the mandible
Needle
22 Ga 2.5 cm (up to 3.8 cm, depending on animal size)
Depth
Skin to ocular cone
Technique
1 Locate the depression limited by the caudal aspect of the maxilla,
the ventral edge of the zygomatic arch and the vertical ramus of
the mandible
2 Introduce the needle perpendicular to the long axis of the head
3 As soon as the needle tip is in the subcutaneous tissue, direct the nee-
pressure of the needle against the extraocular muscles produce a
ventrodorsal movement of the globe
5 Aspirate to prevent intravascular injection
6 Inject 1-2 mL of anesthetic solution or combination (e.g. 0.25-
0.5% bupivacaine)
Cautions
age is rare, although intraconal hematomas can cause blindness. The
traditional approach for this block, curving a spinal needle (20 Ga
7.5 cm}. has been associated with failure of the technique and risk
of direct subarachnoid injection. For this reason, this alternative
approach is presented here, although further research comparing dif-
Blocks of the Head
6E
(a)
(C)
Figure 4.1 (a) Insertion of the needle in the ocular cone produces ventrodorsal
movement of the globe. (b-c) Retrobulbar block (subzygomatic approach).
Parts (a) and (c) reproduced with permission frorm The Ohio State University.
40
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Maxillary
Indications
Surgical procedures involving the maxilla, upper lip and/or palate.
bilaterally) (Cremer et al, 2013)
Targetnerves
tine nerves)
Region anesthetized
Dorsal head and muzzle approximately up to midline. Maxilla and
maxillary teeth, hard and soft palate (if major palatine nerve is blocked
with the technique). nares, upper labium and rostral part of the nasal
cavity
Landmarks
Zygomatic arch, caudal part of the maxilla, and vertical ramus of the
mandible
Needle
22 Ga 2.5 cm non-insulated needle
Depth
Skin to pterygoid fossa
Technique
1 Identify the depression formed by the caudal aspect of the maxilla.
the ventral edge of the zygomatic arch, and vertical ramus of the
mandible. This depression is located ventral to the lateral canthus
of the eye
2 Introduce the needle perpendicular to the maxilla
3 Direct the tip of the needle perpendicular to the sagittal plane of
the skull
4 If the tip of the needle hits bone, withdraw approximately 1-2 mm
before performing the injection
5 Aspirate to prevent intravascular injection
6 Inject 0.3-1 mL of anesthetic solution or combination (e.g. 0.25-
0.5% bupivacaine or ropivacaine)
Cautions
Hematoma, intrava scular injection, nerve damage
Blocks of the Head
41
(a)
D
Figure 4.2 (a) Maxillary nerve block. Needle is directed perpendicular to the
pterygoid fossa to also block the nasal and palatal nerve branches. (b) Maxillary
nerve block. Part (a) reproduced with permission from The Ohio State
University.
42
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Infraorbital
Indications
procedures may require bilateral block)
Target nerves
Infraorbital nerve
Region anesthetized
Rostral part of the muzzle including skin, maxilla, maxillary teeth, and
palate. Rostral upper lip and nasal cavity
Landmarks
Infraorbital foramen, premolar tooth P3
Needle
25 Ga 1.5 or 2.5 cm hypodermic needle
Depth
Skin to the interior of the infraorbital foramen
Technique
1 Percutaneously or lifting the upper lip. locate the infraorbital fora-
men (dorsal to the tooth P3)
2 Introduce the needle at a shallow angle towards the entrance of
the foramen
3 Advance the needle into the foramen as far as possible (within a
safety margin, a few millimetres is sufficient)
4 Aspirate to avoid intravascular injection
5 Inject 0.3-0.5 mL of anesthetic solution or combination (e.g. 0.25-
0.5% bupivacaine)
6 The effectiveness of the block and the size of the area desensitized
depend on whether the injection is performed inside the foramen
(anesthetizing up to the first molar; Gross et al, 1997) or only at
the entrance (blocking only the area rostral to the canine teeth)
Cautions
Hematoma, intravascular injection, nerve damage
Blocks of the Head
43
(a)
(q)
(C]
Figure 4.3 (a) Nerve branches exiting the infraorbital foramen. (b) Infraorbital
block (note the insertion of the needle tip within the canal). (e) Infraorbital
block. Parts {a) and (b) reproduced with permission from The Ohio State
University.
4
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Mandibular (or inferior alveolar)
Indications
extractions (Aguiar et al, 2015)
Target nerves
Inferior alveolar nerve (at the mandibular foramen)
Region anesthetized
Hemi-mandible up to the chin.The tissues between the mandibles
should not be anesthetized if the technique is performed correctly. On
some occasions, the most rostral part of the chin is not desensitized (in
some animals the innervation is by the mylohyoid nerve)
Landmarks
Mandible, angular process, mandibular foramen
Needle
22 Ga 1.6 or 2.5 cm
Depth
Skin rostral to the angular process of the mandible to the mandibular
foramen
Technique
1 Palpate the angular process of the mandible, then open the mouth
and palpate the mandibular foramen. This foramen is located
approximately halfway between the last molar tooth and the con-
dylar process
2 Introduce the needle percutaneously immediately rostral to the
angular process and directed dorsally along the medial aspect of
the mandible
3 Direct the tip of the needle towards the foramen. It is very difficult
to advance the needle into the foramen, but the block can be effec-
tive as long as the anesthetic solution is delivered at the entrance
of the foramen
4 Aspirate to prevent intravascular injection
5 Inject 0.2-l mL of anesthetic solution or combination (e.g. 0.25-
0.5% bupivacaine)
Cautions
Hematoma, intravascular injection, nerve damage. Desensitization of
the tongue can occur if a bilateral block is performed with large vol-
umes and/or poor technique (difficulty locating and injecting within
the foramen or as close as possible to it). This desensitization may lead
Blocks of the Head
45
(a]
(b]
(C)
Figure 4.4 (a) Innervation of the mandible and the tongue.(b)Percutaneous
approach to the mandibular nerve (note the needle tip close to the foramen).
(c) Percutaneous approach for the mandibular nerve block. Parts (a) and (b)
reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
46
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Mental (or middle mental)
indications
Surgical procedures involving the rostral mandible, teeth associated
with the area, and rostral lower lip
Target nerves
nerve)
Region anesthetized
Chin when performed bilaterally. up to premolar tooth P4 if injection
is performed inside the foramen (Gross et al, 2000)
Landmarks
Mental foramen, lower lip. premolar tooth P2
Needle
25 Ga 1.6 mm
Depth
Gum mucosa to foramen
Technique
1 Palpate the foramen ventral to the tooth P2 from the inside of the
lower lip
2 Introduce the needle just rostral to that point, at a shallow angle,
towards the foramen
3 Advance the needle into the foramen as far as possible (without
forcing it in)
4 Aspirate to prevent intravascular injection
5 Inject 0.2-0.6 mL of anesthetic solution or combination (e.g. 0.25-
0.5% bupivacaine)
Cautions
Hematoma, intravascular injection, nerve damage. In some instances,
the most rostral part of the chin is not desensitized (in some animals
the innervation is by the mylohyoid nerve)
Blocks of the Head
47
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5 {a) Mental block (note the insertion of the needle tip within the
nerve canal). (b) Mental block for rostral hemimandibulectomy. Part (a)
reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
48
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Auriculotemporal and great auricular
Indications
Analgesia in severe cases of otitis externa, perioperative analgesia for
surgical interventions affecting the external ear canal and the auricu-
lar pinna (postoperative analgesia can also be achieved by local infil-
tration at the time of closure, but the lse of this block would provide
intraoperative analgesia as well)
Target nerves
Auriculotemporal (branch of the mandibular nerve) and great auricul-
lar (formed by the union of the ventral roots of Cl and C2)
Region anesthetized
External ear canal and pinna
Landmarks
Zygomatic arch, external ear canal, vertebral atlas transverse process
(also known as wings)
Needle
22 Ga 2.5 cm (or longer in big dogs)
Depth
Skin to mid-distance between skin and temporomandibular joint
(auriculotemporal nerve) and skin to subcutaneous tissue (great
auricular nerve)
Blocks of the Head
49
(a]
(b)
Figure 4.6 (a) Innervation of the ear and pinna. (b) Identification of the
anatomical landmarks for the desensitization of the auriculotemporal nerve.
50
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Technique
Auriculotemporal nerve block
1 Palpate the external ear canal (it is conical in shape and very hard
when inflamed}
2 Locate the caudal aspect of the zygomatic arch
3 Introduce the needle perpendicular to the skin in the palpable
depression between the zygomatic arch and the external ear canal
(the temporomandibular joint)
5 Knowing the total depth of the tissues, withdraw the needle
approximately halfway
 6 Aspirate to prevent intravascular injection
7 Inject 0.5-1.5 mL of anesthetic solution or combination (e.g. 0.25-
0.5% bupivacaine)
Great auricular nerve
1 Palpate the external ear canal
 l 5  e l  l  
vertebra
3 Introduce the needle parallel to the transverse process
4 Direct the tip of the needle ventral to the most cranial part of the
process
5 The nerve is very superficial and it is better to maintain the needle
at a very shallow angle to the skin
6 Aspirate to prevent intravascular injection
0.5% bupivacaine)
Cautions
Hematoma, intravascular injection, nerve damage. Temporary paraly-
sis of the facial and/or temporopalpebral nerves preventing the animal
from blinking (recommended to lubricate the eye every 2-4 h)
Blocks of the Head
51
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.6
(continued)
(c) Innervation in relation to anatomical landmarks. (d) Great auricular nerve
block. Parts (a) and (c) reproduced with permission from The Ohio State
University.
52  Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
References
Aguiar, J., Chebroux, A., Martinez-Taboada, F, et al. (20l5) Analgesic effects
of maxillary and inferior alveolar nerve blocks in cats undergoing dental
extractions. J Feline Med Surg 17: 1l0-1l6.
Cremer, J., Sum, S.O., Braun, C., et al. (20l3) Assessment of maxillary and
infraorbital nerve blockade for rhinoscopy in sevoflurane anesthetized
dogs. Ver Anaesth Analg 40: 432-439.
Gross, M.E., Pope, E.R., O'Brien, D., et al. {l997) Regional anesthesia of the
infraorbital and inferior alveolar nerves during noninvasive tooth pulp
stimulation in halothane-anesthetized dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 21l:
1403-1405.
Gross, M.E., Pope, E.R., Jarboe, JM., et al. (2000) Regional amesthesia of the
stimulation in halothane-anesthetized cats. Am J Ver Res 61: 1245-1 247.
CHAPTER 5
Regional Anesthetic
Blocks of the Limbs
GwenCovey-Cruinp
Handbookof Small Animal Regiona? Anesthesia αnd Anaigesia Techniques, First Edition.
By Phillip Lerche. Turi K. Aarnes, Gwen Covey-Crump and Fernando Martinez Taboada.
@ 20l6 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd. Published 20l6 by John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.
54
Handboolk of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Thoracic limb regional anesthetic blocks
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
55
Local anesthetic here should
diffuse over most of brachial
Injection very caudal may not 
 Cranial aspect of technique 
Middle aspect of technique 
reach more cranial nerves 
 Direct muscle stimulation
 Too ventral/caudal
Comment
Cranial
plexus
Accept
Musculocutaneous 
Suprascapular
Median, ulnar 
Subscapular
Nerves
Phrenic 
Axillary
Median
Radial
le!pey 
Carpal/digital extensors 
Triceps, carpal/digital
Carpal/digital flexors
Carpal/digital flexors 
Carpal/digital flexors
Teres major/minor.
 Biceps brachialis
Supraspinatus,
infraspinatus
Diaphragm
deltoideus 
extensors
Muscle
Triceps/biceps contraction 
Rotate shoulder in, flex 
Pronate antebra.chium.
Flex shoulder, extend
Extend elbow/carpus 
carpal/palmar flexion 
Motor response
scapula/shoulder
Palmar extension
Adduct, rotate
elbow/carpus
Palmar flexion 
Palmar flexion
Hiccup
elbow
 Cervical paravertebral 
 bra.chial plexus 
Technique
 RUMM 
56
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Brachial plexus
Indications
Unilateral surgical procedures of distal humerus. elbow, antebra-
chium, carpus
Targetnerves
Musculocutaneous, axillary, radial, median and ulnar
Region anesthetized
Thoracic limb distal to mid humerus
Landmarks
Acromion, trachea, jugular vein, 1" rib
Needle
21 Ga 5.0-10.0 cm insulated needle
Depth
Acromion to 1s rib
Technique (Campoy et al, 2008; Mahler & Adogwa, 2008)
1 Identify 1 rib by axillary palpation. Premeasure needle depth to a
point where a line extending the course of the jugular vein crosses
the 1s rib. The brachial plexus is just cranial to this point
2 Insert needle craniomedial to the acromion in a caudoventral
direction parallel to the jugular vein and in a strictly sagittal plane
3 With nerve stimulator at 2 mA and gradually reducing. observe
responses to nerve stimulation (Table 5.1) (reducing to 0.2 mA t0
avoid intrafascicular injection prior to injection}
4 At point of radial nerve stimulation (and no further than premeas-
lred depth), aspirate to avoid intravascular (blood) or interpleural
(air) injection
5 Inject 0.1 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
6 Withdraw needle 0.5-1 cm, aspirate, then inject further 0.1 mL/kg
7 Repeat step 6, injectinga final 0.1 mL/kg beneath the point of the
shoulder
Cautions
Intravascular, interpleural injection, hematoma. Nerve damage
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
57
C6
Cervicaln.6-
Cervicaln.7
Cervicaln.8
Thoracicn.1
Jugularv.
Musculocutaneousn.
Axillaryn.
Radialn.
Axillarya.
Mediann.
UInarn.
(a)
[b]
Figure 5.1 Brachial plexus block.(a) Anatomy,(b) approach.Part (a) reproduced
58  Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Paravertebral: C6-T1
Indications
Unilateral surgical procedures of the scapula, shoulder, and brachium,
including forequarter amputation
Target nerves
Spinal nerves of C6, C7, C8, Tl
Region anesthetized
Entire thoracic limb, except skin over upper shoulder region
Landmarks
Transverse process C6, head of rib 1
Needle
()     
Technique (Campoy & Read, 2013; Lemke & Creighton, 2008)
Advanced technique to be undertaken with due caution only in patients
1 With patient in lateral recumbency and limb to be blocked upper-
most, retract scapula caudally
2 Palpate transverse process of C6, maintain digital pressure on lat-
eral aspect
3 From dorsolateral approach, advance needle in caudal direction t0
meet transverse process. Walk needle off cranial border
4 With nerve stimulator at 2 mA and gradually reducing. observe
responses to nerve stimulation of ventral branches of spinal
nerves C6 and C7, suprascapular, subscapular, musculocutaneous
(Table 5.l} (reducing to 0.2 mA to avoid intrafascicular injection
prior to injection)
injection
6 Inject 0.1 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
7 Repeat steps 3-6, walking needle off caudal border of transverse
process
8 Palpate axillary artery at 1s rib costochondral junction and thor-
   i        
dorsal to costochondral junction
9 Observe elbow/carpus/digit extension (C8) and carpus/digit flex-
ion (T1)
10 Aspirate to avoid intravascular (blood) or interpleural (air) injection
11 Inject 0.1 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
Cautions
Intravascular epidural or interpleural injection, hematoma. Nerve injury.
Phrenic nerve paralysis (common}. Do not perform technique bilaterally
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
59
C6
Cervical n.6
Cervical n.7
Cervicaln.8
Thoracicn.1
Jugularv.
Musculocutaneousn.
Axillaryn.
Radialn.
Axillarya.
Mediann.
UInarn.
(a)
b
Figure 5.2 Paravertebral block. (a) Anatomy, (b) approach. Part (a) reproduced
with permission from The Ohio State University.
60
 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
RUMM (radial/ulnar/median/musculocutaneous)
Indications
Anesthesia for surgical procedures of the thoracic limb distal to and
including the carpus
Target nerves
Radial (R}. ulnar (U}, median (Me}, musculocutaneous (Mus} nerves
Region anesthetized
Carpus, metacarpus, and digits
Landmarks
Lateral and medial epicondyles, greater tubercle of humerus. Lat-
eral and medial head of triceps, biceps and biceps brachialis muscles.
Brachial artery
Needle
21 Ga 5.0 cm insulated/20-22 Ga 2.0-4.0 cm non-insulated
Depth
10-20 mm
Technique (Lamont & Lemke, 2008; Trumpatori et al, 2009)
1 Begin with patient in lateral recumbency, limb to treat uppermost,
elbow flexed 90°
2 Grasp humerus from cranial aspect, place thumb on caudal humerus
two-thirds distance from greater tubercle to lateral epicondyle.
Retract brachialis muscle cranially. Insert needle from caudal aspect,
perpendicular to long axis of humerus at 45° angle. Puncture long
heads of triceps to contact humerus, withdraw slightly
3 If using nerve stimulator, with nerve stimulator at 2 mA and
gradually reducing. observe responses to radial nerve stimulation
(Table 5.1) (reducing to 0.2 mA to avoid intrafascicular injection
prior to injection
4 Aspirate to avoid intra-arterial injection
5 Inject 0.1 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
6 Turn patient into opposite lateral recumbency. have assistant
retract upper limb caudally (limb to treat is lowest and flexed 90°)
7 Palpate brachial artery at point mid humerus. With digital pressure
on humerus, retract biceps brachialis muscle and brachial artery cra-
nially. Insert needle from caudal aspect perpendicular to long axis of
humerus and at 45° angle to contact humerus, withdraw slightly
8 Observe responses to median/ulnar nerve stimulation if using
(Table 5.1)
9 Aspirate to avoid intra-arterial injection
10 Inject half of 0.15 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
deeply and remaining half as needle is withdrawn
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
61
Triceps,
lateralhead
Cephalicv.
Lateral
Brachialis m.
Collateralradiala.
Radial nerve:
Deepramus
Sup.ramus,med
Sup.ramus,lat
Musculocutaneousn.
Bicepsbrachiim.
Brachiala.
Median.n.
Medial
Caud.cutaneous
antebrachialn.
UInarn.
Brachialv.
(a)
[b]
Figure 5.3 Radius, ulnar, median, musculocutaneous (RUMM) block.
The Ohio State University.
62
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Bier block (intravenous regional anesthesia)
(Staffieri, 2013)
Indications
Surgical procedures of <90 min duration of the distal limb, especially
when a bloodless surgical field is advantageous
Target nerves
Local anesthetic effect by spread to peripheral nerve endings
Region anesthetized
Thoracic limb distal to elbow and pelvic limb distal to tarsus
Important anatomy
· Suitable distal vein
· Palpable peripheral artery
Equipment
● Tourniquet - preferably pneumatic with pressure gauge
● Esmarch or elastic bandage
● Doppler probe (optional)
+ Catheter 22-25 Ga 25-33 mm
Technique (Webb et al, 1999)
1 Clip surgical and catheter placement sites (plus tourniquet site if
heavily coated)
2 Place intravenous catheter as distally as possible
3 Find a palpable artery and mark with pen
4 Apply tourniquet and identify lower occlusion pressure (LOP)
(pressure at which palpable pulse is absent)
5 Release tourniquet, apply esmarch or elastic bandage tightly
6 Apply tourniquet to 50-100 mmHg above LOP, record time
7 Release esmarch bandage
8 Confirm absence of peripheral pulse
9 Infuse lidocaine 0.5% 0.6 mL/kg over 2-3 min, observe patient for
toxicity
10 Remove catheter
above systolic arterial pressure
12 At end of surgery, remove tourniquet slowly, observing for signs of
toxicity and to ensure hemostasis
Cautions
Avoid cuff pressures in excess of 400 mmHg. Use only lidocaine. Risk
of systemic toxicity.ischemic injury.limb engorgement,tourniquet
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
63
Figure 5.4 Bier block. (a) Find lower occlusion pressure {LOP), (b) apply
esmarch bandage, (c) apply tourniquet 50-100 mrmHg above LOP and remove
esmarch, (d) check pulse absent, infuse lidocaine.
64
Handboolk of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Pelvic limb
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
65
Direct muscle stimulation
 May block with femoral
 Direct muscle stimulation
Too superficial 
Too superficial 
Comment
Too caudal
Accept
Direct muscle stimulation 
Femoral/ saphenous
Motor branches only
Peroneal/fibul ar 
 Perone al/fibul ar 
Nerves
Femoral 
Sciatic
Tibi al 
Sciatic
29!1
Psoas stimulation
Gracilis, pectineus,
adductor femoris.
obturator externus
 Biceps femoris
Gastrocnemius
Biceps femoris
Gastrocnemius
Quadriceps
Quadniceps 
Sartorius
Muscle
able 5.2 Elicited motor responses to nerve stimulation - pelvic limb
Stifle extension, patellar twitch 
Biceps twitch at 1 mA
Semimembranosus/
Motor response
tendinosus twitch
Patellar twitch
Anterior thigh
Hip adduction
Stifle flexion 
Plantarflexion
Dorsiflexion 
 Gluteal twitch
Stifle flexion 
Plantarflexion
Hip flexion 
Dorsiflexion
approach (caudal lumbar plexus)
Femoral - inguinal approach 
 Sciatic - parasacral approach 
Femoral - lateral preiliac 
 Sciatic - lateral approach 
Technique
66
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Femoral/saphenous nerve block
inguinal approach
Indications
Surgery of distal femur, stifle and distal limb in combination with sci-
atic nerve block
Target nerves
Femoral and/or its branch: saphenolus
Region anesthetized
Medial aspect of hindlimb - mid femur to lst digit
Landmarks
Femoral artery: femoral triangle (enclosed dorsally by rectus femoris
cranially by caudal belly of sartorius muscle, proximally (deep) by ili
opsoas muscle
Needle
21 Ga 5.0 cm insulated/20-22 Ga 2.0-4.0 cm non-insulated
Depth
5-15 mm
Technique
1 With patient in lateral recumbency. hindlimb to treat uppermost
2 Abduct limb caudally, palpate femoral artery
3 Direct needle dorsomedially towards nerve which lies cranial to
femoral artery
4 With nerve stimulator at 2 mA and gradually reducing. observe
responses to nerve stimulation including quadriceps twitch, patellar
twitch,stifle extension(Table 5.2)(reducing to 0.2 mA to avoid
intrafascicularinjection prior to injection} (sartorius twitch = needle
too superficial}
5 Aspirate to avoid intra-arterial injection
6 Inject 0.2 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
Cautions
Hematoma, intravascular injection, nerve damage
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
67
Femoralv,a.,n.
Pectineusm.
Adductorm.
Sartoniusm.
Gracilis m.
(a)
[b]
Figure 5.5 Femoral nerve block - inguinal approach. (a) Anatomy, (b) approach.
Part (a) reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
68
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Lateral preiliac approach (caudal lumbar plexus)
(Portela et af, 2013)
Target nerves
Femoral (may also block obturator)
Region anesthetized
Hemipelvis, femur, medial femorotibial joint, skin of dorsomedial tar-
sus, lst digit. May not anesthetize skin overlying coxofemoral joint
Landmarks
Cranial dorsal iliac crest (CDIC). L6
Needle
Small dogs 22 Ga 5.0 cm, large dogs 22 Ga 7.5 cm insulated
Depth
Use depth of iliopsoas muscle as reference
Technique
1 With patient in lateral recumbency, hindlimb to treat uppermost
2 Draw a line dorsoventral from L6, bisect with line parallel to spine
originating from most cranial aspect of iliac crest
3 Puncture site at bisection, advance needle caudomedially with
30-45° intent through iliocostalis lumborum muscle
4 With nerve stimulator at l mA and gradually reducing. observe
responses to nerve stimulation - quadriceps contraction (Table 5.2)
injection)
5 Aspirate to avoid intra-arterial injection
6 Inject 0.1 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
Cautions
Low risk of epidural migration, vessel puncture
iliocostalis
lumborumm.
L5
iliocostalis
lumborumm.
L6
Spinaln.L5
quadratuslumborumm.:
Obturatorn.
quadratus
Femoraln.
External iliaca&v
iliopsoasm.
iliopsoasm.
Femoraln.
Externaliliaca&v
(a)
Internaliliaca&v
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
69
_6
CDIC
CDIC
Figure 5.6 Femoral nerve block - lateral preiliac approach. (b) Anatomy,
{c) approach. Part (a) reproduced with permission from The Ohio State
University.
70
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Sciatic nerve block
Indications
Surgery of distal femur, stifle and distal limb in combination with fem-
oral nerve block
Target nerves
Sciatic (ischiatic) nerve gives off branches: common peroneal, tibial
nerves
Region anesthetized
Lateral, dorsal, caudal aspects of hindlimb - caudolateral stifle to
digits 2-5
Lateral approach (Campoy et al, 2008)
Landmarks
Greater trochanter of femur (GT}. ischial tuberosity (IT)
Needle
21 Ga 5.0 cm insulated or 22 Ga 2.0-4.0 cm non-insulated
Depth
5-10 mm
Technique
1 With patient in lateral recumbency, hindlimb to treat uppermost
on a line between GT and IT, puncture site is 1/3 distance from GT
2 Direct needle perpendicular to skin
3 With nerve stimulator at 2 mA and gradually reducing. observe
responses to nerve stimulation - dorsiflexion of tarsus (peroneal
nerve), plantarflexion (tibial nerve) (Table 5.2) (reducing to 0.2 mA
to avoid intrafascicular injection prior to injection}
4 Aspirate to avoid intra-arterial injection
5 Inject 0.05-0.1 mL/kg 0.25-0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
Cautions
Risk of intravascular injection, nerve damage
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
71
Caudalgluteal
vein&artery
GT
Sciaticn.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7 Sciatic nerve block -lateral approach. (a) Anatomy, (b) approach.
Part {a) reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
72
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Parasacral approach (sacral plexus block) (Portela et al, 2010)
Landmarks
Cranial dorsal iliac crest (CDIC), ischial tuberosity (IT), dorsal spinous
processes (DSP)
Needle
21 Ga 5.0 cm insulated
Depth
15-30 mm
Technique
1 With patient in lateral recumbency, hindlimb to treat uppermost,
on a line between CDIC and IT, puncture site is l/3 distance from
CDIC
2 Direct needle sagitally
3 With nerve stimulator at 2 mA and gradually reducing. observe
responses to nerve stimulation - gastrocnemius twitch, digital/
in tra fascicular injection prior to injection}
4 Aspirate to avoid intra-arterial injection
5 Inject 0.1 mL/kg 0.5% bupivacaine or 0.75% ropivacaine
Cautions
bowel puncture
Regional Anesthetic Blocks of the Limbs
EL
Lumbarn.7
Lumbarn.6
Sciaticn
Caudal
glutealv&a
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8 Sciatic nerve block - parasacral approach. (a) Anatomy. (b) approach.
Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
74 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
References
Campoy. L & Read, M.R. (2013) The thoracic limb. In: Sma!l Anima! Regiona!
Anesrhesia αnd Analgesia. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 146-147.
Campoy, L. Looney, A.L. Ludders, JW. & Gleed, R.D. (2008) Distribution of
a Lidocaine-methylene blue solution staining in brachial plexus, lumbar
plexus and sciatic nerve blocks in the dog. Ver Anaesth Anaig 35: 348-354.
Lamont, LA. & Lemke, K.A. (2008) The effects of medetomidine on radia]
nerve blockade with mepivacaine in dogs. Ver Anaesth Analg 35: 62-68.
Lemke, K.A. & Creighton, C.M. (2008) Paravertebral blockade of the brachial
plexus in dogs. Ver Clin Small Anim 38: 1231-1241
Mahler, S.P & Adogwa, A.O. (2008) Anatomical and experimental studies of
brachial plexus, sciatic, and femoral nerve-location using peripheral nerve
stimulation in the dog. Ver Anaesth Analg 35: 80-89.
Portela, D.A., Otero, PE. Tarragona, L., Briganti, A., Breghi, G. S Melanie, P
{201O) Combined paravertebral plexus block and parasacral sciatic block in
healthy dogs. Ver Anαesth Analg 37: 531-541.
Portela, D.A., Otero, PE., Briganti, A., et al. (20l3) Femoral nerve block: a
Anαg 40: 194204.
Staffieri, F (2013) Intravenous regional anesthesia. In: Campoy. L. & Read,
M.R. (eds) Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia. Ames, IA: Wiley-
Blackwell pp. 261-271.
Trumpatori, B.J., Carter, JE., Hash, J., et al. (2009) Evaluation of a mid-
humeral block of the radial, ulnar, mu sculocutaneous and median (RUMM
block) nerves for analgesia of the distal aspect of the thoracic limb in dogs.
Ver Surg 39: 785-796.
Webb, A.A., Cantwell, S.L., Duke, T, et al. (1999) Intravenous regional anes
thesia (Bier block) in a dog. Can Ver J 40: 419-421.
CHAPTER6
Epidurals and
Spinals
Turi K.Aarnes
Handbookof Small Animal Regiona? Anesthesia αnd Anaigesia Techniques, First Edition.
By Phillip Lerche. Turi K. Aarnes, Gwen Covey-Crump and Fernando Martinez Taboada
@ 20l6 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd. Published 20l6 by John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.
76  Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Lumbosacral epidural and spinal in dogs
Indications
Abdominal pain, thoracic pain, hindlimb pain, perineum/tail
Target nerves
Nerves caudal to the spread of local anesthetic
Regionofanesthesia/anafgesia
Using 0.2 mL/kg of injectate (local anesthetic or morphine at appropri-
ate dose diluted to appropriate volume), anesthesia/analgesia should
occur from T13 spinal space and extend caudally. Larger volumes may
be used if cranial spread is desired.
Landmarks
Place the thumb and middle finger on the craniodorsal aspects of the
wings of the ilium and place the index finger at the lumbosacral space
(L7-Sl) for epidural administration (Figure 6.1). When performing a
spinal, place the thumb and middle finger on the craniodorsal aspects
of the wings of the ilium, and the index finger at the space between
L5 and L6.
Needle
A spinal needle with stilette (e.g. Tuohy needle for epidural, Quincke
needle for spinal), depending on the size of the dog - typically a 20 Ga,
5.1 cm needle for a 15-40 kg dog.
Technique (Skarda & Tranquilli, 2007a; Troncy et al, 2002)
  e i aaa a a l  od,  
spinal fluid should be observed when performing an epidural. Fluid
will most likely be observed flowing from the needle when the sti-
lette is removed when performing a spinal, though it is possible to be
in the subarachnoid space with no fluid flowing ("dry tap"). Loss of
resistance technique may be utilized by injecting approximately 1 mL
plunger should be felt. The "hanging drop technique" may also be
used by placing saline into the needle to fill the hub. The drop should
tion should be felt during drug administration.
Advantages
Advantages of epidural anesthesia include good muscle relaxation,
postoperative analgesia, minimal effects on the body, low cost
Epidurals and Spinals
VETERINARY
TECHNICIAN
Figure 6.1 Palpation of the lumbosacral space in a dog. Place the thumb and
middle fnger on the craniodorsal aspects of the wings of the ilium and place the
index finger at the lumbosacral space.
Figure 6.2 Lumbosacral epidural technique in a dog. A distinct "pop" is felt
when the needle is advanced through the interarcuate ligament {ligamentum
78 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Complications
Inadequate anesthesia due to faulty technique, if the animal is awake
during surgery (might move); hypotension (if using local anesthetic).
respiratory depression (local anesthetic epidurals and spinals), or apne?
after excessive blockade (epidurals and spinals); accidental administra
Contraindications
Hypovolemia and hypotension (when using local anesthetics), bleed-
ing disorder, skin infection
Lumbosacral epidural in cats
indications
Abdominal pain, thoracic pain, hindlimb pain, perineum/tail
Target nerves
Nerves caudal to the spread of local anesthetic
Region of anesthesia/anaigesia
ate dose diluted to appropriate volume), anesthesia/analgesia should
occur from Tl3 spinal space and extend caudally. Local anesthetic for
lumbosacral epidural should be used with caution in cats due to toxic-
Landmarks
Place the thumb and middle finger on the craniodorsal aspects of the
wings of the ilium and place the index finger at the lumbosacral space
(Figure 6.3).
Needle
A 22 Ga 2.5 cm straight needle
Technigue (Skarda & Tranquilli, 2007b;Troncy et al, 2002)
A 22 Ga needle is placed at the midline of the lumbosacral space (L7-S1)
       r  
should be observed. Minimal resistance to injection should be felt.
Complications
Inadequate anesthesia due to faulty technique, if the animal is awake
during surgery (might move); hypotension, respiratory depression, or
apnea after excessive blockade; accidental administration into the sub-
arachnoid space. Due to anatomical differences from dogs, more likely
to perform a spinal rather than an epidural (spinal cord ends at L6-
Epidurals and Spinals
79
Contraindications
Hypovolemia and hypotension (when using local anesthetics). bleed-
ing disorder, skin infection. Reduce dose by 50% if performing spinal
rather than epidural.
Figure 6.3 Palpation of the lumbosacral space in a cat. Place the thumb and
middle fnger on the craniodorsal aspects of the wings of the ilium and place the
index finger at the lumbosacral space.
Figure 6.4 Lumbosacral epidural and spinal technique in a cat. A 22 Ga needle
is placed at the midline of the lumbosacral (L7-Sl) space. Reproduced with
80
Handboolk of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Caudal epidural in dogs and cats
Indications
Described for use in cats with urethral obstruction. Other possibilities:
dystocia, tail amputation, perineal procedures
Target nerves
Nerves caudal to the spread of local anesthetic
Region of anesthesia/analgesia
Perineum, tail, sacrum
Landmarks
A coccygeal epidural can be performed at either the sacrococcygeal
interspace or Col-Co2. First moveable vertebrae between the sacrum
and tail, or first coccygeal interspace, on midline
Needle
25 Ga 1.5 cm straight needle
Technigue (o'Hearn & Wright, 2011)
Palpate the space between sacrum and Col or Col andCo2. Insert 25 Ga
needle on midline, direct at a 30-45° angle, and advance through the
ligamentum flavum (Figure 6.5). Aspirate through the needle to check
for blood (if blood is aspirated, start over). Infuse 0.1-0.2 mL/kg of
lidocaine 2%.
Complications
Bleeding, incomplete blockade
Contraindications
Hypovolemia and hypotension (when using local anesthetics), bleed-
ing disorder, skin infection
Epidurals and Spinals
81
S3
Co1
Co2
Figure 6.5 Coccygeal epidural technique in a cat. Insert a 25 Ga needle on the
midline, directed at a 3045° angle, and advance through the ligamentum
flavum. Reproduced with permission from The Ohio State University.
82  Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
References
O'Hearm, A.K. & Wright, B.D. (201l) Coccygeal epidural with local anesthetic
for catherization and pain management in the treatment of feline urethral
obstruction. J Ver Emerg Crit Care 21: 50-52.
Skarda, R.T. & Tranquilli, W.J. (2007a) Local and regional anesthetic and anal-
(eds) Lumb e Jones'Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia,4th edn. Ames.IA:
Wiley-Blackwell, pp.561-5 94,
Skarda, R.T. & Tranquilli, W.J. (2007b) Local and regional anesthetic and anal-
gesic techniques: cats. In: Tranquilli, WJ., Thurmon, JC. & Grimm, K.A.
(eds)Lumb e Jones’Vererinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th edn. Ames,IA:
Wiley-Blackwell, pp.595-603.
Troncy, E., Junot, S., Keroack, S., et al. (2002) Results of preemptive epidura]
administration of morphine with or without bupivacaine in dogs and cats
undergoing surgery: 265 cases (1997-1999). J Am Ver Med Assoc 221: 666-672.
CHAPTER 7
Emergency
Procedures
Turi K.Aarnes
Handbookof Small Animal Regiona? Anesthesia αnd Anaigesia Techniques, First Edition.
By Phillip Lerche. Turi K. Aarnes, Gwen Covey-Crump and Fernando Martinez Taboada.
@ 20l6 John Wiley & Sons. Ltd. Published 20l6 by John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.
 Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Complications associated with local
anesthetic techniques
Bleeding
Bleeding is a potential complication of all nerve blocks. Caution should
be exercised in patients with bleeding/clotting disorders and patients
that have been heparinized. Epidurals and spinals are contraindicated
in these patients.
Clinicalsigns
Visible hemorrhage. hypotension
Treatment
Monitor systemic blood pressure, apply pressure to area of hemor-
rhage, cold compress to reduce blood flow, in extreme cases ligation of
blood vessels (e.g. accidental laceration of an artery)
Nerve trauma
Injection of local anesthetic directly into nerve or nerve trauma may
result from local anesthetic techniques. Return to normal function
may occur over time.
Clinical signs
Pain, motor or sensory deficits, urinary or fecal incontinence
Treatment
Supportive care, systemic analgesics for pain, systemic anti-
inflammatories
Complications associated with local
anesthetic drugs
Allergic reactions to local anesthetic drugs
True allergic reactions to local anesthetics are rare. Reported with use
of aminoesters (e.g. procaine, tetracaine). Signs develop 12-24 h after
exposure (Lin & Liu, 2013}
Clinical signs
Hypersensitivity reaction; contact dermatitis including erythema, pru-
ritus, papules, vesicles
Emergency Proce dures
85
Treatment
Stop administration of local anesthetic, airway maintenance, epineph-
rine, intravenous fluids, diphenhydramine
Methemoglobinemia
More likely with benzocaine or prilocaine but also reported with pro-
caine and lidocaine. Also more lilkely in cats than dogs.
Clinical signs
Hypoxia, cyanosis, death, blood that looks brown in color, dyspnea,
nausea, tachycardia
Treatment
Intravenous administration of l% methylene blue; intubation and
Hillier, 2006).
Systemic toxicity of Tocal anesthetics
Systemic toxicity of local anesthetics is usually associated with
diac arrest. Monitoring patients and preparation for performing CPCR
are necessary.
Cardiovascular toxicity (Table 7.1)
Cardiovascular (CV) toxicity is increased with bupivacaine compared
with lidocaine or ropivacaine, accidental intravenous administration
of bupivacaine or ropivacaine, and in patients with decreased hepatic
function. Large doses of high-potency local anesthetics are more likely
Separately. CV toxicity may result from CNS toxicity due to decreased
activity of the nucleus tractus solitarii resulting in decreased auto-
nomic control of the CV system (Salinas et al, 2004).
CNS toxicity(Table7.2)
cause CNS depression, high concentrations can result in excitation
due to inhibition of inhibitory neurons. High potency and high lipid
solubility can result in increased CNS toxicity (Lin & Liu, 2ol3}.
86
Handboolk of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
Stop administration of local anesthetic, continuous
 Stop administration of local anesthetic, continuous 
monitoring of invasive blood pressure, administer 
 Stop administration of local anesthetic, continuous
ephedrine, phenylephrine), inotropes (dopamine.
monitoring of invasive blood pressure, continuous
IV fluids, vasopressors (vasopressin, epinephrine.
IV fluids, vasopressors (vasopressin, epinephrine.
ephedrine, phenylephrine), inotropes (dopamine.
(Weinberg et al, 2003), antidysrhythmics, oxygen 
monitoring of ECG, intravenous lipid emulsion,
dobutamine), intravenous lipid emulsion
 antidysrhythmics, oxygen supplementation
dobutamine), intravenous lipid emulsion
supplementation 
Treatment
 Clinical presentation/clinical sign 
 Hypotension, collapse, tachycardia
premature contractions, ventricular
 P-R interval, prolongation of QRS 
 ta.chycardia, ventricular fibrillation 
ECG changes: prolongation of 
interval., AV block, ventricular
ECG changes, hypotension
Excessive plasma concentration, also related 
drug diffuses to conducting tissue of heart.
Excessive plasma concentration, unbound 
also related to potency of local anesthetic
tissue of heart, inhibition of depolarization
accidental IV administration of bupivacaine
 Unbound drug diffuses to conducting 
rate of cardiac action potential due to
Epinephrine and phenylephrine may
increase bupivacaine toxicity to cAMP
to potency of local anesthetic drug 
Mechanism
inhibition 
able 7.1 Cardiovascular toxicity
bnup
 Myocardial depression 
 and cardiac toxicity
Com plication
 Dysrhythmias 
Emergency Proce dures
8
supplementation, epinephrine, intravenous
 supportive care, systemic analgesics for pain
Stop administration of local anesthetic.
anticonvulsants: midazolam or diazepam
0.5 mg/kg IV; intravenous lipid emulsion:
Stop administration of local anesthetic.
continuous monitoring of ECG, monitor
Stop administration of local anesthetic.
ntubation and oxygen supplementation,
Stop administration of local anesthetic.
/entilation, intravenous lipid emulsion 
luids, intravenous lipid emulsion
oxygen administration
Treatment
 Clinical presentation/clinical sign
Nystagmus, myoclonus, seizures 
 Pain, motor or sensory deficits.
 urinary or fecal incontinence 
Unconsciousness, coma 
 Respiratory arrest
Rare complication. Direct exposure of nerves to
ocal anesthetics can result in toxicity of neural
dependent), also related to potency of local 
dependent), also related to potency of local 
lesol jo Aoualod ol patelal osle (tuapuadap
fibers, leading to concentration- dependent 
 poog leunau paseaisap pue abewep aaal
low. More likely to see neurotoxicity with
eou ot wnay 'sjeunpida pue sieuids
Excessive plasma concentration (dose 
Excessive plasma concentration (dose 
Excessive plasma concentration (dose
function may occur over time 
anesthetic drug 
anesthetic drug
anesthetic drug 
Mechanism
 CNS depresson/toxicity
able 7.2 CNS toxicity
Complication
 Neurotoxicity
881
Handbook of Small Animal Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia
References
Lin, Y. & Liu, S.S. {20l3) Local anesthetics. In: Barasch, PG., Cullen, B.F,
Sotelting. R.K.,et al.(eds) Cfinical Anesthesia, 7th edn. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp.561-577.
Salinas, EV., Liu, S.L. & Scholz, A.M. (2004) Analgesics: ion channel ligands/
sodium channel blockers/local anesthetics. In: Evers, A.S. & Maze, M. (eds)
Anestheric Pharmacology: Physiologic Principles and Clinical Practice. Philadel-
phia: Churchill Livingstone, pp.507-533.
Stoelting. R.K. & Hillier, S.C. (2006) Local anesthetics. In: Stoelting. R.K. S
Hillier, S.C. (eds) Pharmacology e Physiology in Anesrheric Practice, 4th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp. 1 79-207.
Weinberg, G., Ripper, R., Feinstein, D.L., et al. (2003) Lipid emulsion infusion
Med 28: 198-202.
Further reading
Martin-Flores, M. (2013) Clinical pharmacology and toxicology of local anes-
thetic and adjuncts. In: Campoy. L. & Read, M.R. (eds) Small Anima!
Regiona! Anestheia and Analgesia. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp.25-38.
Skarda, R.T. & Tranquilli, WJ. (20o7) Local anesthetics. In: Tranquilli, W.J.,
Thurmon, JC.& Grimm, K.A. (eds) Lumb e Jones'Vererinary Anesthesia and
Analgesia, 4th edn. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp.395-418.
acromion, 56
mental, 46-47
additives, 6. 10
paravertebral C6-T1, 58-59
adrenaline, 6
radial, ulnar, median,
allergic reactions, 84-85
musculocutaneous
alpha-2 adrenoceptor
(RUMM},17,60-61
agonists,2,6
retrobulbar, 38-39
amino amide, 3
ring block, 22-24
amino ester, 3, 84
sacral plexus block, 72-73
amputation, 58
sciaticblock, 70-71
antebrachium, 55-56
blood vessels
alriculotemporal nerve
axillary a., 59
block, 48-50
brachial a., 60-61
ear, 48-50
brachial v., 61
ear canal, 48, 50
caudal gluteal a. v., 71
otitis, 48
cephalic v., 61
pinna, 48-49
external iliac a. v., 68
Zygomatic arch, 38-40, 48. 50
femoral a. v., 66-67
internal iliac a. v., 68
Bier block, 6,62-63
jugular v., 56, 59
block
brachial plexus, 17.55-57
auriculotemporal,48-50
bupivacaine, 3, 5-7
Bier block, 62-63
brachial plexus, 56-57
carpus, 55-56,58,60
diffusion, 28
caudal epidural, 80
femoral/saphenous, 66-69
coxofemoral joint, 68
great auricular, 48-50
cranial dorsal iliac crest, 72-73
incisional, 26
infraorbital, 42-43
dexmedetomidine,6
intercostal, 30-32
diaphragm, 55
interpleural, 32-33
diffusion catheter, 28-29
intraperitoneal, 34
catheter, 28-29
inverted "L",24-25
pain buster, 29
line, 22-24
soaker, 28-29
mandibular, 44-45
soaker catheter, 28-29
maxillary. 40-41
digit, 6,58,60, 66. 68.70
90
Index
diphenhydramine, 85
laceration, 22-28
dorsal spinous process, 72
lidocaine, 3-6, 11, 80
line block, 22-23, 27-28
elbow, 55-56. 58, 60.62
lumbosacral epidural, 76
epidural, 7
epidural catheter, 8
mandibular nerve block, 44-45
epinephrine, 5-6,85
dental, 44
esmarch bandage, 62-63
mandibulectomy. 44-47
mass removal, 22,24,26
femoral triangle, 66
maxillary nerve block, 40-41
femorotibialjoint, 68-69
dental, 40
forequarter, 58
pterygoid fossa, 40
rhinoscopy. 40
great auricular nerve
zygomatic arch, 40
block, 48,50
mechanism of action,4
ear, 48-50
medetomidine, 6
ear canal, 48, 50
mental nerve block, 46-47
otitis, 48
chin, 46-47
pinna, 48-49
dental, 46-47
greater trochanter, 70-71
mepivacaine, 3. 5
metabolism, 4, 11
humerus, 56. 60
metacarpus, 60
hyaluronidase. 7
methemoglobinemia, 85
methylene blue, 85
iliac crest, 68. 72
morphine. 6
infiltration of surgical incision,
muscle
22-34
adductor femoris m., 65. 67
infraorbital nerve block, 42-43
biceps brachii m., 55, 60-61
dental, 40-44
biceps femoris m., 65
muzzle,40,42
brachialis m., 60-61
nares, 40
carpal extensors, 55
intercostal block, 30-33
carpal flexors, 55
chest wall, 30-33
deltoideus m., 55
intercostal, 30-33
digital extensors, 55
rib, 30-33
digital flexors, 55
interpleural block, 32-33
gastrocnemius m., 65. 72
chest drain, 32-33
gracilis m., 65. 67
intraperitoneal
iliopsoas m., 66-69
abdominal cavity. 34
obturator externus m., 65
laparoscopy. 34
pectineus m., 65. 67
laparotomy. 34
psoas m., 65
inverted "L"block, 25-28
quadriceps m., 65-66, 68
ischial tuberosity.70-72
rectus femoris m., 66-67
sartorius m., 65-67
xap
91
semitendinosus m., 65
supraspinatus n., 55
teres major m., 55
thoracic n., 1, 57. 59
teres minor m., 55
tibial n., 16, 19,65.70
triceps, 55, 60
ulnar n., 15. 17. 55-56, 60-61
nerve locator
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA}
acoustic device. 9
channel, 6
peripheral nerve stimulator. 8
needles
pressure transducer, 9
hypodermic. 7
ultrasound, 9
Quincke, 76
nociception, 2, 6
spinal, 7
Tuohy. 7-8.76
opioids, 2. 6
nerve
auriculotemporal, 48-50
patellar twitch, 65-66
axillary n., 17. 55-57
pelvic limb
brachiocephalic n., 15
femoral/saphenous nerve
cervical n., 6-8, 17. 57
block, 65-69
common peroneal n., 70
inguinal approach, 65-67
cutaneous
lateral pre-iliac approach
C2, 14
(caudal lumbar plexus).
C3, 14
65. 68-69
LCB-T2.15
parasacral approach (sacral
facial n., 14
plexus block}.65. 72-73
femoral n., 19. 65-69
sciatic nerve block, 65-66,
great auricular, 48-50
70-73
infraorbital n., 42-43
pKa, 4-5
infraspinatus n., 55
preemptive analgesia, 2
ischiatic n., 70
prilocaine,3
lumbar plexus, 65. 68
proparacaine,3
mandibular n., 14, 44-45
maxillary n., 14, 40-41
retrobulbar block, 38-39
median n., 17. 55-57.60-61
eye, 38-39
musculocutaneous n., 15, 17.
ocular, 38-39
55-57. 60-61
zygomatic arch, 38-40.
obturator n., 65.68
48. 50
ophthalmic n., 14, 38
rib, 58
peroneal n., 16, 19, 65. 70
ring block, 6
phrenic n., 55. 58
ropivacaine, 3, 5. 7
radial n.,15.17.55-57.60-61
route of administration
sacral plexus, 72-73
epidural, 4, 6-11, 76-81
saphenous n., 16, 19, 65-66
intra-articular, 4
sciatic n.,16,19, 65,70-73
intravenous regional, 3. 5
spinal nerves, 58
peripheral nerve block, 4
subscapular n., 17. 55. 58
regional infiltration, 3
92
Index
route of administration (Continned)
tarsus,62, 68-70
topical
tourniquet,62-63
corneal, 3
toxicity
intrapleural, 3
cardiovascular, 85
transdermal, 3
CNS (central nervous
system). 85
scapula, 55. 58
transverse process, 58
shoulder, 55-56. 58
sodium bicarbonate, 7
xylazine.6
spinal, 76-77
spine, 76-81
zygomatic arch, 38-40,
stifle,65-66.70
48, 50
syringes, 3. 7-8